# Volume 31

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 31

 




Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 31



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 31
April - December 1920


Preface




1920


Left-Wing
  Communism: An Infantile 
    Disorder
 336k

 Speech Delivered
    at an All-Russia Congress of Glass and Porcelain
  Workers
    
April
29, 192010k


    From The First Subbotnik On The Moscow-Kazan Railway To The
    All-Russia May Day Subbotnik8k

 Speech at a
    Meeting Dedicated To the Laying of the Foundation Stone of a Monument
    to Liberated Labour
    
May 1, 19203k


    Speech To Men Of The Red Army Leaving for the Polish
    Front
    
May
  5, 19205k

 Speech Delivered
    at a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central
  Executive Committee
    
The Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army
Deputies, Trade Unions, And Factory Committees, May 5, 1920 16k


    Telegram to the Soviet Socialist Government of Azerbaijan4k

 Speech at
    Conference of Workers and Red Army Men In Rogozhsko-Simonovsky
    District Of Moscow
    
May 13, 19209k

 To
    the Indian Revolutionary Association4k


  “Dual” Subordination and
  Legality
12k

 Letter to the
    British Workers13k


    Preliminary Draft Theses on National and Colonial Questions for the
    Second Congress of the Communist International24k

 Preliminary
    Draft Theses on The Agrarian Question For the Second Congress Of The
    Communist International31k

KOMMUNISMUS
    Journal of the Communist
    International8k

 Speech at Second
    All-Russia Conference of Organisers Responsible for
  Rural Work
    
June 12, 192035k


    Telephone Message to All-Russia Food Conference5k

 Aid for the
    Wounded of the Red Army!3k


    Theses on Fundamental Tasks of The Second Congress Of The Communist
    International48k

 Reply to A Letter
    From The Joint Provisional Committee For the Communist Party Of
    Britain4k


    Telephone Message to J. V. Stalin
    
July 12 or 13, 19204k

 Telegram to J. V.
    Stalin
    
17 July, 19203k


    Terms of Admission into Communist International24k

 Article Twenty
    Of The Terms Of Admission Into the Communist
    International3k


    The Second Congress of the Communist International120k

 Telegram to J. V.
    Stalin
    
August 2, 19203k


    Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
August 4, 1920
3k

 Telegram to J. V.
    Stalin
    
August 11, 19203k


    Letter to The Austrian Communists9k

 The Second
    Congress of the Communist International7k


    Reply to Mr. Segrue, Daily News Correspondent5k

 Speech Delivered
    at the Ninth All-Russia Conference of the Russian
  Communist Party
    
September 22, 192014k


    Letter to The German and the French Workers Regarding The Discussion
    On The Second Congress Of The Communist International8k

 Tasks of the
    Youth Leagues44k


    Speech Delivered at a Congress Of Leather Industry
    Workers
    
October 2, 192032k

 To The Poor
    Peasants Of The Ukraine5k

 On
    Proletarian Culture6k

 Speech Delivered
    at a Conference of Chairmen of Uyezd, Volost and Village Committees
    of Moscow Gubernia
    
October 15, 192039k


    Concluding Remarks At A Conference Of Chairmen Of Uyezd, Volost And Village Executive Committees Of Moscow GuberniaOctober 15, 192012k


    Telegram to the Soviet Government of the Ukraine and the General Headquarters
    of the Southern Front
    
October 16, 19203k

 A
    Contribution To The History Of The Question of The
    Dictatorship64k


    Greetings to the All-Russia Conference of Gubernia Soviet
    Women’s Departments4k


    Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
October 29, 19203k


    Speech Delivered at an All-Russia Conference Of
    Political Education Workers Of Gubernia and Uyezd
    Education Departments
    
November 3, 192028k


    Draft Resolution on “The Tasks of the Trade Unions, And The Methods of Their Accomplishment” 8k


    On the Struggle of the Italian Socialist Party48k

Speech at a Joint Plenum Of The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’, Peasants’ And Red Army Deputies, The Moscow Committee Of The R.C.P.(B.)
    And The Moscow City Trade Union Council, Dedicated To The Third Anniversary
    Of The October Revolution
    
November 6, 192022k


    Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
November 13, 192013k


    Theses on Production Propaganda3k


    Extract From Direct-Line Talk Between
    V. I. Lenin And J. V. Stalin
3k


    Our Foreign and Domestic Position and Party Tasks
    Speech Delivered To The Moscow Gubernia Conference
    Of The R.C.P.(B.)
    
November 21, 192051k


    Speech Delivered at the Moscow Gubernia
    Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) On Elections to the
    Moscow Committee
    
November 21, 192012k


    Speech Delivered at a Conference Of Factory Trade Union Committees
    Of Moscow Enterprises Of The Printing And Publishing Industry November 25, 192012k


    Speech Delivered at a Meeting of Cells’ Secretaries
    Of The Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.) November 25, 192016k

 
    Speech Delivered at a Meeting of Cells’ Secretaries
    Of Communists Of Zamoskvorechye District, Moscow
    
November 29, 192012k


    Telegram to the Chairman of the Revolutionary
    Military Committee  of Armenia
    
December 2, 19205k


    Speech Delivered at a Meeting Of Activists Of The
    Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.)
    
December 6, 192064k

Eighth All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets
    
December 29, 1920192k


  Letter to Workers of Red Presnya District of Moscow
    
December 25, 19208k

 


Volume 31 Transcription/Mark-up: Brian
    Baggins, Robert Cymbala,  Sally Ryan, David Walters and Zodiac, 1998-2002
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Left-Wing
  Communism: An Infantile 
    Disorder









“Left-Wing” Communism: an Infantile Disorder



Vladimir Lenin’s

      “Left-Wing” Communism: an Infantile Disorder
    


Written: April–May 1920
      
Source: Collected Works, Volume 31, pp. 17–118
      
Publisher: Progress Publishers, USSR, 1964
      
First Published: As pamphlet, June 1920
      
Translated: Julius Katzer
      
Online Version: marx.org in 1996, marxists.org 1999
      
Transcribed: Zodiac
      
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins and David Walters
Proof reading: Steve Iverson, 2014. Alvaro Miranda 2022.  


      Contents:
    

In What
Sense We Can Speak of the International Significance of the
Russian Revolution (9 k)
      
      
An Essential
Condition of the Bolsheviks’ Success
      (9 k)
      
      
The Principal
Stages in the History of Bolshevism
      (19 k)

      
The Struggle
Against Which Enemies Within the Working-Class MovementHelped Bolshevism
Develop, Gain Strength, and Become Steeled
      (28 k)

      
“Left-Wing”
Communism in Germany. The Leaders, the Party, the Class, the
Masses (28 k)

      
Should
Revolutionaries Work in Reactionary Trade Unions?
      (29 k)

      
Should
We Participate in Bourgeois Parliaments?
      (32 k)

      
No Compromises?
      (33 k)

      
“Left-Wing”
Communism in Great Britain
      (35 k)

      
Several
Conclusions
      (38 k)

    

Appendix
      (28 k)

    

The
Split Among the German Communists

The
Communists and the independents in Germany

Turati
and Co. in Italy

False
Conclusions from Correct Premises

Note
from Wijnkoop, June 30, 1920


      Download: Macintosh | 
  Windows


Endnotes

      With this now-classic work, Lenin aimed to encapsulate the
      lessons the Bolshevik Party had learned from its involvement in
      three revolutions in 12 years—in a manner that European
      Communists could relate to, for it was to them he was
      speaking. He also further develops the theory of what the
      “dictatorship of the proletariat” means and stresses that the
      primary danger for the working-class movement in general is
      opportunism on the one hand, and anti-Marxist ultraleftism on
      the other.

    

“Left-Wing” Communism: an Infantile Disorder was
      written in April, and the appendix was written on May 12,
      1920. It came out on June 8–10 in Russian and in July was
      published in German, English and French. Lenin gave personal
      attention to the book’s type-setting and printing schedule so
      that it would be published before the opening of the Second
      Congress of the Communist International, each delegate receiving
      a copy. Between July and November 1920, the book was
      republished in Leipzig, Paris, and London, in the German, French,
      and English languages respectively.

    

“Left-Wing” Communism: an Infantile Disorder is
      published according to the first edition print, the proofs of
      which were read by Lenin himself.
    


Lenin Works Archive

>



==========

##  Speech Delivered
    at an All-Russia Congress of Glass and Porcelain
  Workers











Speech Delivered At An All-Russia 
Congress Of Glass And Porcelain Workers April 29, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at an All-Russia 
Congress
Of Glass and Porcelain Workers
April 29, 1920


Delivered: 29 January, 1920 
 
First Published: Pravda No 92, April 30, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 119-122
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Yesterday brought us two pieces of news: the first
      is very bad—a report about a manifesto by Pilsudski, head
      of the Polish Government. I have not yet seen the text of this
      manifesto; I was told of it on the telephone. One thing is
      certain, however, that it is tantamount to Poland’s
      declaration of war on the Ukraine. The French
      imperialists’ influence has evidently gained the upper
      hand in Poland’s government circles. The Polish Government
      has decided to drop its recent policy of tacking and manoeuvring
      around the peace negotiations with us, and to start hostilities
      on a wider front. The Poles have already captured Zhitomir and
      are marching on Kiev. This demands of us the most determined and
      urgent defence of the interests of the proletariat. We do not
      doubt that we shall be able to defend those interests; we do not
      doubt that this new attempt by the Entente imperialists to
      strangle Soviet Russia will fall through just as the Denikin
      and. the Kolchak ventures have. Poland is obviously getting all
      her military support from France, Britain, and the entire
      Entente It is highly characteristic, in this connection, that in
      the last stage of the negotiations with us about the Crimea the
      British Government has considerably changed its originally
      favourable attitude. In reply to Great Britain’s call to
      us to show clemency to Denikin’s soldiers, who are being
      driven into the sea, we have said that we were prepared to spare
      the lives of the Crimean whiteguards if, for its part, the
      Entente shows clemency to the defeated Hungarian Communists and
      allows them to enter Soviet Russia.

      

      We do not need to shed the blood of these Crimean whiteguards;
      we are not vindictive. We have, however, received no reply to our
      Note from the British Government, which, in connection with
      Poland’s action, seems in no hurry to reply. But we are sure
      that no supporters of intervention are to be found among the
      British workers, even the most opportunistically minded.
We have information to the effect that even in Poland the
    Polish Socialist Party, which has persecuted Polish Communists,
    has stated in its newspaper that Poland should not break off peace
    negotiations with Soviet Russia by presenting an ultimatum
    demanding that these talks should be conducted in Borisov. This
    newspaper considers such conduct by the Polish Government a
    crime. The Poles have proposed that the peace talks should take
    place in Borisov without any cessation of hostilities. Conducting
    negotiations in this particular place would prevent us from
    continuing hostilities during the talks, while giving Poland
    complete freedom of action in this respect. Of course, we could
    not conduct peace negotiations on such terms, and we proposed that
    they should be transferred to Paris, Revel, Warsaw, Moscow or some
    other city mutually agreed upon with Poland. The reply to this
    proposal was an extensive Polish offensive along the entire
    front. We have no doubt that the Polish Government started this
    war of aggression in defiance of the wishes of its workers. That
    is why we face this new military gamble quite calmly; we know that
    we shall emerge the victors. But you know, comrades, that any war
    is accompanied by tremendous difficulties, to overcome which we
    have more than onoe appealed to the worker masses for support. The
    war with Poland has been forced upon us. We have no designs
    whatever on Poland’s independence, just as we have no
    designs on the independence of Lithuania or Byelorussia. Yet,
    despite all our willingness to come to terms, war has been forced
    upon us; that being the case, we must rise up as one man to defend
    both ourselves and the Ukraine from the onslaught of the Polish
    imperialists. (Loud applause.) For that purpose we must
    again make a certain change of plans. However much we might desire
    to go over to peaceful construction as soon as possible and on the
    greatest possible scale, the fact that war has been forced upon us
    makes it imperative that we subordinate everything to the demands
    of that war so as to achieve the most successful and rapid
    results. We must explain to the workers and peasants why an
    Entente-instigated Poland has launched a war against us. We must
    explain that this has been done in order to widen the barrier and
    deepen the gulf separating the proletariat of Germany from us.
On the other hand, we received news from Baku yesterday which
    shows that the position of Soviet Russia is improving. We know
    that our industry is at a standstill owing to lack of fuel. News
    has come in that the Baku proletariat has taken over power and
    overthrown the Azerbaijan Government. This means that we now have
    an economic base that may put life into our whole industry. In
    Baku there is a million poods
    of oil which could not be sold, with the result that even Nobel,
    the oil magnate, tried to start, talks with us for the delivery of
    this oil to Soviet Russia. Thus our railways and industry will
    receive very substantial aid from the Baku oilfields.
Comrade Tsyurupa, the People’s Commissar for Food,
    informed me today that in Kuban Region and in the Caucasus there
    are vast stocks of grain which we can count on having sent
    here. That means that we shall have fuel for industry and bread
    for the people. By exerting every effort to restore the transport
    system, we shall be able to secure bread and oil, which will serve
    as a sound economic basis for relations between the workers and
    the peasants. We say that the peasants must give their surplus
    grain to the workers because under present-day conditions, the
    sale of these surpluses would be a crime. Consequently, as soon as
    we get our industry going, we shall make every effort to satisfy
    the peasants’ need of manufactured goods from the
    cities.
After outlining the Republic’s general position today in
    these few words and to the extent permitted by the time, I shall
    take the liberty of concluding by expressing the conviction that
    at the present moment, at this new stage of our relations with
    Poland, when both Kuban grain and Baku oil have been made
    available to us, the four million workers organised in the trade
    unions, through whom we have conducted our Soviet policy with the
    backing of the broad strata of the peasants, will, without
    confining themselves to the narrow limits of their trade union
    life, go on giving every support to the further success and
    development of the proletariat’s common cause. We know that
    the workers’ class-consciousness and unity and the complete
    solidarity of the trade unions. have been the only force that have
    made possible the brilliant victories of the Red Army, an army
    which has been the finest medium of spreading political
    enlightenment among the peasants, teaching them to oust
    self-seekers from their ranks so as to keep power in the hands of
    the workers. Now, too, we need that class-consciousness, that
    unity and complete solidarity of the trade unions in the war
    against Poland and in the work of restoring industry. What we need
    today is the further maintenance and tightening of the discipline
    necessary in all branches of production. The class-conscious
    workers know that if you, the workers, had not displayed this
    discipline hitherto, we might have suffered the fate of
    Hungary. Let the comrades remember that and, in their localities,
    ensure the complete subordination of all to the one fundamental
    task: we must abolish, we must eliminate as soon as possible the
    accursed motto-every man for himself and the devil take the
    hindmost. Proletarian labour discipline must be raised to the
    highest pitch of intensity-and then we shall be invincible. We
    will show that the Soviet Republic cannot be overthrown and that
    we shall succeed in winning the aid of all the other republics of
    the world. (Continuous applause from all members of the
    Congress; cries of “Long live our leader Comrade
    Lenin!”)


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 







==========

## 
    From The First Subbotnik On The Moscow-Kazan Railway To The
    All-Russia May Day Subbotnik











From The First Subbotnik On The Moscow-Kazan Railway To The All-Russia May Day Subbotnik



V. I. Lenin
From The First Subbotnik On The Moscow-Kazan Railway
To The All-Russia May Day Subbotnik[1]


Written: 2 May, 1920 
 
First Published: Pervomaisky Subbotnik, May 2, 1920;  Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 123-125
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The distance indicated in the above title has been
    covered in a single year. This is an enormous distance. Although
    all our subbotniks are still weak, and each subbotnik reveals a
    host of defects in arrangement, organisation and discipline, the
    main thing has been done. A heavy and ponderous mass has been
    shifted, and that is the essence of the matter. 

      We are not deceiving ourselves in the least about the little
      that has yet been done and about the infinite amount of work
      that has yet to be done; however, only malicious enemies of the
      working people, only malicious supporters of the bourgeoisie,
      can treat the May 1 subbotnik with disdain; only the most
      contemptible people, who have irrevocably sold themselves to the
      capitalists, can condemn the utilisation of the great First of
      May festival for a mass-scale attempt to introduce communist
      labour. 

      This is the very first time since the overthrow of the tsars,
      the landowners and tho capitalists that the ground is being
      cleared for the actual building of socialism, for the
      development of new social links, a new discipline of work in
      common and a new national (and later an international) system of
      economy of world-historic importance. This is a matter of
      transforming the very habits of the people, habits which, for a
      long time to come, have been defiled and debased by the accursed
      private ownership of the means of production, and also by the
      entire atmosphere of bickering, distrust, enmity, disunity and
      mutual intrigue that is inevitably generated—and
      constantly regenerated—by petty individual economy, the
      economy of private owners in conditions of “free”
      exchange among them. For hundreds of years, freedom of trade and
      of exchange has been to millions of people the supreme gospel of
      economic wisdom, the most deep-rooted habit of hundreds and
      hundreds of millions of people. This freedom is just as utterly
      false, serving to mask capitalist deception, coercion and
      exploitation, as are the other “freedoms” proclaimed
      and implemented by the bourgeoisie, such as the “freedom
      to work” (actually the freedom to starve), and so on. 

      In the main we have broken irrevocably with this
      “freedom” of the property-owner to be a
      property-owner, with this “freedom” of capital to
      exploit labour, and we shall finish the job. We are combating
      its remnants ruthlessly, with all our might. 

      Down with the old social links, the old economic relationships,
      the old “freedom” of labour (subordinated to
      capital), the old laws, the old habits!

      Let us build a new society!

      We were not daunted by defeats during the great revolutionary
      war against tsarism, against the bourgeoisie, against the
      omnipotent imperialist world powers.

      We shall not be daunted by the gigantic difficulties and by the
      errors that are inevitable at the outset of a most difficult
      task; the transformation of all labour habits and customs
      requires decades. We solemnly and firmly promise one another
      that we shall make every sacrifice, that we shall hold out and
      win in this most arduous struggle—the struggle against the
      force of habit—that we shall work indefatigably for years
      and decades. We shall work to do away with the accursed maxim:
      “Every man for himself and the devil take the
      hindmost”, the habit of looking upon work merely as a
      duty, and of considering rightful only that work which is paid
      for at certain rates. We shall work to inculcate in people's
      minds, turn into a habit, and bring into the day-by-day life of
      the masses, the rule: “All for each and each for
      all”; the rule: “From each according to his ability,
      to each according to his needs”; we shall work for the
      gradual but steady introduction of communist discipline and
      communist labour. 

      We have shifted a huge mountain, a huge mass of conservatism,
      ignorance, stubborn adherence to the habits of “freedom of
      trade” and of the “free” buying and selling of
      human labour-power like any other commodity. We have begun to
      undermine and destroy the most deep-rooted prejudices, the
      firmest, age-long and ingrained habits. In a single year our
      subbotniks have made an immense stride forward. They are still
      infinitely weak, but that will not daunt us. We have seen our
      “infinitely weak” Soviet state, before our very
      eyes, gaining strength and becoming a mighty world force, as a
      result of our own efforts. We shall work for years and decades
      practising subbotniks, developing them, spreading them,
      improving them and converting them into a habit. We shall
      achieve the victory of communist labour. 


Endnotes
[1]
      The first communist subbotnik was held on April 12, 1919, by
      railwaymen of the Sortirovochnaya marshalling yards of the
      Moscow-Kazan Railway. Subbotniks were soon being held at many
      other enterprises in various cities. The experience of the first
      communist subbotniks was summed up by V. I. Lenin in 

      A Great Beginning
      (Heroism of the Workers of the Rear. “Communist
      Subbotniks” ).
An all-Russia subbotnik was held on May 1,
    1920, with over 425,000 people in Moscow alone participating,
    including V. I. Lenin, who, together with Kremlin army cadets,
    worked on clearing away building rubble on the territory of the
    Kremlin. 

      Lenin's article “From the First Subbotnik on the
      Moscow-Kazan Railway to the All-Russia May Day Subbotnik”
      was brought out on May 2, 1920, in a specially published
      handbill Pervomaisky Subbotnik, which was drawn up, set
      and printed during the May Day subbotnik by the staff of the
      newspapers Pravda, Izvestia,
      Ekonomicheskaya Zhizn, Bednota, the ROSTA
      Telegraph Agency, and by workers at the printing-house of the
      All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee.—Editor.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Speech at a
    Meeting Dedicated To the Laying of the Foundation Stone of a Monument
    to Liberated Labour











Speech at a Meeting Dedicated To the Laying of the Foundation Stone
of a Monument to Liberated Labour



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Meeting Dedicated
To the Laying of the Foundation Stone
of a
 Monument to Liberated Labour
May 1, 1920
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 1 May, 1920 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 94, May 4, 1920;   Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 126
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Comrade Lenin mounts the platform to unanimous applause from the audience.) Comrades, this was once the site of the monument to a tsar. Today we are laying the foundation stone of a monument to the glory of liberated labour. The capitalists used to speak of the freedom of labour, while the workers and the peasants were obliged to sell them their labour and, in consequence, were free to die of starvation. We call that kind of labour wage slavery. We know that it is no easy matter to organise free labour in the proper way and to work in the conditions of the difficult times we are living through. Today's subbotnik is the first step along that road, but if we carry on in the same way we shall create a kind of labour that is genuinely free. (Prolonged and unanimous applause.)


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 







==========

## 
    Speech To Men Of The Red Army Leaving for the Polish
    Front











Speech To Men Of The Red Army Leaving For The Polish Front May 5, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech To Men Of The Red Army
Leaving For The Polish Front
May 5, 1920[1]
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 5 May, 1920
 
First Published: Pravda, May 2, 1920;  Published according to the newspaper text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 127-128
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades: You know that, instigated by the Entente,
    the Polish landowners and capitalists have forced a new war on
    us. Remember, comrades, that we have no quarrel with the Polish
    peasants and workers; we have recognised Poland’s
    independence and the Polish People’s Republic, and shall
    continue to do so. We have proposed peace to Poland on the basis
    of the integrity of her frontiers, although these frontiers extend
    far beyond the purely Polish population. We have agreed to make
    all concessions, which is something each of you should remember at
    the front. Let your attitude to the Poles there prove that you are
    soldiers of a workers’ and peasants’ republic, that
    you are coming to them, not as aggressors but as liberators. Now
    that, despite our efforts, the Polish magnates have concluded an
    alliance with Petlyura, launched an offensive, are approaching
    Kiev, and are spreading rumours in the foreign press that they
    have already captured Kiev—which is the sheerest fabrication
    since only yesterday I was talking on the direct line with F. Kon,
    who is in Kiev—we say: Comrades, we have been able to repel
    a more terrible enemy; we have been able to defeat our own
    landowners and capitalists, and we shall defeat the Polish
    landowners and capitalists too! All of us here today should pledge
    ourselves, give a solemn promise, that we shall stand as one man
    so as not to allow a victory of the Polish magnates and
    capitalists. Long live the peasants and workers of a free
    independent Polish Republic! Down with the Polish magnates,
    landowners and capitalists! Long live our Red Workers’ and
    Peasants’ Army! (The mighty strains of the
    "Internationale" and cries of "Hurrah" drown Comrade
    Lenin’s final words.)

Endnotes
[1]
    This speech was made by V. I. Lenin on May 5, 1920, in Teatralnaya
    Square (now Sverdlov Square), whore a parade of the Moscow
    garrison troops took place. Petrograd Communists leaving for the
    Polish front were also present at the
    parade.—Editor. 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Speech Delivered
    at a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central
  Executive Committee











Speech Delivered At A Joint Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee,The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies, Trade Unions, and Factory Committees May 5, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee,
The Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies, Trade Unions,
And Factory Committees
May 5, 1920[1] 


Delivered: 5 May, 1920
 
First Published: Published in 1920 in the book Verbatim Reports of the Plenary Meetings of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies; Published according to the text in the book
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 129-134
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Applause.) Comrades, I should like to
    draw your attention to a feature that, from the international
    point of view or more correctly from the point of view of
    Russia’s international position, distinguishes the present
    war from previous wars. Of course, none of you doubt, or could
    doubt, that this war is a link in a long chain of events revealing
    the international bourgeoisie’s frantic resistance to the
    victorious proletariat, a frantic attempt by the international
    bourgeoisie to crush Soviet Russia, to overthrow the first Soviet
    state at all costs and by all means. There cannot be the least
    doubt that there is a connection between these events, between the
    international bourgeoisie’s previous attempts and the
    present war. At the same time, however, we see the tremendous
    difference between this war and previous wars, from the point of
    view of our international position. We see the tremendous impetus
    our struggle has given to the international working-class
    movement. We see how the international proletariat reacts to
    Soviet Russia’s victories, how the world proletarian
    struggle is mounting and gaining strength, and what gigantic work
    has been carried out in the little more than the two years of the
    Soviet Republic’s existence.
You remember how the most responsible and most powerful
    ministers of the mightiest and unrivalled capitalist powers
    announced quite recently that they had prepared an alliance of
    fourteen powers against Russia; you know how, under pressure from
    the powerful capitalists of France and Britain, this alliance
    brought Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin together, and how it drew up
    a really grandiose and comprehensive war plan. If we destroyed
    that plan, it was because the imperialists’ unity was
    illusory, and the forces of the international bourgeoisie cannot
    stand up to a single trial when it comes to sacrificing
    oneself. It appeared that, after four years of the imperialist
    slaughter, the working people do not recognise the justice of a
    war against us, and in them we have a great ally. The
    Entente’s plan was really destructive, but it came to grief
    because, despite their most powerful alliance, the capitalist
    states could not carry it through, proved powerless to give it
    effect. None of the powers, any one. of which could have the
    advantage over us, could show unity, because the organised
    proletariat does not support it; no army-neither the French nor
    the British-could get its soldiers to fight on Russian soil,
    against the Soviet Republic.
If, in our mind’s eye, we follow the desperate situations
    our republic was faced with when, in fact, it was standing up to
    the whole world, against powers far more powerful than it, and if
    we recollect how we emerged fully victorious from these formidable
    trials, then these recollections will give us a clear idea of what
    we are confronted with now. Here we see a plan that is not new and
    at the same time does not at all resemble the really comprehensive
    and single plan we were faced with six months ago. What we have is
    the relics of the former plan and, in the light of the
    international alignment of forces, this is the greatest assurance
    of the futility of the present attempt. The former plan was an
    attempt on the part of all the imperialist powers to crush the
    workers’ and peasants’ republic, in alliance with all
    the small border states of the former Russian Empire, which had
    been shamelessly and outrageously oppressed by the tsarist and
    capitalist government of Great Russia. At present, several powers,
    in alliance with one of the border states, are attempting to
    accomplish that which proved impossible to all the imperialist
    powers in alliance with all the border states, and was undertaken
    by them twelve and six months ago in alliance with Kolchak,
    Denikin and others. We now see the relics of the
    imperialists’ plan. The great tenacity being shown by the
    bourgeoisie is a feature of the imperialist plans. They know that
    they are fighting to retain power at home, and that it is not the
    Russian or the Polish question that is being decided, but the
    question of their own survival. It is therefore to be expected
    that they will try to salvage the former and unsuccessful plan
    from the wreck.
We can all clearly see the clash of the imperialist
    states’ interests. Despite all pronouncements by their
    ministers about the peaceful settlement of questions in dispute,
    the imperialist powers cannot in reality take a single serious
    step in political matters without disagreeing. The French need a
    powerful Poland and a powerful Russia of the tsarist brand, and
    they are prepared to make every sacrifice to this end. Because of
    her geographical position, Britain wants something else-the
    break-up of Russia and a weak Poland, so as to ensure a balance
    between France and Germany which would give the imperialist
    victors control of colonies acquired by robbing Germany as a
    consequence of the world war. Here the clash of interests is
    really striking; no matter how the representatives of the
    imperialist powers at San Remo[2] try to assure us that
    there is full unanimity among the Allies, we know that this is not
    the case.
We know that Poland’s offensive is a relic of the old
    plan that once united the entire international bourgeoisie. If
    that ambitious plan failed at that time, even though from the
    purely military standpoint it was assured of success, it is
    hopeless today, even in that aspect. Furthermore, we know that the
    imperialist powers, who have entered into an alliance with the
    Polish bourgeoisie, and the Polish Government are in a bigger mess
    than ever. Each political move made by the Polish bourgeoisie over
    the past months, weeks and days has shown them up to their own
    working people. They have been quarrelling with their allies, and
    cannot make a single consistent move in their policy. At one
    moment they announce their unyielding attitude to Soviet Russia
    and the impos3ibility of conducting any kind of talks with her,
    while at the next moment they raise the blockade, and solemnly
    announce this on behalf of an allegedly existing alliance, an
    allegedly existing League of Nations, and then they again commence
    a policy of vacillation. In consequence of all this, the
    imperialists have enabled us to prove that our policy is peaceful,
    and that our international policy has nothing in common either
    with tsarist policies or those of the Russian capitalists or the
    Russian bourgeoisie, even a democratic bourgeoisie. We have proved
    to the entire world that our foreign policy has nothing in common
    with the policy constantly ascribed to us by all the bourgeois
    press. Consequently, the Poles themselves have exposed every piece
    of deception in their policy. The experience of three Russian
    revolutions has shown us how they were prepared, and how each
    served as the basis for the further development of home and
    foreign policy. This experience has proved that in the preparation
    of revolution those ruling classes are our most
    faithful. assistants which, laying claim to all kinds of
    coalitions, constituent assemblies and so on, and asserting that
    they represent the will of the people, in fact reveal-through
    their own policy at every serious, difficult or crucial moment in
    the life of the country-the self-interest of squabbling bourgeois
    groups that cannot come to terms, rival capitalist groups that
    unmask themselves a hundred times more effectively than communist
    propaganda can do. In no country or state can the working
    class-even if it is most revolutionary-ever he revolutionised by
    any propaganda and agitation unless that agitation is backed up in
    practice by the behaviour of the ruling classes of that
    country.
What is now taking place in all capitalist countries (and this
    will develop even more with time, particularly in a country like
    Poland) makes us confident that, if we emerged victorious from a
    war undoubtedly far more arduous, and if we have correctly
    assessed the discord and the impossibility of reconciliation among
    the bourgeoisie of various groups and parties at times when. they
    stand in particular need of such unity, the present improvement in
    our international position is enormous. This fills us with
    confidence, not only in view of the internal alignment of forces,
    but also of our international position. If we consider the entire
    system of present-day imperialist states, and all their
    strivings-and we know-that their urge to use any moment for an
    attack on Russia is irresistible-and appraise them quite
    objectively in the light of the incontrovertible facts of the
    history of recent years and particularly of the past six months,
    we shall see that the international enemy is weakening, that all
    attempts at an alliance between the imperialists are becoming more
    and more futile, and that, from this aspect, our victory is
    assured.
However, comrades, while working on economic problems and
    concentrating all our attention on peaceful economic construction,
    we must rapidly re-form our ranks as we face the approach of a new
    war. Our entire army, which has recently been a labour army,[3] must now turn its attention to other
    matters. We must discontinue everything else and concentrate on
    this new war. We are perfectly aware that, after all that we have
    been through, we do not have to fear the enemy now facing us, but
    he may impose new and heavy sacrifices on the workers and
    peasants, may greatly impede our economic construction, and bring
    about the devastation and ruin of tens, hundreds and thousands of
    peasant households. He may also, by his temporary success, revive
    the extinct hopes of the imperialists we have defeated, who will
    of course not fail to join forces with this enemy. We must,
    therefore, declare that the rule we have followed throughout all
    previous wars must be resolutely reinforced. Since, despite all
    our most conciliatory intentions and the fact that we made great
    concessions and renounced all national claims, the Polish
    landowners and the Polish bourgeoisie have forced a war on us;
    since we are certain, and we must be certain, that the bourgeoisie
    of all countries, even those that at present are not helping the
    Poles, will help them when the war flares up, because it is not
    only a Russian or a Polish issue, but one of the survival of the
    entire bourgeoisie-then we must remember and at all costs
    implement the rule which we have followed in our policy and which
    has always been a guarantee of our success. That rule is: once
    things have led to war, everything must be subordinated to the war
    effort; the entire internal life of the country must he
    subordinated to wartime needs; the slightest hesitation on this
    score is inexcusable. No matter how hard it is for the great
    majority of comrades to tear themselves away from their work,
    which has only recently been switched onto a new course, more
    gratifying and essential to the tasks of peaceful construction, it
    must be remembered that the least oversight or inattention may
    often mean the deaths of tens of thousands of our best comrades,
    our younger generation of workers and peasants, our Communists
    who, as always, are in the front ranks of the lighters. Therefore,
    once more—everything for the war effort. No meeting, no
    conference should he held without having as its first item the
    question: have we done everything possible to help the war effort;
    have our forces been sufficiently mobilised; have we sent
    sufficient help to the front? Only those people who cannot help at
    the front should remain here. Every sacrifice, every assistance
    for the front, without the least hesitation! And, by concentrating
    all efforts and making every sacrifice, we shall undoubtedly
    triumph again. (Applause.)


Endnotes
[1]
    The joint session of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee, the Moscow Soviet, and representatives of Moscow trade
    unions  and factory committees, held on May 5, 1920, was
    called in connection with the offensive launched by the whiteguard
    Poles against Soviet Russia. The session was also attended by 300
    worker Communists from Petrograd who ware going to the Polish
    front. A single item was discussed-the position on the Polish
    front. The session unanimously adopted a resolution calling upon
    the workers and peasants to bend every effort for the defeat of
    bourgeois-landowner Poland.—Editor. 
[2]
      The reference is to the Conference of the Entente Powers
      held at San Remo (Italy) in April 1920. Among questions discussed
      at the Conference were the draft peace treaty with Turkey, and
      Germany’s observation of the Treaty of
      Versailles. —Editor.

[3]
    The use of Red Army regular units as labour detachments for
    construction work was occasioned by the situation in the country
    during the peaceful respite early in 1920, when any day could
    bring a resumption of the imperialists’ armed
    intervention. In February 1920, in connection with the formation
    of the labour army, Lenin pointed out, “The task of the
    transition from war to peaceful development arises in such
    peculiar conditions that we cannot disband the army, since we have
    to allow, say, for the possibility of an attack by that selfsame
    Poland or any of the powers which the Entente continues to incite
    against us” (See 

      Report On The Work
Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee And The Council Of
People’s Commissars Delivered At The First Session Of The
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, Seventh
Convocation).
The war that broke out against
      bourgeois-landowner Poland and Wrangel made necessary the transfer
      of the labour detachments to a wartime
      footing.—Editor.



Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
    Telegram to the Soviet Socialist Government of Azerbaijan











Telegram To The Soviet Socialist Government Of Azerbaijan



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To The Soviet Socialist Government Of Azerbaijan


Wired: 5 May, 1920
 
First Published: Kommunist (Baku) No. 7, May 9, 1920; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 135
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Baku
The Council of People’s Commissars welcomes
    the liberation of the toiling masses of the independent Azerbaijan
    Republic and expresses its firm confidence that, under the
    leadership of its Soviet Government, the independent Republic of
    Azerbaijan will, together with the R.S.F.S.R., uphold its freedom
    and independence against imperialism, the sworn enemy of the
    oppressed nations of the East.

    
Long live the independent Soviet Republic of
    Azerbaijan! 

    

      Long live the workers and peasants of Azerbaijan!

    
Long live the alliance of the workers and peasants
    of Azerbaijan and Russia!

    
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

Chairman of the Council of People's
Commissars


      May 5, 1920


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive








==========

##  Speech at
    Conference of Workers and Red Army Men In Rogozhsko-Simonovsky
    District Of Moscow











Speech at Conference of Workers and Red Army Men In Rogozhsko-Simonovsky District Of Moscow, May 13, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech at Conference of Workers and Red Army Men
In Rogozhsko-Simonovsky District Of Moscow 
May 13, 1920
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 13 May, 1920
 
First Published: Kommunistichesky Trud No. 44,May 14, 1920; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 136-137
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The Soviet Republic is again going through a difficult period. After dealing with Kolchak and Denikin, the Russian proletariat was preparing to devote all its spiritual and material forces to the restoration of the country's economic life. We thought that the bourgeois government of Poland would not hazard a new venture. The Polish Communists, it is true, had said that, just because the Polish Government had nothing more to lose, it would not hesitate to drive its workers and peasants into any kind of adventure. We, however, think that the Polish proletariat, together with the proletariat of Lithuania and Byelorussia, will see to it that the Polish bourgeoisie and nobility are driven out of the country. The Russian workers' and peasants' government has made enormous concessions to Poland, wishing thereby to prove to the Polish people that it has ended with tsarism's policy towards small states. 
Behind the Polish bourgeoisie stand the capitalists of France, who are manoeuvring to sell military supplies to Poland at good prices, thus recovering the losses incurred with Kolchak and Denikin. 
It is significant that no Entente power dares to come out openly against Soviet Russia, for fear of showing the workers its true colours. At present it is of the utmost importance for us to make the politically illiterate and backward citizens realise that we have done everything to avoid fresh bloodshed, that the Polish worker and peasant are no enemies of ours, but that we shall fight and fight ruthlessly if the Polish bourgeoisie is out for war, hand in glove with Petlyura. In the final analysis, victory in any war depends on the spirit animating the masses that spill their own blood on the field of battle. The conviction that the war is in a just cause and the realisation that their lives must be laid down for the welfare of their brothers strengthen the morale of the fighting men and enable them to endure incredible hardships. Tsarist generals say that our Red Army men are capable of enduring hardships that the tsar's army could never have stood up to. The reason is that every mobilised worker or peasant knows what he is fighting for and is ready to shed his own blood for the triumph of justice and socialism. 
The realisation by the masses of the causes and aims of the war is of tremendous importance and ensures victory.
Our country has been exhausted by war, and we are prepared to make great concessions to end the bloodshed and apply ourselves to peaceful labour. That was why, when Bullitt came to Russia and proposed a harsh peace, the Soviet Government signed it[1] so as to enable the Soviets to gain strength. 
At present we are again obliged to issue the call, “Everything for the war effort! ”All trade union and Party organisations must bend every effort to help the heroic Red Army. 
We shall very soon convince the whole world of the justice of our cause.
A British trade union delegation arrived in Petrograd yesterday. Few of its members are in sympathy with us, but we are sure that when they return home they will be our best propagandists.[2] Even former tsarist generals consider Poland's claims unjust and are helping us. The Russian workers and peasants join us in saying, “Everything for the war effort, everything for victory ”. Let us devote all our forces to secure victory. (A storm of applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
 Lenin has in view the arrival in Moscow, in March 1919, of Bullitt, on instructions from U.S. President Wilson and British Prime Minister Lloyd George, with the proposal that the Soviet Government should sign a peace with the whiteguard Governments existing at the time on the territory of Russia. A draft of the treaty was drawn up, but then the imperialists, who, in view of the temporary successes of Kolchak's army, hoped that the Soviet Republic would be crushed, refused to continue peace talks.—Editor.
[2] The British trade union delegation was sent to Russia by decision of the British Trade Unions Congress held in December 1919, for a first-hand study of the economic and political situation in Soviet Russia. The delegation consisted of: Ben Turner (head of the delegation), Ethel Snowden, Tom Shaw, Robert Williams—from the Labour Party, and Margaret Bondfield, A. Purcell, and H. Skinner, from the trade unions; Charles Roden Buxton and Haden L. Guest were secretaries to the delegation. R. C. Wallhead and Allen Clifford, representing the Independent Labour Party, came to Russia together with the delegation, but were not official members. 
V. I. Lenin attached great importance to the delegation's visit to Russia. He instructed the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions to give the delegation a hearty welcome and acquaint them with the life of the Soviet people, so that they could tell the truth about Soviet Russia when they returned home.
The delegation arrived in Petrograd on May 12, 1920, and went to Moscow on May 17. They were warmly welcomed by the working people of Soviet Russia, as representatives of the British working masses. Meetings were held in their honour, as well as a great rally in the Bolshoi Theatre and a parade of the Moscow Garrison. The delegation became acquainted in detail with the life of the Soviet Republic, visited a number of cities along the Volga, went to the front, and took part in Subbotniks. The delegation members expressed their determination to strengthen fraternal solidarity between British and Soviet working people, and voiced a protest against any aid, whether overt, or covert, given by Britain to the Polish Government in the new offensive, and against any threat to force Russia to meet Polish demands. The delegation were received by V. I. Lenin on May 26. On their return home, the British workers' delegation published a report on the situation in Russia (see British Labour Delegation to Russia. 1920. Report. London, 1920).—Editor.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  To
    the Indian Revolutionary Association











To the Indian Revolutionary Association



V. I. Lenin
To the Indian Revolutionary Association[1]


Delivered: 13 May, 1920
 
First Published: Pravda No. 108; May 20, 1920; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 138
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 I am glad to hear that the principles of self-determination and the liberation of oppressed nations from exploitation by foreign and native capitalists, proclaimed by the Workers’ and Peasants’ Republic, have met with such a ready response among progressive Indians, who are waging a heroic fight for freedom. The working masses of Russia are following with unflagging attention the awakening of the Indian workers and peasants. The organisation and discipline of the working people and their perseverance and solidarity with the working people of the world are an earnest of ultimate success. We welcome the close alliance of Moslem and non-Moslem elements. We sincerely want to see this alliance extended to all the toilers of the East. Only when the Indian, Chinese, Korean, Japanese, Persian, and Turkish workers and peasants join hands and march together in the common cause of liberation—only then will decisive victory over the exploiters be ensured. Long live a free Asia!

Endnotes
[1] Lenin’s message of greetings “To the Indian Revolutionary Association” was broadcasted on May 10, 1920, in reply to the resolution of the Assembly of Indian Revolutionaries held in Kabul on February 17, 1920. The Assembly’s resolution, which was addressed to Lenin, read as follows: “The Indian revolutionaries express their deep gratitude and their admiration of the great struggle carried on by Soviet Russia for the liberation of all oppressed classes and peoples, and especially for the liberation of India. Great thanks to Soviet Russia for her having heard the cries of agony from the 315,000,000 people suffering under the yoke of imperialism. The mass meeting accepts with joy the hand of friendship and help extended to oppressed India” (Pravda No. 108, May 20, 1920). 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
  “Dual” Subordination and
  Legality










“Dual” Subordination and Legality



V. I. Lenin 
“Dual” Subordination and Legality[1]

Dictated by phone: 20 May 1922 
First Published: Dictated by telephone; on May 20, 1922; First published in Pravda No. 91, April 23, 1925; Published according to the stenographers notes (typewritten copy).
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 2nd English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 33, pages 363-367
Translated: David Skvirsky and George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License
 
To Comrade Stalin for the Political Bureau
The question of the procuratorship has given rise to disagreement on the commission appointed by the Central Committee to direct the proceedings of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee session. If these disagreements do not cause this question to be brought before the Political Bureau automatically, I propose, in view of its extreme importance, that it be brought up in any case.
In substance, the point at issue is the following: On the question of the procuratorship, the majority of the commission elected by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee expressed opposition to the proposal that local procurators should be appointed solely by the central authority and he subordinate solely to the latter. The majority demands what is called dual” subordination, the system that applies to all local officials, i.e., subordination to the central authority in the shape of the respective People’s Commissariat, and also to the Gubernia Executive Committee.
The same majority of the commission of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee denies the right of local procurators to challenge the legality of decisions passed by gubernia executive committees, and by local authorities generally.
I cannot imagine on what grounds this obviously fallacious decision of the majority of the commission of the AllRussia Central Executive Committee can be justified. The only argument I have neard in support of it is that defence of ’dual” subordination in this case means legitimate opposition to bureaucratic centralism, defending the  necessary independence of the local authorities, and protecting the officials of the gubernia executive committees from high-handed conduct by the central authorities. Is there anything high-handed in the view that law cannot be Kaluga law or Kazan law, but that it must be uniform all-Russia law, and even uniform for the entire federation of Soviet Republics? The underlying fallacy of the view which has prevailed among the majority of the commission of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee is that they wrongly apply the principle of “dual” subordination. ’Dual” subordination is needed where it is necessary to allow for a really inevitable difference. Agriculture in Kaluga Guhernia differs from that in Kazan Gubernia. The same thing can be said about industry; and it can be said about administration, or management, as a whole. Failure to make allowances for local differences in all these matters would mean slipping into bureaucratic centralism, and so forth. It would mean preventing the local authorities from giving proper consideration to specific local features, which is the basis of all rational administration. Nevertheless, the law must be uniform, and the root evil of our social life, and of our lack of culture, is our pandering to the ancient Russian view and semi-savage habit of mind, which wishes to preserve Kaluga law as distinct from Kazan law. It must be borne in mind that, unlike the administration authorities, the procurator has no administrative powers, and has no power to decide any question of administration. His rights and duties are reduced to one function, viz., to see that the law is really uniformly interpreted throughout the Republic, notwithstanding differences in local conditions, and in spite of all local influences. The only right and duty of the procurator is to take the matter before the court. What sort of court? Our courts are local courts. Our judges are elected by the local Soviets. Hence, the authority to which the procurator submits a case of infringement of the law is a local authority which, on the one hand, must strictly abide by the laws uniformly established for the whole Federation and, on the other hand, in determining the penalty, must take all local circumstances into consideration. And it has the right to say that although there has been a definite infringement of the law in a given case, nevertheless, certain circumstances, with which local people are closely familiar, and which come to light in the local court, compel the court to mitigate the penalty to which the culprit is liable, or even acquit him. Unless we strictly adhere to this most elementary condition for maintaining the uniformity of the law for the whole Federation, it will be utterly impossible to protect the law, or to develop any kind of culture.
Similarly, it is wrong in principle to argue that procurators should not have the right to challenge the decisions of gubernia executive committees, or of other local authorities; that legally the latter come under the jurisdiction of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection.
The Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection judges not only from the viewpoint of the law, but also from the viewpoint of expediency. The procurator must see to it that not a single decision passed by any local authority runs counter to the law, and only from this aspect is it his duty to challenge every illegal decision. He has no right to suspend such a decision; he must only take measures to secure that the interpretation of the law is absolutely uniform throughout the Republic. Hence, the decision of the majority of the commission of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee is not only utterly wrong in principle, it not only applies the principle of “dual” subordination in an utterly fallacious manner, but it also hinders all efforts to establish uniformity of the law and develop at least the minimum of culture.
Further, in deciding this question, it is necessary to take into account the weight of local influence. Undoubtedly, we are living amidst an ocean of illegality, and local influence is one of the greatest, if not the greatest obstacle to the establishment of law and culture. There is scarcely anyone who has not heard that the purging of the Party revealed the prevalence, in the majority of local purging committees, of personal spite and local strife in the process of purging the Party. This fact is incontrovertible, and significant. Scarcely anyone will dare deny that it is easier for the Party to find half a score of reliable Communists who possess an adequate legal education and are capable of resisting all purely local influences than to find hundreds  of them. And this is precisely what the question boils down to in discussing whether procurators should be subject to “dual” subordination, or to subordination solely to the central authorities. At the centre we must find about half a score of men to exercise the functions of the central procurator authority represented by the Procurator General, the Supreme Tribunal, and the Collegium of the People’s Commissariat of Justice (1 leave aside the question as to whether the Procurator General should he the sole authority, or whether he should share his authority with the Supreme Tribunal and the Collegium of the People’s Commissariat of Justice, for this is purely a secondary question, and can be settled, one way or another, in accordance with whether the Party will delegate vast authority to one person, or divide that authority among the three aforesaid bodies). These ten should work at the centre, under the closest supervision of and in closest contact with the three Party bodies which provide the most reliable barrier against local and personal influences, viz., the Organising Bureau of the Central Committee, the Political Bureau of the Central Committee, and the Central Control Commission. The latter body, i.e., the Central Control Commission, is responsible only to the Party Congress, and is constructed in such a way that no member of it can hold a position in any People’s Commissariat, government department, or any organ of the Soviet government. It is clear that under these circumstances we have the greatest guarantee so far devised that the Party will set up a small central collegium that will be really capable of resisting local influences and local, and all other, bureaucracy, and which will establish real uniformity in the application of the laws throughout the Republic, and throughout the Federation. Hence, any mistake that this central legal collegium may make can be at once rectified on the spot by the Party bodies, which determine all the fundamental concepts and lay down all the fundamental rules for all our Party and Soviet activities throughout the Republic.
To depart from this would mean dragging in on the sly a view which nobody can defend openly and frankly, viz., that culture and law, which is its necessary concomitant, are so highly developed in our country that we can guarantee to find hundreds of absolutely irreproachable procurators capable of resisting all local influences, and of establishing uniformity of the law throughout the Republic by their own efforts.
To sum up, I draw the conclusion that to defend the “dual” subordination of procurators, and to deprive them of the right to challenge any decision passed by the local authorities, is not only wrong in principle, not only hinders our fundamental task of constantly introducing respect for the law, but is also an expression of the interests and prejudices of local bureaucrats and local influences, i.e., the most pernicious wall that stands between the working people and the local and central Soviet authorities, as well as the central authority of the Russian Communist Party, I therefore propose that the Central Committee should reject “dual” subordination in this matter, establish the subordination of local procurators solely to the central authority, and allow the procurator to retain the right and duty to challenge the legality of any decision or order passed by the local authorities with the proviso, however, that he shall have no right to suspend such decisions; he shall only have the right to bring them before the courts.

Lenin

Endnotes
[1] Lenin wrote this letter in connection with the drawing up of the Rules of the Procurator’s office. On May 24, 1922 the Political Bureau discussed Lenin’s letter and accepted the recommendations in it. On May 26, acting on the report of the special commission, the Third Session of the Ninth All-Russia Central Executive Committee approved the Rules in accordance with Lenin’s recommendations.

    


Collected Works Volume 33

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

##  Letter to the
    British Workers











Letter to the British Workers



V. I. Lenin
Letter to the British Workers[1]


Written: 30 May, 1920
 
First Published: Pravda No. 130, June 17, 1920; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 139-143
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades: 


First of all permit me to thank you for sending
    your delegation here to acquaint themselves with Soviet
    Russia. When your delegation suggested to me that I should send a
    letter through them to the British workers and perhaps also
    proposals to the British Government, I replied that I gratefully
    accepted the first suggestion but that I must address myself to
    the government, not through a workers’ delegation but
    directly, on behalf of our government, through Comrade
    Chicherin. We have on very many occasions addressed ourselves this
    way to the British Government, making the most formal and solemn
    proposals to start peace talks. All our
    representatives—Comrade Litvinov, Comrade Krasin and the
    rest—are unceasingly continuing to make these proposals. The
    British Government stubbornly refuses to accept them. It is not
    surprising, therefore, that I desired to speak to the delegates of
    the British workers exclusively as delegates of the workers, not
    as a representative of the government of Soviet Russia, but simply
    as a Communist. 
I was not surprised to find that several members of your
    delegation hold a standpoint, not of the working class but of the
    bourgeoisie, of the exploiting class: in all capitalist countries
    the imperialist war fully revealed an old ulcer, namely, the
    desertion of the majority of the workers’ parliamentary and
    trade union leaders to the side of the bourgeoisie. On the false
    pretext of “defence of country” they were actually
    defending the predatory interests of either of the two groups of
    robbers of the entire world—the Anglo-American-French group,
    or the German group; they entered into an alliance with the
    bourgeoisie, against the revolutionary struggle of the
    proletariat; they covered up this treachery with sentimental
    petty-bourgeois reformist and pacifist phrases about peaceful
    evolution, constitutional methods, democracy, etc. This is what
    happened in all countries; it is not surprising that in Britain
    this state of affairs has also been reflected in the composition
    of your delegation. 
Members of your delegation, Shaw and Guest—obviously
    surprised and hurt by my statement that Britain, notwithstanding
    our peace proposals and notwithstanding the declarations of her
    government, is continuing her intervention, waging war against us
    and helping Wrangel in the Crimea and whiteguard
    Poland—asked me whether I had proof of this, and whether I
    could show how many trainloads of military supplies Britain had
    provided Poland with, etc. I replied that, to obtain the secret
    treaties of the British Government, it was necessary to overthrow
    it in a revolutionary manner and to seize all its foreign policy
    documents in the same way as we did in 1917. Any educated man,
    anybody sincerely interested in politics, was aware even prior to
    our revolution that the tsar had secret treaties with the
    predatory governments of Britain, France, America, Italy and Japan
    concerning the division of the spoils, concerning Constantinople,
    Galicia, Armenia, Syria, Mesopotamia, etc. Only liars and
    hypocrites (excluding, of course, absolutely ignorant, backward
    and illiterate people) could deny this, or pretend not to know of
    this. However, without a revolution, we could never have obtained
    the secret documents of the predatory governments of the
    capitalist class. Those leaders or representatives of the British
    proletariat—whether they are members of Parliament, trade
    union leaders, journalists, or others—who pretend ignorance
    of the secret treaties between Britain, France, America, Italy,
    Japan and Poland concerning the plunder of other countries,
    concerning the division of the spoils, and who do not wage a
    revolutionary struggle in order to expose these treaties, are
    merely once again showing that they are faithful servants of the
    capitalists. We have known this for a long time; we are exposing
    this in our own country and in all other countries of the
    world. The visit to Russia of a delegation of the British workers
    will hasten the exposure of such leaders in Britain too. 
I had a conversation with your delegation on Wednesday, May
    26. On the following day telegrams arrived stating that Bonar Law
    had admitted in the British Parliament that military aid had been
    given to Poland in October “for defence against
    Russia” (of course only for defence, and only in October!
    There are still “influential labour leaders” in
    Britain who are helping the capitalists to dupe the workers!), but
    the New Statesman, the most moderate of moderate
    petty-bourgeois newspapers or journals, wrote of tanks being
    supplied to Poland, which were more powerful than those used
    against the Germans during the war. After this, can one refrain
    from ridiculing such “leaders” of the British workers
    that ask with an air of injured innocence whether there is any
    “proof” that Britain is fighting against Russia and is
    helping Poland and the whiteguards in the Crimea? 
Members of the delegation asked me which I considered more
    important: the formation in Britain of a consistently
    revolutionary Communist Party, or obtaining the immediate aid of
    the masses of the workers in Britain for the cause of peace with
    Russia. I replied that this is a matter of one’s
    convictions. Sincere supporters of the emancipation of the workers
    from the yoke of capital cannot possibly be opposed to the
    formation of a Communist Party, which alone is capable of training
    the workers in a non-bourgeois and non-petty-bourgeois manner, and
    is alone capable of genuinely exposing, ridiculing and disgracing
    “leaders” who can doubt whether Britain is helping
    Poland, etc. There is no need to fear the Communists will be too
    numerous in Britain, because there is not even a small Communist
    Party there. But if anyone continues to remain in intellectual
    slavery to the bourgeoisie, and continues to share petty-bourgeois
    prejudices about “democracy “ (bourgeois
    democracy), pacifism, etc., then of course such people would only
    do more harm to the proletariat if they took it into their heads
    to call themselves Communists, and affiliate to the Third
    International. All that these people are capable of doing is to
    pass sentimental “resolutions” against intervention
    couched exclusively in philistine phrases. In a certain sense
    these resolutions are also useful, namely, in the sense that the
    old “leaders” (adherents of bourgeois democracy, of
    peaceful methods, etc., etc.) will make themselves ridiculous in
    the eyes of the masses, and the more they pass empty,
    non-committal resolutions unaccompanied by revolutionary action,
    the sooner will they expose themselves. Let each man stick to his
    job: let the Communists work directly through their Party,
    awakening the revolutionary consciousness of the workers. Let
    those who supported the “defence of country” during
    the imperialist war for the partitioning of the world,
    “defence” of the secret treaty between the British
    capitalists and the tsar to plunder Turkey, let those who
    “do not see” that Britain is helping Poland and the
    whiteguards in Russia—let such people hasten to increase the
    number of their “peace resolutions” to the point of
    becoming ridiculous; the more they do that, the sooner will they
    meet with the fate of Kerensky, the Mensheviks and the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries in Russia. 
Several members of your delegation questioned me with surprise
    about the Red terror, about the absence of freedom of the press in
    Russia, of freedom of assembly, about our persecution of
    Mensheviks and pro-Menshevik workers, etc. My reply was that the
    real cause of the terror is the British imperialists and their
    “allies", who practised and are still practising a White
    terror in Finland and in Hungary, in India and in Ireland, who
    have been supporting Yudenich, Kolchak, Denikin, Pilsudski and
    Wrangel. Our Red terror is a defence of the working class against
    the exploiters, the crushing of resistance from the exploiters
    with whom the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Mensheviks and an
    insignificant number of pro-Menshevik workers have sided. Freedom
    of the press and assembly under bourgeois democracy is freedom for
    the wealthy to conspire against the working people, freedom for
    the capitalists to bribe and buy up the press. I have explained
    this in newspaper articles so often that I have derived no
    pleasure in repeating myself. 
Two days after my talk with your delegation, the news papers
    reported that, besides the arrests of Monatte and Loriot in
    France, Sylvia Pankhurst had been arrested in Britain. This is the
    best possible reply the British Government could give to a
    question that the non-Communist British labour “leaders",
    who are captives to bourgeois prejudices, are afraid even to ask,
    namely, which class the terror is directed against—the
    oppressed and exploited, or the oppressors and exploiters? Is it a
    question of the “freedom” of the capitalists to rob,
    deceive and dupe the working people, or of the
    “freedom” of the toilers from the yoke of the
    capitalists, the speculators and the property-owners? Comrade
    Sylvia Pankhurst represents the interests of hundreds upon
    hundreds of millions of people that are oppressed by the British
    and other capitalists. That is why she is subjected to a White
    terror, has been deprived of liberty, etc. The labour
    “leaders” who pursue a non-Communist policy are 99 per
    cent representatives of the bourgeoisie, of its deceit, its
    prejudices. 
In conclusion, I want to thank you once again, comrades, for
    having sent your delegation here. Despite the hostility of many of
    the delegates towards the Soviet system and the dictatorship of
    the proletariat, and although many of them are in the grip of
    bourgeois prejudices, their acquaintance with Soviet Russia will
    inevitably accelerate the collapse of capitalism throughout the
    world.
N. Lenin

    

      30.5.1920
Endnotes
[1] 
   “Letter to the British Workers” was published on June 17, 1920, in Pravda, Izvestia, Kommuniitichesky Trud, and Gudok ; on the same day it was published in Britain in The Call, the weekly of the British Socialist Party. On June 19, the letter was published in The Workers’ Dreadnought, organ of the Workers’ Socialist Federation of England and in the journal The Russia Outlook, and on June 22, in the Labour The Daily Herald. Later the “Letter to the British Workers” was repeatedly published both in Russia and abroad.—Editor.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
    Preliminary Draft Theses on National and Colonial Questions for the
    Second Congress of the Communist International










Draft Theses on National and Colonial Questions
      For The Second Congress Of The Communist International



V. I. Lenin 
Draft Theses on
National and Colonial Questions
For The Second Congress Of The Communist 

      International[1]

Written: 5 June, 1920 
First Published: Published in June, 1920; Published according to the manuscript and checked against the text of the proof-sheet, as amended by V. I. Lenin
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 2nd English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 144-151
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In submitting for discussion by the Second
      Congress of the Communist International the following draft theses
      on the national and the colonial questions I would request all
      comrades, especially those who possess concrete information on any
      of these very complex problems, to let me have their opinions,
      amendments, addenda and concrete remarks in the most concise
form (no mree than two or three pages ),
      particularly on the following points:

    
    Austrian experience;
    Polish-Jewish and Ukrainian experience;
    Alsace-Lorraine and Belgium;
    Ireland;
    Danish-German, Italo-French and Italo-Slav relations;
    Balkan experience;
    Eastern peoples;
    The struggle against Pan-Islamism;
    Relations in the Caucasus;
    The Bashkir and Tatar Republics;
    Kirghizia; Turkestan, its experience;
    Negroes in America;
    Colonies;
    China-Korea-Japan.

    
N. Lenin

    

      June 5, 1920
 1) An abstract or formal posing of the problem of equality in
    general and national equality in particular is in the very nature
    of bourgeois democracy. Under the guise of the equality of the
    individual in general, bourgeois democracy proclaims the formal or
    legal equality of the property-owner and the proletarian, the
    exploiter and the exploited, thereby grossly deceiving the
    oppressed classes. On the plea that all men are absolutely equal,
    the bourgeoisie is transforming the idea of equality, which is
    itself a reflection of relations in commodity production, into a
    weapon in its struggle against the abolition of classes. The real
    meaning of the demand for equality consists in its being a demand
    for the abolition of classes. 

    

      2) In conformity with its fundamental task of combating
         bourgeois democracy and exposing its falseness and hypocrisy,
         the Communist Party, as the avowed champion of the
         proletarian struggle to overthrow the bourgeois yoke, must
         base its policy, in the national question too, not on
         abstract and formal principles but, first, on a precise
         appraisal of the specific historical situation and,
         primarily, of economic conditions; second, on a clear
         distinction between the interests of the oppressed classes,
         of working and exploited people, and the general concept of
         national interests as a whole, which implies the interests of
         the ruling class; third, on an equally clear distinction
         between the oppressed, dependent and subject nations and the
         oppressing, exploiting and sovereign nations, in order to
         counter the bourgeois-democratic lies that play down this
         colonial and financial enslavement of the vast majority of
         the world’s population by an insignificant minority of
         the richest and advanced capitalist countries, a feature
         characteristic of the era of finance capital and
         imperialism. 
 3) The imperialist war of 1914-18 has very clearly revealed to
    all nations and to the oppressed classes of the whole world the
    falseness of bourgeois-democratic phrases, by practically
    demonstrating that the Treaty of Versailles of the celebrated
    “Western democracies” is an even more brutal and foul
    act of violence against weak nations than was the Treaty of
    Brest-Litovsk of the German Junkers and the Kaiser. The League of
    Nations and the entire post war policy of the Entente reveal this
    truth with even greater clarity and distinctness. They are
    everywhere intensifying the revolutionary struggle both of the
    proletariat in the advanced countries and of the toiling masses in
    the colonial and dependent countries. They are hastening the
    collapse of the petty-bourgeois nationalist illusions that nations
    can live together in peace and equality under capitalism. 
 4) From these fundamental premises it follows that the
    Communist International’s entire policy on the national and
    the colonial questions should rest primarily on a closer union of
    the proletarians and the working masses of all nations and
    countries for a joint revolutionary struggle to overthrow the
    landowners and the bourgeoisie. This union alone will guarantee
    victory over capitalism, without which the abolition of national
    oppression and inequality is impossible. 
 5) The world political situation has now placed the
    dictatorship of the proletariat on the order of the day. World
    political developments are of necessity concentrated on a single
    focus—the struggle of the world bourgeoisie against the
    Soviet Russian Republic, around which are inevitably grouped, on
    the one hand, the Soviet movements of the advanced workers in all
    countries, and, on the other, all the national liberation
    movements in the colonies and among the oppressed nationalities,
    who are learning from bitter experience that their only salvation
    lies in the Soviet system’s victory over world
    imperialism. 
 6) Consequently, one cannot at present confine oneself to a
    bare recognition or proclamation of the need for closer union
    between the working people of the various nations; a policy must
    be pursued that will achieve the closest alliance, with Soviet
    Russia, of all the national and colonial liberation movements. The
    form of this alliance should be determined by the degree of
    development of the communist movement in the proletariat of each
    country, or of the bourgeois-democratic liberation movement of the
    workers and peasants in backward countries or among backward
    nationalities. 
 7) Federation is a transitional form to the complete unity of
    the working people of different nations. The feasibility of
    federation has already been demonstrated in practice both by the
    relations between the R.S.F.S.R. and other Soviet Republics (the
    Hungarian, Finnish[2] and Latvian[3] in the past, and the
    Azerbaijan and Ukrainian at present), and by the relations within
    the R.S.F.S.R. in respect of nationalities which formerly enjoyed
    neither statehood nor autonomy (e.g., the Bashkir and Tatar
    autonomous republics in the R.S.F.S.R., founded in 1919 and 1920
    respectively).
 8) In this respect, it is the task of the Communist
    International to further develop and also to study and test by
    experience these new federations, which are arising on the basis
    of the Soviet system and the Soviet movement. In recognising that
    federation is a transitional form to complete unity, it is
    necessary to strive for ever closer federal unity, bearing in
    mind, first, that the Soviet republics, surrounded as they are by
    the imperialist powers of the whole world—which from the
    military standpoint are immeasurably stronger—cannot
    possibly continue to exist without the closest alliance; second,
    that a close economic alliance between the Soviet republics is
    necessary, otherwise the productive forces which have been ruined
    by imperialism cannot be restored and the well-being of the
    working people cannot be ensured; third, that there is a tendency
    towards the creation of a single world economy, regulated by the
    proletariat of all nations as an integral whole and according to a
    common plan. This tendency has already revealed itself quite
    clearly under capitalism and is bound to be further developed and
    consummated under socialism. 
 9) The Communist International’s national policy in the
    sphere of relations within the state cannot be restricted to the
    bare, formal, purely declaratory and actually non-committal
    recognition of the equality of nations to which the bourgeois
    democrats confine themselves—both those who frankly admit
    being such, and those who assume the name of socialists (such as
    the socialists of the Second International). 
 In all their propaganda and agitation—both within
    parliament and outside it—the Communist parties must
    consistently expose that constant violation of the equality of
    nations and of the guaranteed rights of national minorities which
    is to be seen in all capitalist countries, despite their
    “democratic” constitutions. It is also necessary,
    first, constantly to explain that only the Soviet system is
    capable of ensuring genuine equality of-nations, by uniting first
    the proletarians and then the whole mass of the working population
    in the struggle against the bourgeoisie; and, second, that all
    Communist parties should render direct aid to the revolutionary
    movements among the dependent and underprivileged nations (for
    example, Ireland, the American Negroes, etc.) and in the
    colonies. 
 Without the latter condition, which is particularly important,
    the struggle against the oppression of dependent nations and
    colonies, as well as recognition of their right to secede, are but
    a false signboard, as is evidenced by the parties of the Second
    International. 
 10) Recognition of internationalism in word, and its
    replacement in deed by petty-bourgeois nationalism and pacifism,
    in all propaganda, agitation and practical work, is very common,
    not only among the parties of the Second International, but also
    among those which have withdrawn from it, and often even among
    parties which now call themselves communist. The urgency of the
    struggle against this evil, against the most deep-rooted
    petty-bourgeois national prejudices, looms ever larger with the
    mounting exigency of the task of converting the dictatorship of
    the proletariat from a national dictatorship (i.e., existing in a
    single country and incapable of determining world politics) into
    an international one (i.e., a dictatorship of the proletariat
    involving at least several advanced countries, and capable of
    exercising a decisive influence upon world politics as a
    whole). Petty-bourgeois nationalism proclaims as internationalism
    the mere recognition of the equality of nations, and nothing
    more. Quite apart from the fact that this recognition is purely
    verbal, petty-bourgeois nationalism preserves national
    self-interest intact, whereas proletarian internationalism
    demands, first, that the interests of the proletarian struggle in
    any one country should be subordinated to the interests of that
    struggle on a world-wide scale, and, second, that a nation which
    is achieving victory over the bourgeoisie should be able and
    willing to make the greatest national sacrifices for the overthrow
    of international capital. 
 Thus, in countries that are already fully capitalist and have
    workers’ parties that really act as the vanguard of the
    proletariat, the struggle against opportunist and petty-bourgeois
    pacifist distortions of the concept and policy of internationalism
    is a primary and cardinal task. 
 11) With regard to the more backward states and nations, in
    which feudal or patriarchal and patriarchal-peasant relations
    predominate, it is particularly important to bear in mind: 
 first, that all Communist parties must assist the
    bourgeois-democratic liberation movement in these countries, and
    that the duty of rendering the most active assistance rests
    primarily with the workers of the country the backward nation is
    colonially or financially dependent on; 
 second, the need for a struggle against the clergy and other
    influential reactionary and medieval elements in backward
    countries; 
 third, the need to combat Pan-Islamism and similar trends,
    which strive to combine the liberation movement against European
    and American imperialism with an attempt to strengthen the
    positions of the khans, landowners, mullahs, etc.;[In the proofs Lenin inserted a brace opposite
    points 2 and 3 and wrote “2 and 3 to be
    united”.—Editor.]

      fourth, the need, in backward countries, to give special support
      to the peasant movement against the landowners, against landed
      proprietorship, and against all manifestations or survivals of
      feudalism, and to strive to lend the peasant movement the most
      revolutionary character by establishing the closest possible
      alliance between the West European communist proletariat and the
      revolutionary peasant movement in the East, in the colonies, and
      in the backward countries generally. It is particularly
      necessary to exert every effort to apply the basic principles of
      the Soviet system in countries where pre-capitalist relations
      predominate—by setting up “working people’s
      Soviets”,  etc.; 

      fifth, the need for a determined struggle against attempts to
      give a communist colouring to bourgeois-democratic liberation
      trends in the backward countries; the Communist International
      should support bourgeois-democratic national movements in
      colonial and backward countries only on condition that, in these
      countries, the elements of future proletarian parties, which
      will be communist not only in name, are brought together and
      trained to understand their special tasks, i.e., those of the
      struggle against the bourgeois-democratic movements within their
      own nations. The Communist International must enter into a
      temporary alliance with bourgeois democracy in the colonial and
      backward countries, but should not merge with it, and should
      under all circumstances uphold the independence of the
      proletarian movement even if it is in its most embryonic form;
      

      sixth, the need constantly to explain and expose among the
      broadest working masses of all countries, and particularly of
      the backward countries, the deception systematically practised
      by the imperialist powers, which, under the guise of politically
      independent states, set up states that are wholly dependent upon
      them economically, financially and militarily. Under present-day
      international conditions there is no salvation for dependent and
      weak nations except in a union of Soviet republics. 

      12) The age-old oppression of colonial and weak nationalities by
      the imperialist powers has not only filled the working
      masses of the oppressed countries with animosity towards the
      oppressor nations, but has also aroused distrust in these
      nations in general, even in their proletariat. The
      despicable betrayal of socialism by the majority of the
      official leaders of this proletariat in 1914-19, when
      “defence of country” was used as a
      social-chauvinist cloak to conceal the defence of the
      “right” of their “own” bourgeoisie
      to oppress colonies and fleece financially dependent
      countries, was certain to enhance this perfectly legitimate
      distrust. On the other hand, the more backward the country,
      the stronger is the hold of small-scale agricultural
      production, patriarchalism and isolation, which inevitably
      lend particular strength and tenacity to the deepest of
      petty-bourgeois prejudices, i.e., to national egoism and
      national narrow-mindedness. These prejudices are bound to
      die out very slowly, for they can disappear only after
      imperialism and capitalism have disappeared in the advanced
      countries, and after the entire foundation of the backward
      countries’ economic life has radically changed.

      It is therefore the duty of the class-conscious communist
      proletariat of all countries to regard with particular caution
      and attention the survivals of national sentiments in the
      countries and among nationalities which have been oppressed the
      longest; it is equally necessary to make certain concessions
      with a view to more rapidly overcoming this distrust and these
      prejudices. Complete victory over capitalism cannot be won
      unless the proletariat and, following it, the mass of working
      people in all countries and nations throughout the world
      voluntarily strive for alliance and unity.

Endnotes
[1]
    Notes to “Preliminary Draft Theses on the National and the
    Colonial Questions” were received by Lenin from
    G. V. Chicherin, N. N. Krestinsky, J. V. Stalin, M. G. Rafes,
    Y. A. Preobrazhensky, N. D. Lapinsky, and I. Nedelkov
    (N. Shablin), representative of the Bulgarian Communists, as well
    as from a number of leaders in Bashkiria, Kirghizia, and
    Turkestan. Along with correct ideas, the notes contained certain
    grave errors. Thus, Chicherin gave a wrong interpretation to
    Lenin’s theses on the necessity of support for national
    liberation movements and on agreements with the national
    bourgeoisie, without due regard for Lenin’s distinction
    between the bourgeoisie and the peasantry. With regard to this
    Lenin wrote: “I lay greater stress on the alliance
    with the peasantry (which does not quite mean the
    bourgeoisie)” (Central Party Archives of the Institute of
    Marxism-Leninism of the C.C. C.P.S.U.). Referring to the relations
    between the future socialist Europe and the economically
    underdeveloped and dependent countries, Preobrazhensky wrote:
    “. . . if it proves impossible to reach economic agreement
    with the leading national groups, the latter will inevitably be
    suppressed by force and economically important regions will be
    compelled to join a union of European Republics.” Lenin
    decisively objected to this remark: “. . . it goes too
    far. It cannot be proved, and it is wrong to say that
    suppression by force is “inevitable”. That is
    radically wrong” (see Voprosy Istorii KPSS
    [Problems of the C.P.S.U. History] 1958, No. 2,
    p. 16).
 A grave error was made by Stalin, who did not
    agree with Lenin’s proposition on the difference between
    federal relations among the Soviet republics based on autonomy,
    and federal relations among independent republics. In a letter to
    Lenin, dated June 12, 1920, he declared that in reality
    “there is no difference between these two types of federal
    relations, or else it is so small as to be
    negligible”. Stalin continued to advocate this later, when,
    in 1922, he proposed the “autonomisation” of the
    independent Soviet republics. These ideas were criticised in
    detail by Lenin in his article “The Question of
    Nationalities or ’Autonomisation’”,  and in his
    letter to members of the Political Bureau “On the Formation
    of the U.S.S.R” (see present edition, Vol. 36, and Lenin
    Miscellany XXXVI; pp. 496-98).
[2]
    As a result of the revolution which commenced in Finland on
    January 27, 1918, the bourgeois government of Svinhufvud was
    overthrown and the working class assumed power. On January 29, the
    revolutionary government of Finland, the Council of People’s
    Representatives was formed by Edvard Gylling, Yrjö Sirola,
    Otto Kuusinen, A. Taimi and others. The following were among the
    most important measures taken by the workers’ government:
    the law on the transfer to landless peasants, without
    indemnification, of the land they actually tilled; tax-exemption
    for the poorest sections of the population; the expropriation of
    enterprises whose owners had fled the country; the establishment
    of state control over private banks (their functions being assumed
    by the State Bank).
 On March 1, 1918, a treaty between the Finnish
    Socialist Workers’ Republic and the R.S.F.S.R. was signed in
    Petrograd. Based on the principle of complete equality and respect
    for the sovereignty of the two sides, this was the first treaty in
    world history to be signed between two socialist countries. 
 The proletarian revolution, however, was
    victorious only in the south of Finland. The Svinhufvud government
    concentrated all counter-revolutionary forces in the north of the
    country, and appealed to the German Kaiser’s government for
    help. As a result of German armed intervention, the Finnish
    revolution was put down in May 1918, after a desperate civil
    war. White terror reigned in the country, tens of thousands of
    revolutionary workers and peasants were executed or tortured to
    death in the prisons. 
[3]As
    a result of mass action by the Lettish proletariat and peasantry
    against the German invaders and the counter-revolutionary
    government of Ulmanis, a provisional Soviet government was
    established in Latvia on December 17, 1918, which issued a
    Manifesto on the assumption of state power by the Soviets. Soviet
    Russia gave fraternal help to the Lettish people in their struggle
    to establish Soviet rule and strengthen the Latvian Soviet
    Socialist Republic.
 Under the leadership of the Latvian Communist
    Party and the Latvian Soviet Government, a Red Army was formed,
    the landed estates were confiscated, the banks and big commercial
    and industrial enterprises were nationalised, social insurance and
    an eight-hour working day were introduced, and a system of public
    catering for working people was organised.
 In March 1919, German troops and the
    whiteguards, armed and equipped by the U.S. and the Entente
    imperialists, attacked Soviet Latvia. In May they captured Riga,
    the capital of Soviet Latvia. After fierce fighting the entire
    territory of Latvia had been overrun by the interventionists by
    the beginning of 1920. The counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie
    established a regime of bloody terror, thousands of revolutionary
    workers and peasants being killed or thrown into prison.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

##  Preliminary
    Draft Theses on The Agrarian Question For the Second Congress Of The
    Communist International










Preliminary Draft Theses On The Agrarian Question For The Second Congress Of The Communist International



V. I. Lenin
Preliminary Draft Theses
On The Agrarian Question
For The Second Congress Of The Communist International


Written: Beginning of June , 1920
 
First Published: Published in June 1920; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 152-164
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In his article,[1] Comrade Marchlewski gave an excellent explanation of the reasons why the Second International, which has now become the yellow International, failed, not only to define the revolutionary proletariat’s tactics on the agrarian question, but even to pose that question properly. Comrade Marchlewski then went on to set forth the theoretical fundamentals of the Third International’s communist agrarian programme.
These fundamentals can (and, I think, should) serve as the basis of the general resolution on the agrarian question for the Communist International Congress, which will meet on July 15, 1920.
The following is a preliminary draft of that resolution:
1)Only the urban and industrial proletariat, led by the Communist Party, can liberate the working masses of the countryside from the yoke of capital and landed proprietorship, from ruin and the imperialist wars which will inevitably break out again and again if the capitalist system remains. There is no salvation for the working masses of the countryside except in alliance with the communist proletariat, and unless they give the latter devoted support in its revolutionary struggle to throw off the yoke of the landowners (the big landed proprietors) and the bourgeoisie.
On the other hand, the industrial workers cannot accomplish their epoch-making mission of emancipating mankind from the yoke of capital and from wars if they confine themselves to their narrow craft, or trade interests, and smugly restrict themselves to attaining an improvement in their own conditions, which may sometimes be tolerable in the petty-bourgeois sense. This is exactly what happens to the “labour aristocracy” of many advanced countries, who constitute the core of the so-called socialist parties of the Second International; they are actually the bitter enemies and betrayers of socialism, petty-bourgeois chauvinists and agents of the bourgeoisie within the working-class movement. The proletariat is a really revolutionary class and acts in a really socialist manner only when it comes out and acts as the vanguard of all the working and exploited people, as their leader in the struggle for the overthrow of the exploiters; this, however, cannot be achieved unless the class struggle is carried into the countryside, unless the rural working masses are united about the Communist Party of the urban proletariat, and unless they are trained by the proletariat.
2)The working and exploited people of the countryside, whom the urban proletariat must lead into the struggle or, at all events, win over, are represented in all capitalist countries by the following classes:
first, the agricultural proletariat, wage-labourers (by the year, season, or day), who obtain their livelihood by working for hire at capitalist agricultural enterprises. The organisation of this class (political, military, trade union, co-operative, cultural, educational, etc.) independently and separately from other groups of the rural population, the conduct of intensive propaganda and agitation among this class, and the winning of its support for the Soviets and the dictatorship of the proletariat constitute the fundamental tasks of the Communist parties in all countries;
second, the semi-proletarians or peasants who till tiny plots of land, i.e., those who obtain their livelihood partly as wage-labourers at agricultural and industrial capitalist enterprises and partly by working their own or rented plots of land, which provide their families only with part of their means of subsistence. This group of the rural working population is very numerous in all capitalist countries; its existence and special position are played down by the representatives of the bourgeoisie and by the yellow “socialists” belonging to the Second International, partly by deliberately deceiving the workers and partly by blindly submitting to the routine of petty-bourgeois views and lumping together this group with the mass of the “peasantry”. This bourgeois method of duping the workers is to be seen mostly in Germany and in France, but also in America and other countries. If the work of the Communist Party is properly organised, this group will become its assured supporter, for the lot of these semi-proletarians is a very hard one and they stand to gain enormously and immediately from Soviet government and the dictatorship of the proletariat:
third, the small peasantry, i.e., the small-scale tillers who, either as owners or as tenants, hold small plots of land which enable them to satisfy the needs of their families and their farms, and do not hire outside labour. This stratum, as such, undoubtedly stands to gain by the victory of the proletariat, which will fully and immediately bring it: (a) deliverance from the necessity of paying the big landowners rent or a share of the crop (for example, the métayers in France, also in Italy and other countries); (b) deliverance from mortgages; (c) deliverance from the numerous forms of oppression by and dependence on the big landowners (forest lands and their use, etc.); (d) immediate aid for their farms from the proletarian state (the use of the agricultural implements and part of the buildings on the big capitalist farms confiscated by the proletariat and the immediate conversion, by the proletarian state, of the rural co-operative societies and agricultural associations from organisations which under capitalism served above all the rich and middle peasants, into organisations that will primarily assist the poor, i.e., proletarians, semi-proletarians, small peasants, etc.), and many other things.
At the same time the Communist Party must clearly realise that during the transitional period from capitalism to communism, i.e., during the dictatorship of the proletariat, this stratum, or at all events part of it, will inevitably vacillate towards unrestricted freedom of trade and the free enjoyment of the rights of private property. That is because this stratum, which, if only in a small way, is a seller of articles of consumption, has been corrupted by profiteering and by proprietary habits. However, if a firm proletarian policy is pursued, and if the victorious proletariat deals very resolutely with the big landowners and the big peasants, this stratum’s vacillation cannot be considerable and cannot alter the fact that, on the whole, it will side with the proletarian revolution.
3)Taken together, the three groups enumerated above constitute the majority of the rural population in all capitalist countries. That is why the success of the proletarian revolution is fully assured, not only in the cities but in the countryside as well. The reverse view is widespread; however, it persists only, first, because of the deception systematically practised by bourgeois science and statistics, which do everything to gloss over both the gulf that separates the above-mentioned classes in the countryside from the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists, and that which separates the semi-proletarians and small peasants from the big peasants; second, it persists because of the inability and unwillingness of the heroes of the yellow Second International and of the “labour aristocracy” in the advanced countries, which has been corrupted by imperialist privileges, to conduct genuinely proletarian revolutionary work of propaganda, agitation and organisation among the rural poor; the attention of the opportunists has always been and still is wholly concentrated on inventing theoretical and practical compromises with the bourgeoisie, including the big and middle peasants (who are dealt with below), and not on the revolutionary overthrow of the bourgeois government and the bourgeoisie by the proletariat; it persists, third, because of the obstinate refusal to understand—so obstinate as to be equivalent to a prejudice (connected with all the other bourgeois-democratic and parliamentary prejudices)—a truth which has been fully proved by Marxist theory and fully corroborated by the experience of the proletarian revolution in Russia, namely, that although the three enumerated categories of the rural population—who are incredibly downtrodden, disunited, crushed, and doomed to semi-barbarous conditions of existence in all countries, even the most advanced—are economically, socially, and culturally interested in the victory of socialism, they are capable of giving resolute support to the revolutionary proletariat only after the latter has won political power, only after it has resolutely dealt with the big landowners and capitalists, and only after these downtrodden people see in practice that they have an organised leader and champion, strong and firm enough to assist and lead them and to show them the right path.
4)In the economic sense, one should understand by “middle peasants” those small farmers who, (1) either as owners or tenants, hold plots of land that are also small but, under capitalism, are sufficient not only to provide, as a general rule, a meagre subsistence for the family and the bare minimum needed to maintain the farm, but also produce a certain surplus which may, in good years at least, be converted into capital; (2) quite frequently (for example, one farm out of two or three) resort to the employment of hired labour. A concrete example of the middle peasants in an advanced capitalist country is provided by the group of farms of five to ten hectares in Germany, in which, according to the census of 1907, the number of farms employing hired labourers is about one-third of the total number of farms in this group.[2] In France, where the cultivation of special crops is more developed—for example, grape-growing, which requires a very large amount of labour—this group probably employs outside hired labour to a somewhat greater extent.
The revolutionary proletariat cannot set itself the task—at least not in the immediate future or in the initial period of the dictatorship of the proletariat—of winning over this stratum, but must confine itself to the task of neutralising it, i.e., rendering it neutral in the struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie. This stratum inevitably vacillates between these two forces; in the beginning of the new epoch and in the developed capitalist countries, it will, in the main, incline towards the bourgeoisie. That is because the world outlook and the sentiments of the property-owners are prevalent among this stratum, which has a direct interest in profiteering, in “freedom” of trade and in property, and stands in direct antagonism to the wage-workers. By abolishing rent and mortgages, the victorious proletariat will immediately improve the position of this stratum. In most capitalist countries, however, the proletarian state should not at once completely abolish private property; at all events, it guarantees both the small and the middle peasantry, not only the preservation of their plots of land but also their enlargement to cover the total area they usually rented (the abolition of rent).
A combination of such measures with a ruthless struggle against the bourgeoisie fully guarantees the success of the policy of neutralisation. The proletarian state must effect the transition to collective farming with extreme caution and only very gradually, by the force of example, without any coercion of the middle peasant.
5)The big peasants (Grossbauern ) are capitalist entrepreneurs in agriculture, who as a rule employ several hired labourers and are connected with the “peasantry” only in their low cultural level, habits of life, and the manual labour they themselves perform on their farms. These constitute the biggest of the bourgeois strata who are open and determined enemies of the revolutionary proletariat. In all their work in the countryside, the Communist parties must concentrate their attention mainly on the struggle against this stratum, on liberating the toiling and exploited majority of the rural population from the ideological and political influence of these exploiters, etc.
Following the victory of the proletariat in the cities, all sorts of manifestations of resistance and sabotage, as well as direct armed action of a counter-revolutionary character on the part of this stratum, are absolutely inevitable. The revolutionary proletariat must therefore immediately begin the ideological and organisational preparation of the forces necessary to completely disarm this stratum and, simultaneously with the overthrow of the capitalists in industry, to deal this stratum a most determined, ruthless and smashing blow at the very first signs of resistance; for this purpose, the rural proletariat must be armed and village Soviets organised, in which the exploiters must have no place, and in which proletarians and semi-proletarians must be ensured predominance.
However, the expropriation even of the big peasants can in no way be made an immediate task of the victorious proletariat, because the material and especially the technical conditions, as well as the social conditions, for the socialisation of such farms are still lacking. In individual and probably exceptional cases, those parts of their land which they rent out in small plots or which are particularly needed by the surrounding small-peasant population will be confiscated; the small peasants should also be guaranteed, on certain terms, the free use of part of the agricultural machinery belonging to the big peasants, etc. As a general rule, however, the proletarian state must allow the big peasants to retain their land, confiscating it only if they resist the power of the working and exploited people. The experience of the Russian proletarian revolution, in which the struggle against the big peasantry was complicated and protracted by a number of special conditions, showed nevertheless that, when taught a severe lesson for the slightest attempt at resistance, this stratum is capable of loyally fulfilling the tasks set by the proletarian state, and even begins to be imbued although very slowly with respect for the government which protects all who work and is ruthless towards the idle rich.
The special conditions which, in Russia, complicated and retarded the struggle of the proletariat against the big peasants after it had defeated the bourgeoisie were, in the main, the following: after October 25 (November 7), 1917, the Russian revolution passed through the stage of the “general democratic”—that is, basically the bourgeois democratic—struggle of the peasantry as a whole against the landowners; the cultural and numerical weakness of the urban proletariat; and, lastly, the enormous distances and extremely poor means of communication. Inasmuch as these retarding conditions do not exist in the advanced countries, the revolutionary proletariat of Europe and America should prepare far more energetically, and achieve far more rapidly, resolutely, and successfully, complete victory over the resistance of the big peasantry, completely depriving it of the slightest possibility of offering resistance. This is imperative because, until such a complete and absolute victory is achieved, the masses of the rural proletarians, semi-proletarians, and small peasants cannot be brought to accept the proletarian state as a fully stable one.
6) The revolutionary proletariat must immediately and unreservedly confiscate all landed estates, those of the big landowners, who, in capitalist countries—directly or through their tenant farmers—systematically exploit wage-labour and the neighbouring small (and, not infrequently, part of the middle) peasantry, do not themselves engage in manual labour, and are in the main descended from the feudal lords (the nobles in Russia, Germany, and Hungary, the restored seigneurs in France, the lords in Britain, and the former slave-owners in America), or are rich financial magnates, or else a mixture of both these categories of exploiters and parasites.
Under no circumstances is it permissible for Communist parties to advocate or practise compensating the big landowners for the confiscated lands, for under present day conditions in Europe and America this would be tantamount to a betrayal of socialism and the imposition of new tribute upon the masses of working and exploited people, to whom the war has meant the greatest hardships, while it has increased the number of millionaires and enriched them.
As to the mode of cultivation of the land that the victorious proletariat confiscates from the big landowners, the distribution of that land among the peasantry for their use has been predominant in Russia, owing to her economic backwardness; it is only in relatively rare and exceptional cases that state farms have been organised on the former estates which the proletarian state runs at its own expense, converting the former wage-labourers into workers for the state and members of the Soviets, which administer the state. The Communist International is of the opinion that in the case of the advanced capitalist countries it would be correct to keep most of the big agricultural enterprises intact and to conduct them on the lines of the “state farms” in Russia.
It would, however, be grossly erroneous to exaggerate or to stereotype this rule and never to permit the free grant of part of the land that belonged to the expropriated expropriators to the neighbouring small and sometimes middle peasants.
First, the objection usually raised to this, namely, that large-scale farming is technically superior, often amounts to an indisputable theoretical truth being replaced by the worst kind of opportunism and betrayal of the revolution. To achieve the success of this revolution, the proletariat should not shrink from a temporary decline in production, any more than the bourgeois opponents of slavery in North America shrank from a temporary decline in cotton production as a consequence of the Civil War of 1863-65. What is most important to the bourgeois is production for the sake of production; what is most important to the working and exploited population is the overthrow of the exploiters and the creation of conditions that will permit the working people to work for themselves, and not for the capitalists. It is the primary and fundamental task of the proletariat to ensure the proletarian victory and its stability. There can, however, be no stable proletarian government unless the middle peasantry is neutralised and the support is secured of a very considerable section of the small peasantry, if not all of them.
Second, not merely an increase but even the preservation of large-scale production in agriculture presupposes the existence of a fully developed and revolutionarily conscious rural proletariat with considerable experience of trade union and political organisation behind it. Where this condition does not yet exist, or where this work cannot expediently be entrusted to class-conscious and competent industrial workers, hasty attempts to set up large state conducted farms can only discredit the proletarian government. Under such conditions, the utmost caution must be exercised and the most thorough preparations made when state farms are set up.
Third, in all capitalist countries, even the most advanced, there still exist survivals of medieval, semi-feudal exploitation of the neighbouring small peasants by the big landowners as in the case of the Instleute[Tenant farmers.—Editor.] in Germany, the métayers in France, and the sharecroppers in the United States (not only Negroes, who, in the Southern States, are mostly exploited in this way, but sometimes whites too). In such cases it is incumbent on the proletarian state to grant the small peasants free use of the lands they formerly rented, since no other economic or technical basis exists, and it cannot be created at one stroke.
The implements and stock of the big farms must be confiscated without fail and converted into state property, with the absolute condition that, after the requirements of the big state farms have been met, the neighbouring small peasants may have the use of these implements gratis, in compliance with conditions drawn up by the proletarian state.
In the period immediately following the proletarian revolution, it is absolutely necessary, not only to confiscate the estates of the big landowners at once, but also to deport or to intern them all as leaders of counter-revolution and ruthless oppressors of the entire rural population. However, with the consolidation of the proletarian power in the countryside as well as in the cities, systematic efforts should be made to employ (under the special control of highly reliable communist workers) those forces within this class that possess valuable experience, know how, and organising skill, to build large-scale socialist agriculture.
7)The victory of socialism over capitalism and the consolidation of socialism may be regarded as ensured only when the proletarian state power, having completely suppressed all resistance by the exploiters and assured itself complete subordination and stability, has reorganised the whole of industry on the lines of large-scale collective production and on a modern technical basis (founded on the electrification of the entire economy). This alone will enable the cities to render such radical assistance, technical and social, to the backward and scattered rural population as will create the material basis necessary to boost the productivity of agricultural and of farm labour in general, thereby encouraging the small farmers by the force of example and in their own interests to adopt large-scale, collective and mechanised agriculture. Although nominally recognised by all socialists, this indisputable theoretical truth is in fact distorted by the opportunism prevalent in the yellow Second International and among the leaders of the German and the British “Independents”, the French Longuetists, etc. This distortion consists in attention being directed towards the relatively remote, beautiful, and rosy future; attention is deflected from the immediate tasks of the difficult practical transition and approach to that future. In practice, it consists in preaching a compromise with the bourgeoisie and a “class truce”, i.e., complete betrayal of the proletariat, which is now waging a struggle amidst the unprecedented ruin and impoverishment created everywhere by the war, and amidst the unprecedented enrichment and arrogance of a handful of millionaires resulting from that war.
It is in the countryside that a genuine possibility of a successful struggle for socialism demands, first, that all Communist parties should inculcate in the industrial proletariat a realisation of the need to make sacrifices, and be prepared to make sacrifices so as to overthrow the bourgeoisie and consolidate proletarian power—since the dictatorship of the proletariat implies both the ability of the proletariat to organise and lead all the working and exploited people, and the vanguard’s ability to make the utmost sacrifices and to display the utmost heroism to that end; second, success demands that, as a result of the workers’ victory, the labouring and most exploited masses in the countryside achieve an immediate and considerable improvement in their conditions at the expense of the exploiters—for without that the industrial proletariat cannot get the support of the rural areas and, in particular, will be unable to ensure the supply of food for the cities.
8)The enormous difficulty of organising and training for the revolutionary struggle the masses of rural working people, whom capitalism has reduced to a state of great wretchedness, disunity and frequently semi-medieval dependence, makes it necessary for the Communist parties to devote special attention to the strike strugg]e in the rural districts, give greater support to mass strikes by the agricultural proletarians and semi-proletarians, and help develop the strike movement in every way. The experience of the Russian revolutions of 1905 and of 1917, now confirmed and extended by the experience of Germany and other advanced countries, shows that the growing mass strike struggle (into which, under certain conditions, the small peasants can and should also be drawn) is alone capable of rousing the countryside from its lethargy, awakening the class-consciousness of the exploited masses in the countryside, making them realise the need for class organisation, and revealing to them in a vivid and practical manner the importance of their alliance with the urban workers.
This Congress of the Communist International brands as traitors and renegades those socialists—to be found, unfortunate]y, not only in the yellow Second International, but also in the three very important European parties which have withdrawn from that International—who are not only capable of remaining indifferent to the strike struggle in the countryside, but even (like Karl Kautsky) of opposing it on the grounds that it threatens to reduce the output of articles of consumption. Neither programmes nor the most solemn declarations are of any value whatever unless it is proved in practice, in deed, that the Communists and workers’ leaders are able to place above everything else in the world the development and the victory of the proletarian revolution, and to make the greatest sacrifices for it, for otherwise there is no way out, no salvation from starvation, ruin, and new imperialist wars.
In particular, it should be pointed out that the leaders of the old socialist movement and representatives of the “labour aristocracy”—who now often make verbal concessions to communism and even nominally side with it in order to preserve their prestige among the worker masses, which are rapidly becoming revolutionary—should be tested for their loyalty to the cause of the proletariat and their suitability for responsible positions in those spheres of work where the development of revolutionary consciousness and the revolutionary struggle is most marked, the resistance of the landowners and the bourgeoisie (the big peasants, the kulaks) most fierce, and the difference between the socialist compromiser and the communist revolutionary most striking.
9)The Communist parties must exert every effort to begin, as speedily as possible, to set up Soviets of Deputies in the countryside, and in the first place Soviets of hired labourers and semi-proletarians. Only if they are linked up with the mass strike struggle and with the most oppressed class can the Soviets perform their functions, and become consolidated enough to influence (and later to incorporate) the small peasants. If, however, the strike struggle has not yet developed, and the agricultural proletariat is as yet incapable of strong organisation owing both to the severe oppression by the landowners and the big peasants and to lack of support from the industrial workers and their unions, then the formation of Soviets of Deputies in the rural areas will require lengthy preparation by means of the organisation of communist cells, even if only small ones, intensified agitation—in which the demands of communism are enunciated in the simplest manner and illustrated by the most glaring examples of exploitation and oppression—and the arrangement of systematic visits of industrial workers to the rural districts, and so on. 

Endnotes
[1] Lenin is referring to the article by J. Marchlewski “The Agrarian Question and World Revolution” published in the journal The Communist International No. 12, July 20, 1920. Lenin read the article before the issue appeared.—Editor
[2] Here are the exact figures: the number of farms of five to ten hectares—652,798 (out of a total of 5,736,082), these employed 487,704 hired labourers of various kinds, while members of the farmers’ families (Familienangehörige) working on the farms numbered 2,003,633. In Austria, according to the census of 1902, this group comprised 383,331 farms, of which 126,136 employed hired labour; the hired labourers working on these farms numbered 146,044 and the working members of the farmers’ families 1,265,969. The total number of farms in Austria was 2,856,349.—Lenin


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## KOMMUNISMUS
    Journal of the Communist
    International










KOMMUNISMUS: Journal of the Communist International For the Countries of South-Eastern Europe (in German), Vienna, No. 1-2 (February 1, 1920) To No. 18 (May 8, 1920)



V. I. Lenin
KOMMUNISMUS
Journal of the Communist International
 For the Countries of South-Eastern Europe (in German), Vienna, No. 1-2 (February 1, 1920) To No. 18 (May 8, 1920)


Written: 12 June, 1920
 
First Published: Published in June, 1920; Published according to the manuscript and checked against the text of the proof-sheet, as emended by V. I. Lenin
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 165-167
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


This excellent journal, which is published in
    Vienna under the above title, contains a great deal of highly
    interesting material on the growth of the communist movement in
    Austria, Poland and other countries, together with a chronicle of
    the international movement, and articles on Hungary and Germany,
    on general tasks and tactics, etc. A shortcoming that strikes the
    eye even at a cursory examination cannot, however, be
    disregarded—the indubitable symptoms of the “infantile
    disorder of Left-wing Communism” that has affected the
    journal, a subject on which I have written a short pamphlet that
    has just appeared in Petrograd.
The excellent journal Kommunismas reveals three
    symptoms of this malady, which I would like at once to deal with
    briefly. No. 6 (March 4, 1920) contains an article by Comrade
    G.L. entitled “On the Question of
    Parliamentarianism”, which the editors designate as
    controversial, and from which Comrade
    B. K., the author of an article entitled “On the
    Question of the Parliamentary Boycott” (No. 18, May 8,
    1920), directly dissociates himself (fortunately), i.e., declares
    that he is in disagreement with it.
G. L.’s article is very Left-wing, and very poor. Its
    Marxism is purely verbal; its distinction between
    “defensive” and “offensive” tactics is
    artificial; it gives no concrete analysis of precise and definite
    historical situations; it takes no account of what is most
    essential (the need to take over and to learn to take over, all
    fields of work and all institutions in which the bourgeoisie
    exerts its influence over the masses, etc.).
No. 14 (April 17, 1920), carries an article by Comrade B. K.,
    entitled “The Events in Germany", in which he criticises a
    statement made by the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
    Germany on March 21, 1920, which statement I too criticised in the
    pamphlet mentioned above. However, our criticisms differ radically
    in character. Comrade B. K. criticises on the basis of quotations
    from Marx, which refer to a situation unlike the present one; he
    wholly rejects the tactics of the German Communist Party’s
    Central Committee and absolutely evades what is most important,
    that which constitutes the very gist, the living soul, of
    Marxism-a concrete analysis of a concrete situation. Since most of
    the urban workers have abandoned the Scheidemannites for the
    Kautskyites, and since, within the Kautskian party (a party
    “independent” of correct revolutionary tactics) they
    are continuing to abandon its Right wing in favour of the Left,
    i.e., in fact, of communism-since that is the case, is it
    permissible to take no account of the transitional and compromise
    measures to be adopted with regard to such workers? Is it
    permissible to disregard and to gloss over the experience of the
    Bolsheviks, who, in April and May 1917, pursued what was in fact a
    policy of compromise, when they declared that the Provisional
    Government (Lvov, Milyukov, Kerensky and the rest) could not be
    overthrown at once, since in the Soviets, they still had the
    backing of the workers and it was first of all necessary to bring
    about a change in views in the majority, or a
    considerable part, of those workers?
I consider that impermissible.
Lastly, Comrade B. K. ’s article in Kommunisnuts
    No. 18, which I have mentioned, very vividly, strikingly and
    effectively reveals his error in sympathising with the tactics of
    boycotting parliaments in present-day Europe. When the author
    dissociates himself from the “syndicalist boycott” and
    the “passive” boycott, but at the same time invents a
    special kind of “active” (Au, how “Left”!
    ...) boycott, the full extent of the errors in his argument is
    brought out very strikingly.
“An active boycott,” the author writes,
    “means that the Communist Party does not confine itself to
    disseminating the slogan advocating non-participation in
    elections, but, in the interests of the boycott, engages in
    revolutionary agitation just as extensively as f it wore
    participating in the elections and as if its agitation and action
    were designed to secure the greatest possible number of
    proletarian votes.” (P. 552).
This is a gem. This demolishes the anti-parliamentarians better
    than any criticism could. An “active” boycott is
    devised “as though” we were participating in
    elections!! The mass of unenlightened and semi-enlightened workers
    and peasants take a serious part in elections, for they still
    entertain bourgeois-democratic prejudices, are still under the
    sway of those prejudices. And instead of helping the unenlightened
    (although at times “highly-cultured”) petty bourgeois
    to get rid of their prejudices by their own experience, we are to
    hold aloof from taking part in parliaments and to amuse ourselves
    by inventing tactics free of all commonplace and
    bourgeois contamination!!
Bravo, bravo, Comrade B. K.! By your defence of
    antiparliamentarianism you will help us to destroy this folly much
    sooner than I can through my criticism.
N. Lenin

    

      12.6. 1920


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

##  Speech at Second
    All-Russia Conference of Organisers Responsible for
  Rural Work










Speech  at Second All-Russia Conference of  Organisers Responsible for Rural Work, June 12, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech  at Second All-Russia Conference of
Organisers Responsible for Rural Work[1]
June 12, 1920


Delivered: 12 June, 1920 
First Published: 1920; in the pamphlet Speech by V. I. Lenin at the Second All-Russia Conference of Organisers Responsible for Rural Work; Published according to the pamphlet text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 168-180
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I am very glad to be able to greet you
    who have come to this conference to discuss work in the rural
    areas. Permit me first to dwell briefly on the international
    position of the Soviet Republic and our tasks in connection with
    it, and then to say a few words about the tasks in the rural
    districts, which, in my opinion, should now assume prime
    importance to Party workers.
As regards the Republic’s international standing, you are
    of course well aware of the main facts about the Polish
    offensive. An incredible number of lies are being spread on this
    subject abroad, due to the so-called freedom of the press, which
    consists in all the most important organs of the press abroad
    being bought up by the capitalists, and being filled 99 per cent
    with articles by mercenary hacks. That is what they call freedom
    of the press, due to which there is no limit to the lies that are
    being spread. With regard to the Polish offensive in particular,
    they are trying to make out that the Bolsheviks presented
    impossible demands to Poland and launched an offensive, whereas
    you all know very well that we fully consented even to the immense
    frontiers held by the Poles before the offensive began. We set
    more store by the lives of our Red Army men than by a war for
    Byelorussia and Lithuania, which the Poles had seized. We declared
    in the most solemn terms—not only in the name of the Council
    of People’s Commissars, but also in a special manifesto of
    the All-Russia Central Executive Committee,[2] the
    supreme body in the Soviet Republic—we declared to the
    Polish Government, to the bourgeois and landowner government,
    besides appealing to the Polish workers and peasants, that we
    proposed negotiations for peace on the basis of the front that
    existed at the time, i.e., the front that left Lithuania and
    Byelorussia— non-Polish territory—in the hands of the
    Poles. We were and still are convinced that the Polish landowners
    and capitalists will be unable to retain foreign territory, and
    that we shall gain more even from the most unfavourable peace,
    since we shall save the lives of our Red Army men, and every month
    of peace makes us ten times as strong, whereas to every other
    government, including the bourgeois government of Poland, every
    month of peace means greater and greater disintegration. Although
    our peace proposals were very far-reaching, and although certain
    very hasty and, as far as talking goes, highly revolutionary
    revolutionaries, even called our proposals Tolstoyan—when,
    as a matter of fact, the Bolsheviks’ actions have, I think,
    shown sufficiently that there is not a jot of Tolstoyanism in
    us—we considered it our duty, in the face of such a thing as
    war, to show that we were prepared to make the maximum possible
    concessions, and especially to show that we would not wage war for
    boundaries for which so much blood had been spilt, since to us
    that was a matter of little significance.
We were prepared to make concessions no other government can
    make; we offered Poland territory which it would be useful to
    compare with that described in a document published yesterday, I
    think, and coming from the supreme organ of the Allies, the
    British, French and other imperialists, in which Poland’s
    eastern frontiers are indicated.[3]
These capitalists in Britain and France imagine that it is they
    who lay down boundaries. But, thank goodness, there are others
    besides them who do that—the workers and peasants have
    learnt to establish their boundaries themselves.
These capitalists have fixed the Polish boundaries much farther
    to the west than those we proposed. This document, coming from the
    Allies in Paris, is clear proof that they have arrived at a deal
    with Wrangel. They assure us that they want peace with Soviet
    Russia, that they support neither Poland nor Wrangel. We, however,
    say that it is an unscrupulous lie with which they are trying to
    shield themselves; for they say that they are not supplying any
    more arms, when as a matter of fact they are supplying them just
    as they did several months ago. Today’s reports state that
    rich trophies have been captured—a carload of new British
    machine guns; Comrade Trotsky reports that brand new French
    cartridges were captured the other day. What other confirmation do
    we need that Poland is acting with the aid of British and French
    equipment, with the aid of British and French cartridges, that she
    is acting with the aid of British and French money? If they now
    declare that Poland will herself establish her eastern borders,
    then that is in consequence of a direct deal with Wrangel. That is
    obvious to anybody. The entire situation makes it perfectly clear
    that the Polish landowners and bourgeoisie are fighting
    exclusively with the aid of the British and the French. The
    latter, however, are lying brazenly, just as they did when they
    assured us that they had not sent Bullitt, until he finally
    returned to America and came out and published the documents he
    had gathered here.
These gentlemen, these capitalist tradesmen, cannot act
    contrary to their nature. That is obvious. They can only reason
    like tradesmen. When our diplomats do not act like tradesmen, and
    when we say that the lives of our Red Army men are more precious
    to us than any vast boundary changes they, of course, with their
    purely tradesmen’s reasoning, cannot understand it. When, a
    year ago, we proposed to Bullitt a treaty which was extremely
    favourable to them and extremely unfavourable to us, a treaty that
    would have left huge territories in the hands of Denikin and
    Kolchak, we did so in the certainty that, if peace were concluded,
    the whiteguard government would never be able to retain power.
With their tradesmen’s reasoning, they could only
    interpret this as a confession of our weakness. “If the
    Bolsheviks agree to such a peace,” they argued, “it
    must mean that they are at their last gasp.”  And the
    bourgeois press exulted, the diplomats rubbed their hands with
    glee, and millions of pounds sterling were advanced to Kolchak and
    Denikin. True, they did not give them hard cash, but supplied them
    with arms at usurious prices, fully convinced that the Bolsheviks
    could not cope with them at all. The upshot was that Kolchak and
    Denikin were routed and their hundreds of millions of pounds went
    up in smoke. We are now getting trainload after trainload of
    excellent British equipment; you can often meet entire divisions
    of Russian Red Army men clad in excellent British uniforms; the
    other day a comrade who arrived from the Caucasus told me that an
    entire division of Red Army men are wearing Italian bersagliere
    uniforms. I am very sorry that I am unable to show you photographs
    of these Russian Red Army men clad in bersagliere uniforms. All I
    can say is that, after all, the British equipment has been of some
    use and that Russian Red Army men are grateful to the British
    tradesmen who have fitted them out because they reasoned like
    tradesmen, and who have been thrashed, are being thrashed, and
    will be thrashed time and time again. (Applause.)
We find the same thing with the Polish offensive. This is
    another instance of God (if he exists, of course) first depriving
    of reason those whom he would punish. The Entente is undoubtedly
    headed by very shrewd men, excellent politicians, yet these people
    commit folly after folly. They raise up against us one country
    after another, enabling us to smash them one by one. Why, if only
    they succeeded in uniting—and they do have the League of
    Nations and there is no corner of the earth to which their
    military power does not extend. Nobody, it would seem, could unite
    all the enemy forces better and launch them against the
    Soviets. Yet they cannot unite them. They go into battle part by
    part. They merely threaten, boast and bluff. Six months ago they
    declared that they had mustered fourteen states against the
    Soviets, and that in a matter of months they would be in Moscow
    and Petrograd. But today I received a pamphlet from Finland,
    containing the reminiscences of a certain whiteguard officer about
    the offensive against Petrograd; prior to that I received a
    statement of protest from several Russians of the Cadet brand,
    members of the North-Western Government, which tells of how
    certain British generals invited them to a conference and
    suggested to them through an interpreter, and sometimes in
    excellent Russian, that they should form a government right away,
    on the spot—a Russian government, of course, a democratic
    government, it goes without saying, in the spirit of the
    Constituent Assembly—and how they were told to sign on the
    dotted line. And, though they were bitter enemies of the
    Bolsheviks, these Russian officers, these Cadets, were outraged by
    the brazen insolence of the British officers, who dictated to
    them, and ordered them, in a tone of a drill sergeant (and only
    like a Russian one can), to sign what they were told to—and
    they go on to relate how the whole affair fell through. I regret
    that we are unable to give extensive distribution to these
    documents, to these confessions of whiteguard officers who took
    part in the advance on Petrograd.
Why is that so? It is because their League of Nations is a
    league only in name; in fact it is a pack of wolves that are all
    the time at each other’s throats and do not trust one
    another in the least.
As a matter of fact, they are even now boasting that Latvia,
    Rumania and Finland will join Poland in the at tack; it is clear
    from the diplomatic negotiations that when Poland began her
    offensive the powers that were conducting peace negotiations with
    us changed their tone, and came out with statements whose
    insolence was sometimes amazing. They reason like
    tradesmen—and you can not expect anything else from a
    tradesman. It seemed to them that this was the time to square
    accounts with Soviet Russia, so they turned high and mighty. Let
    them do so. We have seen the same thing in the case of other
    states, far bigger ones, but we have paid no heed to that because,
    as experience has shown, all the threats from Finland, Rumania,
    Latvia and the other bourgeois states that are wholly dependent on
    the Entente, have come to nought. Poland signed a treaty only with
    Petlyura, a general without an army, which has evoked even greater
    bitterness among the Ukrainian population and has induced more and
    more semi-bourgeois elements to side with Soviet Russia. So, once
    again, instead of a general offensive, you have isolated action by
    Poland alone. And now we see that although our forces had to spend
    a lot of time on the move because they were farther away from the
    frontiers than the Poles were and we needed more time to bring up
    our troops, the latter have begun to advance. Some days ago our
    cavalry captured Zhitomir. Our forces have cut the last road
    linking Kiev with the Polish front both in the south and the
    north, which means that the Poles have lost Kiev irrevocably. At
    the same time we learn that Skólski has resigned, that the
    Polish Government are in a state of uncertainty and agitation and
    are already declaring that they will offer us new peace
    terms. Just as you please, you landowner and capitalist gentlemen!
    We will give the Polish peace terms due consideration. What we see
    is that their government are waging war against the wishes of
    their own bourgeoisie; that the Polish National Democrats,[4] who correspond to our Cadets and
    Octobrists—the most bitter counter-revolutionary landowners
    and bourgeois—are opposed to the war, for they realise that
    they cannot win such a war, and that it is being run by Polish
    adventurers, by the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Polish
    Socialist Party,[5] people marked most by features
    characterising the Socialist-Revolutionaries, namely,
    revolutionary talk, boastfulness, patriotism, chauvinism,
    buffoonery and sheer claptrap. We are familiar with such
    people. When, after they have bitten off more than they can chew
    in this war, they begin to reshuffle their Cabinet and to say that
    they propose peace talks to us, we say: “Just as you please,
    gentlemen, have a try. We, however, are counting only on the
    Polish workers and peasants. We shall also talk peace, only not
    with you, the Polish landowners and bourgeois, but with the Polish
    workers and peasants, and we shall see what will come of such
    negotiations.” 
Comrades, despite the successes we are gaining on the Polish
    front, the position at present demands every effort of us. The
    most dangerous thing in a war that breaks out in conditions like
    those in the present war with Poland is to underrate the enemy and
    to reassure ourselves with the thought that we are the
    stronger. That is a most dangerous thing, which may lead to defeat
    in the war; it is the worst feature in the Russian character,
    which expresses itself in enervation and flabbiness. It is
    important, not only to begin but to carry on and hold out; that is
    what we Russians are not good at. Only by long training, through a
    proletarian disciplined struggle against all wavering and
    vacillation, only through such endurance can the Russian working
    masses be brought to rid themselves of this bad habit.
We have given Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich a sound thrashing,
    but we have not yet finished the job. Wrangel is still in the
    Crimea. We said to ourselves: “Well, now we are the
    stronger” —and that has led to instance after instance
    of slackness and slovenliness. Meanwhile, Wrangel is receiving aid
    from Great Britain. This is done through traders, but it cannot be
    proved. Only the other day he landed troops and captured
    Melitopol. True, according to the latest reports we have
    re-captured it; but in this case, too, we had let it slip from our
    hands most shamefully just because we were strong. Just because
    Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin have been smashed, the Russian
    begins to reveal his nature and take things easy, with the result
    that we let things slide. His slovenliness leads to tens of
    thousands of his comrades losing their lives. Here is a
    fundamental Russian trait: when not a single job has been carried
    through to the end he is apt to let things slide unless he is
    prodded. This trait must be ruthlessly combated, for it leads to
    tens of thousands of the finest Red Army men and peasants losing
    their lives, and the continued sufferings of famine. And so,
    though we are stronger than the Poles, our slogan in the war that
    has been imposed on us must be—an end to all slackness!
    Since war has proved inevitable, everything must be devoted to the
    war effort; the least slackness or lack of drive must be punished
    by wartime laws. War means war, and let nobody in the rear or in
    any peaceful occupation dare shirk this duty!
The slogan must be—everything for the war effort!
    Otherwise we shall be unable to cope with the Polish nobles and
    bourgeoisie. To finish with this war, we must teach a conclusive
    lesson to the last of the neighbouring powers that still dares to
    play at this game. We must give them so severe a lesson that they
    will warn their children, their grandchildren and their
    great-grandchildren to refrain from such
    things. (Applause.) And so, comrades, at every meeting,
    assembly and business conference, in all groups at all party
    institutions and on all executive bodies, it is the prime duty of
    those who are working in the countryside, of propagandists and
    agitators, and all the comrades engaged in any field of peaceful
    labour to give top priority and full effect to the slogan:
    “Everything for the war effort!” 
Until complete victory is won in this war, we must guarantee
    ourselves against the errors and follies we have been committing
    for years. I do not know how many mistakes a Russian has to make
    before he learns his lesson. We have already had an instance of
    our thinking that the war was over before we had crushed the
    enemy, and we left Wrangel in the Crimea. I repeat, the slogan,
    “Everything for the war effort!”  must be the chief
    item on the agenda at every conference, at every meeting, on every
    executive body.
We must ask ourselves: have we bent every effort, have we made
    every sacrifice to bring the war to an end? This is a question of
    saving the lives of tens of thousands of our finest comrades, who
    are perishing at the front, in the foremost ranks. It is a matter
    of saving ourselves from the famine which is imminent just because
    we are not fighting the war to a finish, when we can and must do
    that and quickly, too. For this, discipline and subordination must
    be enforced at all costs and with the utmost severity. The least
    condonement, the least slackness displayed here, in the rear, in
    any peaceful pursuit, will mean the loss of thousands of lives,
    and starvation in the rear.
That is why faults like these must be treated with ruthless
    severity. That is the first and principal lesson to be drawn from
    the civil war in Soviet Russia. It is the first and principal
    lesson which every Party worker must bear in mind under all
    circumstances, especially if his job is one of agitation and
    propaganda; he must know that he will be a worthless Communist and
    a traitor to the Soviet state if he does not, in respect to every
    shortcoming, however slight, implement this slogan with inflexible
    firmness and with ruthless determination. If this condition is
    observed, an early victory will be assured, and we shall be fully
    guaranteed against famine.
We receive reports about the situation in the outlying regions,
    from comrades arriving from remote parts of the country. I have
    seen comrades from Siberia, and also Comrades Lunacharsky and
    Rykov, who have returned from the Ukraine and the North
    Caucasus. They speak with boundless amazement of the wealth of
    these regions. In the Ukraine pigs are being fed on wheat; in the
    Northern Caucasus the peasant women, when selling milk, rinse
    their cans with milk. Trainloads of wool, leather and other wealth
    are on their way from Siberia; tens of thousands of poods of salt
    are lying in Siberia. In our parts, on the other hand, the
    peasants have been worn down, and refuse to give grain in exchange
    for paper money, which, as they see it, cannot restore their
    farms. Here, in Moscow, we may find starving workers carrying on
    at their machines. The continuation of the war is the chief
    obstacle to our keeping the workers better fed and restoring their
    shattered health. Just because we have slipped up on the Crimea,
    tens of thousands will go short of food for another six
    months. This is all due to poor organisation and discipline on our
    part. People here are dying, while in the Ukraine, in the North
    Caucasus and in Siberia we have wealth untold, with which we could
    feed the hungry workers and restore industry. To restore our
    economic life, we need discipline. The proletarian dictatorship
    should display itself primarily in the advanced, the most
    class-conscious and most disciplined of the urban and industrial
    workers—the greatest sufferers from hunger who have made
    great sacrifices during these two years—educating, training
    and disciplining all the other proletarians, who are often not
    class-conscious, and all working people and the peasantry. All
    sentimentality, all claptrap about democracy must be scrapped. Let
    us leave the claptrap to the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
    Mensheviks; they have spoken enough about democracy to Kolchak,
    Denikin and Yudenich. Let them clear out and go over to
    Wrangel. He will complete their schooling. But that schooling must
    be given to those who have not yet learnt the lesson.
We maintain that the workers who have assumed the burdens and
    have ensured the tranquility and strength of the Soviets through
    their untold sacrifices, should regard themselves as a vanguard
    that will raise up the rest of the working masses by education and
    discipline. We know that the working man, as we have inherited him
    from capitalism, is in a state of utter benightedness and
    ignorance, and does not realise that work can be done, not only
    under the lash of capital, but also under the guidance of the
    organised worker. He is, however, capable of believing all that if
    we demonstrate it in practice. The working man cannot learn that
    from books but he can learn it if we demonstrate it to him in
    practice: he will have either to work under the guidance of the
    class-conscious industrial worker, or submit to the yoke of
    Kolchak, Wrangel and the rest. And so, we must, at any cost, have
    the strictest discipline, and conscious performance of what the
    vanguard of the proletariat prescribes, of what it has learnt from
    its hard experience. If all steps are taken for the achievement of
    our aim, that will fully guarantee our emergence from the economic
    chaos and disruption caused by the imperialist war. Grain
    collections yielded 30,000,000 poods in the season following
    August 1, 1917, and 110,000,000 poods in the season following
    August 1918. That shows that we have begun to emerge from our
    difficulties. Since August 1,1919, over 150,000,000 poods have
    been brought in to date. That shows that we are making it. But we
    have not yet properly seen to the Ukraine, the North Caucasus and
    Siberia. If that is done we shall really be able to provide the
    worker with a good two pounds of bread a day.
I should also like to dwell, comrades, on a question of
    importance to you, rural Party workers, with whom I am in some
    measure acquainted from Party documents. I want to tell you that
    instruction, Party activities, agitation and propaganda will be
    your principal work. One of the main shortcomings in this work is
    that we do not know how to run state affairs, and that with our
    comrades, even with those who are in charge of work here, the
    habits of the old underground conditions are still too strong,
    i.e., habits of the time when we used to gather in small circles
    here or abroad, and did not have the slightest idea or inkling of
    how the work of the state has to be carried on. That, however, is
    something we have got to know, for we must remember that we have
    to govern millions. Any person in authority who goes to the rural
    districts, as delegate or representative of the Central Committee,
    must remember that we have a tremendous machinery of state which
    is still functioning poorly because we do not know how to run it
    properly.

      In the rural districts there are hundreds of thousands of
      teachers who are browbeaten and intimidated by the kulaks, or
      who have been frightened out of their wits by the old tsarist
      officials, and cannot understand, are not in a position to
      understand, the principles of Soviet government. We have a huge
      military apparatus. Without the military commissars we would not
      have had a Red Army.
We also have the apparatus of the Vsevobuch,[6] which, together with its military
    functions, should be carrying on cultural work, should be
    educating the peasants. This state machinery functions very
    poorly; it contains no really devoted and convinced people, no
    real Communists. And you, who are going to the rural districts as
    Communists, must work not in isolation from this apparatus, but,
    on the contrary, in close conjunction with it. Every Party
    agitator who goes to a rural district must at the same time be an
    inspector of schools: not an inspector in the old sense of the
    word, not in the sense of meddling in educational
    affairs—that must not be permitted—but in the sense of
    co-ordinating his work with that of the People’s
    Commissariat of Education, with the work of the
    Vsevobuch, with the work of the military commissars; he
    must regard himself as representative of the state, as
    representative of a party that is governing Russia. When he comes
    to a rural district he must not only act as propagandist and
    teacher; he must at the same time see to it that the
    school-teachers, who have never heard a living word, and those
    scores and hundreds of military commissars, all play a part in the
    Party agitator’s work. Every school-teacher should have
    agitational pamphlets, and should not only have them, but read
    them to the peasants. He should know that he will lose his job
    unless he does that. The same applies to the military commissars;
    they should have these pamphlets and read them out to the
    peasants.
The Soviet government employs hundreds of thousands of office
    workers, who are either bourgeois or semi-bourgeois, or else have
    been so downtrodden that they have absolutely no confidence in our
    Soviet government, or feel so far removed from that government
    that they think it is somewhere far-off, over there in Moscow,
    while next to them are the kulaks, who have grain, but hold on to
    it and will not let them have any, so that they are starving. Here
    the Party worker has a double job. He must remember that he is not
    only a propagandist, that he must not only come to the assistance
    of the most downtrodden strata of the population—that is his
    principal job, not to do which means that he is no Party worker
    and has no right to call himself a Communist—but that, in
    addition, he must act as a representative of the Soviet
    government, he must establish contacts with the teachers, and
    co-ordinate his work with that of the People’s Commissariat
    of Education. He must not be an inspector in the sense of
    exercising control and supervision; he must act as a
    representative of the governing Party, which is now administering
    all Russia through part of the proletariat; in this capacity he
    must remember that his job is one of instruction, and that he must
    enlist and educate all the teachers and military commissars to do
    the same work as his. They are not familiar with this work; you
    must teach it to them. They are at present defenceless against the
    well-fed peasant. You must help them to shake off this
    dependence. You must firmly remember that you are not only
    propagandists and agitators, but also representatives of the
    state; you must not destroy the existing apparatus, or interfere
    with it and muddle its organisation, but must organise your work
    so that, as efficient instructors, propagandists and agitators,
    even after a brief period of work in the rural districts, you will
    leave your mark, not only in the papers of the peasant Communists
    you have educated, but also in the minds of the people whose work
    you inspect and guide, and to whom you give assignments, demanding
    that every teacher and military commissar should work in the
    Soviet spirit under all circumstances, that he should know that
    this is his duty, that he must remember that if he does not
    perform that duty, he will lose his job; they should all sense and
    see in every agitator a fully empowered representative of the
    Soviet government.
If this is done, and if you employ your forces properly, you
    will multiply them, with the result that every body of agitators
    will leave a mark behind them in the shape of an apparatus of
    organisation, which already exists, but as yet functions
    imperfectly and unsatisfactorily.
  In this sphere too, as in all others, I wish you
    success. (Prolonged applause.) 
    

Endnotes
[1]
    Called by the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.), the Second
    All-Russia Conference of Organisers Responsible for Rural
    Work was held in Moscow from June 10 to 15, 1920. It was
    attended by gubernia, uyezd and volost organisers for rural work,
    a total of over 300 delegates from 61 gubernias. The third meeting
    of the Conference, held on June 12, was addressed by
    Lenin. M. I. Kalinin greeted the delegates on behalf of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee.
A report on the activities of the Department
    for Rural Work under the Party’s Central Committee was made
    by V. I. Nevsky. The Conference adopted a resolution on this
    report; it dressed the importance of Party work in the
    countryside, and expressed the firm confidence that “the
    Department for Rural Work will unswervingly carry out the
    directive of the Party’s Ninth Congress, on improving
    agitation and propaganda work among the peasantry”  (see
    Rezolutsii Vtorogo Vserossiiskogo Soveshchaniya rabotnikov v
    derevne. [Resolutions of the Second All-Russia Conference
    of Party Rural Workers ], Moscow, 1920, pp. 4-5). Reports
    from the various localities were also heard, and organisational
    and other matters discussed. The Conference adopted an appeal
    “To All Workers of the World” , greeting the British,
    Hungarian, Italian and other workers who had decided to prevent
    the dispatch of troops and military supplies to help
    bourgeois-landowner Poland in her war against Soviet Russia.
[2]
    Lenin is referring to the Declaration by the R.S.F.S.R. Council of
    People’s Commissars addressed to the Government of Poland
    and the Polish people, made on January 28, 1920, and the Appeal of
    the All-Russia Central Executive Committee to the Polish people on
    February 2, 1920.

    
[3]
    The reference is to the declaration of the Entente’s Supreme
    Council “On the Temporary Eastern Borders of Poland” ,
    made on December 8, 1919, and published on June 11, 1920, in the
    newspaper Izvestia No. 125.
[4]
National Democrats (“Narodowa Democracya
    ”)—the main reactionary and nationalist party of
    the Polish landowners and bourgeoisie, founded in 1897 and closely
    connected with the Catholic church. The National Democrats
    advanced the slogans of “class harmony”  and
    “the national interests” , trying to influence the
    masses and draw them into the wake of their reactionary
    policy. They propagated extreme militant nationalism and
    chauvinism as a means of struggle against the socialist and
    democratic movement of the Polish people, which they strove to
    isolate from the Russian revolutionary movement. During the First
    World War (1914-18) the National Democrats unreservedly supported
    the Entente, counting on the victory of tsarist Russia, the
    unification of the Polish territories then under the yoke of
    Austria and Germany, and autonomy for Poland within the framework
    of the Russian Empire. The downfall of tsarism drove the National
    Democrats towards a pro-French orientation. Though bitterly
    opposed to the October Socialist Revolution and the Soviet state,
    the National Democrats, following their traditional anti-German
    policy, did not always support the adventurist anti-Soviet foreign
    policy of the Pilsudski clique, which ruled the country after
    1926. At present, separate National-Democrat groups are carrying
    on their activities among reactionary émigré
    elements.
[5]
The Polish Socialist Party (Polska Partia
    Socjalistyczna, the P.S.P.)—a reformist nationalist
    party founded in 1892. Throughout its history, Left-wing groups
    arose in it under the influence of the worker rank and file in the
    party. Some of these groups subsequently joined the revolutionary
    wing of the Polish working-class movement.
[6]
    Vsevobuch—the universal military training of the population
    of the Soviet Republic. The question of organising the
    Vsevobuch was raised in the resolution “On War and
    Peace”  adopted by the Seventh Congress of the R.C.P.(B.),
    which was held in March 1918. The resolution said that one of the
    most important and urgent tasks of the Party was the all-round,
    systematic and universal military training of the adult
    population, irrespective of sex. The Decree of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee of April 22, 1918, authorised the
    calling up of all citizens between the ages of 18 and 40, who did
    not exploit the labour of others. The Vsevobuch bodies
    were entrusted with the registration of all working people of
    military age, their unified military training, and the formation
    army units. On June 5-25 1918, the first conference on universal
    military training was held; it drew up a programme for the
    training and testing of Vsevobuch instructor and
    discussed the organisation of Vsevobuch departments, the
    calling of conferences on the military training and the
    registration of the population. The conference also adopted a
    resolution on permanent bureaus of Vsevobuch conferences
    and the statute of inspections.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
    Telephone Message to All-Russia Food Conference










Telephone Message to the Presdium All-Russia Food Conference



V. I. Lenin
Telephone Message to the Presdium All-Russia Food Conference
July 1, 1920


Delivered: 30 June, 1920 
First Published: Pravda No. 163;
July 2, 1920; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 181-182
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 
 Comrades, I would have liked very much to attend your meeting and say something on the main food problems on your agenda. But, unfortunately, I am unable to indulge my wish and am obliged to content myself with addressing you briefly in this telephone message. I must inform you, comrades, that the successful outcome of your work, which is extremely onerous and responsible, recently induced the Council of People's Commissars to adopt a resolution expressing satisfaction with the results achieved by the food bodies in the matter of produce procurements. It is beyond question that the food bodies have grown in organisational strength during the past two years and more. This is largely due to your efforts.
 But we cannot, of course, rest content with the results achieved. The hunger front, the next in importance after the war front, is imposing a number of new tasks upon you, and unless they are accomplished it will be impossible either to go on consolidating the workers' and peasants' government or to solve the immediate and urgent problems of economic development. 
I also hope that you will help our economic development by establishing proper relations with the co-operative societies on the basis of the decisions of the Party Congress,[1] so as to properly accomplish the difficult but grateful task of transforming the petty-bourgeois co-operatives into socialist co-operatives.
The successes you have already achieved in food affairs oblige you more than ever to cope with the new tasks at all costs, and thus approach a real solution of the food problem. For to whom much has been given, of him much shall be demanded; and your work has shown that you have already been given quite a lot. Permit me then, to wish you success in solving the problems on the agenda of your conference, and also in your daily work, which I am sure, when the conference is over, you will tackle on the spot with redoubled energy.

Endnotes
[1] Lenin is referring to the resolution adopted by the Ninth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) "On the Attitude to the Co-operatives" (see KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdo v, konferentsii i plenumov TsK [The C.P.S.U. in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses, Conferences and Plenums of the Central Committee], Part I, 1940, pp. 340-42).


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Aid for the
    Wounded of the Red Army!










Aid for the Wounded of the Red Army!



V. I. Lenin
Aid for the Wounded of the Red Army!


Delivered: 2 July, 1920 
First Published: A facsimile of the manuscript published in the magazine Raneny Krasnoarmeyets No. 1, July 5, 1920; Published according to the magazine text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 183
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Thanks to the heroism of the factory workers and of
    all working people, and despite the extraordinary difficulties and
    the terribly slow rate of progress, we are succeeding in reviving
    and restoring the economic life, which was shattered by the tsar
    and the capitalists. Matters are on the upgrade if ever so
    slowly. However, all our difficulties and hardships are as nothing
    compared with what has fallen to the lot of the wounded Red Army
    men, who are spilling their own blood in defence of the workers'
    and peasants' government, against the Polish nobles and
    capitalists, who are being egged on by the capitalists of Great
    Britain, France and America.
Let each man in the rear be mindful of his duty and help the
    wounded Red Army men to the best of his ability. 

    
N. Lenin


      July 2, 1920 
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
    Theses on Fundamental Tasks of The Second Congress Of The Communist
    International






Theses on Fundamental Tasks of The Second Congress Of The Communist International







V. I. Lenin
Theses on Fundamental Tasks of
The Second Congress Of The Communist International


Written: 30
      June, 1920 

      
First Published: July of 1920

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th
      English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 184-201

      
Translated: Julius Katzer

      
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R.
      Cymbala

Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
      License


Intro
The Essence of the
    Dictatorship of the Proletariat and of Soviet Power
What Immediate and
    Universal Preparation for the Dictatorship of the Proletariat
    Should Consist of
Rectification of the
    Political Line—Partly Also the Composition—of Parties
    Affiliated or Desiring to Affiliate to the Communist
    International
Endnotes



  
      1.The present stage in the development of the international communist
      movement is marked by the fact that the finest representatives of the
      revolutionary proletariat in all capitalist countries have fully
      grasped the fundamental principles of the Communist International,
      viz., dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power, and have
      ranged themselves with unbounded enthusiasm on the side of the
      Communist International. An even bigger and more important step
      forward is the definite sympathy with these fundamental principles
      that has everywhere taken shape among the broadest masses; not only of
      the urban proletariat, but of the advanced section of the rural
      workers as well. 
 On the other hand, two errors, or failings, are to be observed in
      the very rapidly growing international communist movement. One, which
      is very grave and constitutes an immense and immediate danger to the
      success of the cause of proletarian emancipation, is that a section of
      the old leaders and of the old parties of the Second
      International—some yielding half-unconsciously to the wishes and
      pressure of the masses, and some deliberately deceiving the masses in
      order to retain their function of agents and assistants of the
      bourgeoisie within the working-class movement—declare their
      qualified or even unqualified adherence to the Third International,
      while actually remaining in all their practical party and political
      work, on the level of the Second International. Such a state of
      affairs is absolutely intolerable, because it leads to downright
      corruption of the masses, detracts from the Third
      International’s prestige, and threatens a repetition of the same
      acts of treachery as were perpetrated by the Hungarian
      Social-Democrats, who so hastily assumed the title of Communists. The
      other error, which is far less significant and is more in the nature
      of growing pains of the movement, consists in a tendency towards
      “Leftism” which results in a wrong appraisal of the role
      and the tasks of the party with regard to the class and the masses,
      and a wrong attitude towards the revolutionary Communists’
      obligation to work in bourgeois parliaments and reactionary trade
      unions. 
 Communists are in duty bound, not to gloss over shortcomings in
      their movement, but to criticise them openly so as to remedy them the
      more speedily and radically. For this purpose it is necessary: first,
      to define as concretely as possible, particularly on the basis of the
      practical experience already acquired, the content of the concepts
      “dictatorship of the proletariat” and “Soviet
      power”; second, to specify the precise content of the immediate
      and systematic preparatory work to be carried on in all countries so
      as to give effect to these slogans; and third, to specify the methods
      and means of rectifying the faults in our movement. 
    

The Essence Of The Dictatorship Of The Proletariat
      and of Soviet Power
2.The victory of socialism (as the first stage of communism) over
capitalism requires that the proletariat, as the only really
revolutionary class, shall accomplish the following three
tasks. First—overthrow the exploiters, and first and foremost
the bourgeoisie, as their principal economic and political
representative; utterly rout them; crush their resistance; absolutely
preclude any attempt on their part to restore the yoke of capital and
wage-slavery. Second—win over and bring under the leadership of
the Communist Party, the revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat,
not only the entire proletariat, or its vast majority, but all who
labour and are exploited by capital; educate, organise, train and
discipline them in the actual course of a supremely bold and
ruthlessly firm struggle against the exploiters; wrest this vast
majority of the pqpulation in all the capitalist countries from
dependence on the bourgeoisie; imbue it, through its own practical
experience, with confidence in the leading role of the proletariat and
of its revolutionary vanguard. Third—neutralise, or render
harmless, the inevitable vacillation between the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat, between bourgeois democracy and Soviet power, to be seen
in the class of petty proprietors in agriculture, industry and
commerce—a class which is still fairly numerous in nearly all
advanced countries, although comprising only a minority of the
population—as well as in the stratum of intellectuals, salary
earners, etc., which corresponds to this class. 
 The first and second tasks are independent ones, each
      requiring its own special methods of action with regard to the
      exploiters and to the exploited respectively. The third task
      follows from the first two, and merely requires a skilful,
      timely and flexible combination of methods of the first and
      second type, depending on the specific circumstances in each
      separate instance of vacillation. 
3.In the concrete situation created throughout the world, and
      above all in the most advanced, powerful, enlightened and free
      capitalist countries, by militarism, imperialism, the oppression
      of colonies and weak countries, the world wide imperialist
      butchery and the “Peace” of Versailles—in that
      situation the very idea of the capitalists peacefully submitting
      to the will of the majority of the exploited, the very idea of a
      peaceful, reformist transition to socialism, is not merely sheer
      philistine stupidity but also down right deception of the
      workers, embellishment of capitalist wage-slavery, and
      concealment of the truth. That truth consists in the
      bourgeoisie, even the most enlightened and democratic, no longer
      hesitating at any fraud or crime, even the massacre of millions
      of workers and peasants, so as to preserve private ownership of
      the means of production. Only the forcible overthrow of the
      bourgeoisie, the confiscation of its property, the destruction
      of the entire bourgeois state apparatus from top to
      bottom—parliamentary. judicial, military, bureaucratic,
      administrative, municipal, etc.—right down to the
      wholesale deportation or internment of the most dangerous and
      stubborn exploiters and the institution of strict surveillance
      over them so as to foil their inevitable attempts to resist and
      to restore capitalist slavery—only such measures can
      ensure real submission of the whole class of exploiters. 
 On the other hand, the idea, common among the old parties
      and the old leaders of the Second International, that the
      majority of the exploited toilers can achieve complete clarity
      of socialist consciousness and firm socialist convictions and
      character under capitalist slavery, under the yoke of the
      bourgeoisie (which assumes an inIinite variety of forms that
      become more subtle and at the same time more brutal and ruthless
      the higher the cultural level in a given capitalist country) is
      also idealisation of capitalism and of bourgeois democracy, as
      well as deception of the workers. In fact, it is only after the
      vanguard of the proletariat, supported by the whole or the
      majority of this, the only revolutionary class, overthrows the
      exploiters, suppresses them, emancipates the exploited from
      their state of slavery and-immediately improves their conditions
      of life at the expense of the expropriated capitalists—it
      is only after this, and only in the actual process of an acute
      class strugg]e, that the masses of the toilers and exploited can
      be educated, trained and organised around the proletariat under
      whose influence and guidance, they can get rid of the
      selfishness, disunity, vices and weaknesses engendered by
      private property; only then will they be converted into a free
      union of free workers. 
 4.Victory over capitalism calls for proper relations between
      the leading (Communist) party, the revolutionary class (the
      proletariat) and the masses, i.e., the entire body of the
      toilers and the exploited. Only the Communist Party, if it is
      really the vanguard of the revolutionary class, if it really
      comprises all the finest representatives of that class, if it
      consists of fully conscious and staunch Communists who have been
      educated and steeled by the experience of a persistent
      revolutionary struggle, and if it has succeeded in linking
      itself inseparably with the whole life of its class and, through
      it, with the whole mass of the exploited, and in completely
      winning the confidence of this class and this mass—only
      such a party is capable of leading the proletariat in a final,
      most ruthless and decisive struggle against all the forces of
      capitalism. On the other hand, it is only under the leadership
      of such a party that the proletariat is capable of displaying
      the full might of its revolutionary onslaught, and of overcoming
      the inevitable apathy and occasional resistance of that small
      minority, the labour aristocracy, who have been corrupted by
      capitalism, the old trade union and co-operative leaders,
      etc.—only then will it be capable of displaying its full
      might, which, because of the very economic structure of
      capitalist society, is infinitely greater than its proportion of
      the population. Finally, it is only after they have been really
      emancipated from the yoke of the bourgeoisie and of the
      bourgeois machinery of state, only after they have found an
      opportunity of organising in their Soviets in a really free way
      (free from the exploiters), that the masses, i.e., the toilers
      and exploited as a body, can display, for the first time in
      history, all the initiative and energy of tens of millions of
      people who have been crushed by capitalism. Only when the
      Soviets have become the sole state apparatus is it really
      possible to ensure the participation, in the work of
      administration, of the entire mass of the exploited, who, even
      under the most enlightened and freest bourgeois democracy, have
      always actually been excluded 99 per cent from participation in
      the work of administration. It is only in the Soviets that the
      exploited masses really begin to learn—not in books, but
      from their own practical experience—the work of socialist
      construction, of creating a new social discipline and a free
      union of free workers. 

What Immediate And Universal Preparation 
      for the Dictatorship of 
      the Proletariat Should 
      Consist of
5.The present stage in the development of the international
      communist movement is marked by the fact that in the vast
      majority of capitalist countries, the proletariat’s
      preparations to effect its dictatorship have not been completed,
      and, in many cases, have not even been systematically
      begun. From this it does not, however, follow that the
      proletarian revolution is impossible in the immediate future; it
      is perfectly possible, since the entire economic and political
      situation is most inflammable and abounds in causes of a sudden
      flare-up; the other condition for revolution, apart from the
      proletariat’s preparedness, viz., a general state of
      crisis in all the ruling and in all bourgeois parties, also
      exists. However, it does follow that the Communist
      Parties’ current task consists not in accelerating the
      revolution, but in intensifying the preparation of the
      proletariat. On the other hand, the facts cited above from the
      history of many socialist parties make it incumbent on us to see
      that “recognition” of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat shall not remain a more matter of words. 
 Hence, from the point of view of the international
      proletarian movement, it is the Communist parties ’
      principal task at the present moment to unite the scattered
      Communist forces, to form a single Communist Party in every
      country (or to reinforce or renovate the already existing Party)
      in order to increase tenfold the work of preparing the
      proletariat for the conquest of political power—political
      power, moreover, in the form of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat. The ordinary socialist work conducted by groups and
      parties which recognise the dictatorship of the proletariat has
      by no means undergone that fundamental reorganisation, that
      fundamental renovation, which is essential before this work can
      be considered communist work and adequate to the tasks to be
      accomplished on the eve of proletarian dictatorship. 
 6.The proletariat’s conquest of political power does
      not put a stop to its class struggle against the bourgeoisie; on
      the contrary, it renders that struggle most widespread, intense
      and ruthless. Owing to the extreme intensification of the
      struggle all groups, parties and leaders in the working-class
      movement who have fully or partly adopted the stand of
      reformism, of the “Centre”, etc., inevitably side
      with the bourgeoisie or join the waverers, or else (what is the
      most dangerous of all) land in the ranks of the unreliable
      friends of the victorious proletariat. Hence, preparation for
      the dictatorship of the proletariat calls, not only for an
      intensification of the struggle against reformist and
      “Centrist” tendencies, but also for a change in the
      character of that struggle. The struggle cannot be restricted to
      explaining the erroneousness of these tendencies; it must
      unswervingly and ruthlessly expose any leader of the
      working-class movement who reveals such tendencies, for
      otherwise the proletariat cannot know who it will march with
      into the decisive struggle against the bourgeoisie. This
      struggle is such that at any moment it may—and actually
      does, as experience has shown—substitute criticism with
      weapons for the weapon of criticism.[6]  Any inconsistency
      or weakness in exposing those who show themselves to be
      reformists or “Centrists” means directly increasing
      the danger of the power of the proletariat being overthrovn by
      the bourgeoisie, which tomorrow will utilise for the
      counter-revolution that which short-sighted people today see
      merely as “theoretical difference”. 
 7.In particular, we must not restrict ourselves to the usual
      repudiation, in principle, of all collaboration between the
      proletariat and the bourgeoisie, of all
      “collaborationism”. Under the dictatorship of the
      proletariat, which will never be able, at one stroke, to abolish
      private property completely, mere defence of
      “liberty”’ and “equality”, while
      private ownership of the means of production is preserved, turns
      into “collaboration” with the bourgeoisie, and
      undermines the rule of the working class. The dictatorship of
      the proletariat means that the state uses its whole machinery of
      power to uphold and perpetuate “no-liberty” for the
      exploiters to continue their oppression and exploitation,
      “inequality” between the owner of property (i.e.,
      one who has appropriated for himself certain means of production
      created by social labour) and the non-owner. That which, prior
      to the victory of the proletariat, seems merely a theoretical
      difference on the question of “democracy” inevitably
      becomes, on the day following victory, a question that is
      settled by force of arms. Consequently, even preliminary work in
      preparing the masses to effect the dictatorship of the
      proletariat is impossible without a radical change in the entire
      character of the struggle against the “Centrists”
      and the “champions of democracy “. 

 8.The dictatorship of the proletariat is the most determined
      and revolutionary form of the proletariat’s class struggle
      against the bourgeoisie. This struggle can be successful only
      when the most revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat has the
      backing of the overwhelming majority of the proletariat. Hence,
      preparation for the dictatorship of the proletariat entails not
      only explanation of the bourgeois character of all reformism, of
      all defence of democracy, while private ownership of the means
      of production is preserved; it entails, not only exposure of
      such trends, which are in fact a defence of the bourgeoisie
      within the labour movement; it also calls for old leaders being
      replaced by Communists in proletarian organisations of
      absolutely every type—not only political, but also trade
      union, co-operative, educational, etc. The more complete,
      lengthy and firmly established the rule of bourgeois democracy
      has been in a given country, the more the bourgeoisie will have
      succeeded in securing the appointment to such leading posts of
      people whose minds have been moulded by it and imbued with its
      views and prejudices, and who have very often been directly or
      indirectly bought by it. These representatives of the labour
      aristocracy, bourgeoisified workers, should be ousted from all
      their posts a hundred times more sweepingly than hitherto, and
      replaced by workers—even by wholly inexperienced men,
      provided they are connected with the exploited masses and enjoy
      their confidence in the struggle against the exploiters. The
      dictatorship of the proletariat will require the appointment of
      such inexperienced workers to the most responsible posts in the
      state; otherwise the workers’ government will be impotent
      and will not have the support of the masses. 
 9.The dictatorship of the proletariat means that all toiling
      and exploited people, who have been disunited, deceived,
      intimidated, oppressed, downtrodden and crushed by the
      capitalist class, come under the full leadership of the only
      class trained for that leadership by the whole history of
      capitalism. That is why the following is one of the methods
      whereby preparations for the dictatorship of the proletariat
      should be started everywhere and immediately: 
  In all organisations, unions and associations without
      exception, and first and foremost in proletarian organisations,
      but also in those of the non-proletarian toiling and exploited
      masses (political, trade union, military, co-operative,
      educational, sports, etc., etc.), groups or cells of Communists
      should be formed—preferably open groups, but underground
      groups as well, the latter being essential whenever there is
      reason to expect their suppression, or the arrest or banishment
      of their members on the part of the bourgeoisie; these cells,
      which are to be in close touch with one another and with the
      Party centre, should, by pooling their experience, carrying on
      work of agitation, propaganda and organisation, adapting
      themselves to absolutely every sphere of public life and to
      every variety and category of the toiling masses, systematically
      educate themselves, the Party, the class, and the masses by
      means of such diversified work. 
 In this connection, it is of the utmost importance that
      necessary distinctions between the methods of work should be
      evolved in practice: on the one hand, in relation to the
      “leaders”, or “responsible
      representatives”, who are very often hopelessly beset with
      petty-bourgeois and imperialist prejudices—such
      “leaders” must be ruthlessly exposed and expelled
      from the working-class movement—and, on the other hand, in
      relation to the masses, who, particularly after the imperialist
      holocaust, are for the most part inclined to listen to and
      accept the doctrine that the guidance from the proletariat is
      essential, as the only way of escape from capitalist slavery. We
      must learn to approach the masses with particular patience and
      caution so as to be able to understand the distinctive features
      in the mentality of each stratum, calling, etc., of these
      masses. 
 10.In particular, there is a group or cell of Communists
      that deserves exceptional attention and care from the Party,
      i.e., the parliamentary group of Party members, who are deputies
      to bourgeois representative institutions (primarily the
      national, but also local, municipal, etc., representative
      institutions). On the one hand, it is this tribune which is held
      in particular regard by large sections of the toiling masses,
      who are backward or imbued with petty-bourgeois prejudices; it
      is therefore imperative for Communists to utilise this tribune
      to conduct propaganda, agitation and organisational work and to
      explain to the masses why the dispersal of the bourgeois
      parliament by the national congress of Soviets was legitimate in
      Russia (and, at the proper time, will be legitimate in any
      country). On the other hand, the entire history of bourgeois
      democracy, particularly in the advanced countries, has converted
      the parliamentary rostrum into one of the principal, if not the
      principal, venues of unparalleled fraudulency, financial and
      political deception of the people, careerism, hypocrisy and
      oppression of the working people. The intense hatred of
      parliaments felt by the best representatives of the
      revolutionary proletariat is therefore quite justified. The
      Communist parties and all parties affiliated to the Third
      International—especially those which have not arisen by
      splitting away from the old parties and by waging a long and
      persistent struggle against them, but through the old parties
      accepting (often nominally) the new stand—should therefore
      adopt a most strict attitude towards their parliamentary groups;
      the latter must be brought under the full control and direction
      of the Central Committees of the Parties; they must consist, in
      the main, of revolutionary workers; speeches by members of
      parliament should be carefully analysed in the Party press and
      at Party meetings, from a strictly communist standpoint;
      deputies should be sent to carry on agitational work among the
      masses; those who manifest Second International leanings should
      be expelled from the parliamentary groups, etc. 
 11.One of the chief causes hampering the revolutionary
      working-class movement in the developed capitalist countries is
      the fact that because of their colonial possessions and the
      super-profits gained by finance capital, etc., the capitalists
      af these countries have been able to create a relatively larger
      and more stable labour aristocracy, a section which comprises a
      small minority of the working class. This minority enjoys better
      terms of employment and is most-imbued with a narrow-minded
      craft spirit and with petty-bourgeois and imperialist
      prejudices. It forms the real social pillar of the Second
      International, of the reformists and the
      “Centrists”; at present it might even be called the
      social mainstay of the bourgeoisie. No preparation of the
      proletariat for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie is possible,
      even in the preliminary sense, unless an immediate, systematic,
      extensive and open struggle is waged against this stratum,
      which, as experience has already fully shown, will no doubt
      provide the bourgeois White guards with many a recruit after the
      victory of the proletariat. All parties affiliated to the Third
      International must at all costs give effect to the slogans:
      “Deeper into the thick of the masses”, “Closer
      links with the masses”—meaning by the masses all
      those who toil and are exploited by capital, particularly those
      who are least organised and educated, who are most oppressed and
      least amenable to organisation. 
 The proletariat becomes revolutionary only insofar as it
      does not restrict itself to the narrow framework of craft
      interests, only when in all matters and spheres of public life,
      it acts as the leader of all the toiling and exploited masses;
      it cannot achieve its dictatorship unless it is prepared and
      able to make the greatest sacrifices for the sake of victory
      over the bourgeoisie. In this respect, the experience of Russia
      is significant both in principle and in practice. The
      proletariat could not have achieved its dictatorship there, or
      won the universally acknowledged respect and confidence of all
      the toiling masses, had it not made the most sacrifices, or
      starved more than any other section of those masses at the most
      crucial moments of the onslaught, war and blockade effected by
      the world bourgeoisie. 
 In particular, the Communist Party and all advanced
      proletarians must give all-round and unstinted support
      especially to the spontaneous and mass strike movement, which,
      under the yoke of capital, is alone capable of really rousing,
      educating and organising the masses, of imbuing them with
      complete confidence in the leadership of the revolutionary
      proletariat. Without such preparation, no dictatorship of the
      proletariat is possible; those who are capable of publicly
      opposing strikes, such as Kautsky in Germany and Turati in
      Italy, cannot possibly be tolerated in the ranks of parties
      affiliated to the Third International. This applies even more,
      of course, to those trade union and parliamentary leaders who so
      often betray the workers by using the experience of strikes to
      teach them reformism, and not revolution (for instance, in
      Britain and in France in recent years).

    
  12.In all countries, even in those that are freest, most
      “legal”, and most “peaceful” in the
      sense that the class struggle is least acute there, it is now
      absolutely indispensable for every Communist Party to
      systematically combine legal and illegal work, legal and illegal
      organisations. Notwithstanding their false and hypocritical
      declarations, the governments of even the most enlightened and
      freest of countries, where the bourgeois-democratic system is
      most “stable”, are already systematically and
      secretly drawing up blacklists of Communists and constantly
      violating their own constitutions so as to give secret or
      semi-secret encouragement to the whiteguards and to the murder
      of Communists in all countries, making secret preparations for
      the arrest of Communists, planting agents provocateurs
      among the Communists, etc., etc. Only a most reactionary
      philistine, no matter what cloak of fine
      “democratic” and pacifist phrases he may don, will
      deny this fact or the conclusion that of necessity follows from
      it viz., that all legal Communist parties must immediately form
      illegal organisations for the systematic conduct of illegal work
      and for complete preparations for the moment the bourgeoisie
      resorts to persecution. Illegal work is most necessary in the
      army, the navy and the police because, since the imperialist
      holocaust, governments the world over have begun to stand in
      dread of people’s armies which are open to the workers and
      peasants, and are secretly resorting to all kinds of methods to
      set up military units specially recruited from the bourgeoisie
      and equipped with the most up-to-date weapons. 
 On the other hand, it is likewise necessary that, in all
      cases without exception, the parties should not restrict
      themselves to illegal work, but should conduct legal work as
      well, overcoming all obstacles, starting legal publications, and
      forming legal organisations under the most varied names, which
      should be frequently changed if necessary. This is being
      practised by the illegal Communist parties in Finland, Hungary,
      partly in Germany, Poland, Latvia, etc. It should be practised
      by the Industrial Workers of the World in the U.S.A. and by all
      Communist parties at present legal, should public prosecutors
      see fit to take proceedings against them on the grounds of
      resolutions adopted by Congresses of the Communist
      International, etc. 
 A combination of illegal and legal work is an absolute
      principle dictated, not only by all features of the present
      period, that of the eve of the proletarian dictatorship, but
      also by the necessity of proving to the bourgeoisie that there
      is not, nor can there be, any sphere of activity that cannot be
      won by the Communists; above all, it is dictated by the fact
      that broad strata of the proletariat and even broader strata of
      the non-proletarian toiling and exploited masses still exist
      everywhere, who continue to believe in bourgeois-democratic
      legality and whom we must undeceive without fail. 
 13.In particular, the conditions of the working-class press
      in most advanced capitalist countries strikingly reveal the
      utter fraudulency of liberty and equality under bourgeois
      democracy, as well as the necessity of systematically combining
      legal work with illegal work. Both in vanquished Germany and in
      victorious America, the entire power of the bourgeoisie’s
      machinery of state and all the machinations of the financial
      magnates are employed to deprive the workers of their press,
      these including legal proceedings, the arrest (or murder by
      hired assassins) of editors, denial of mailing privileges, the
      cutting off of paper supplies, and so on and so forth. Besides,
      the news services essential to daily newspapers are run by
      bourgeois telegraph agencies, while advertisements, without
      which a large newspaper cannot pay its way, depend on the
      “good will” of the capitalists. To sum up: through
      skulduggery and the pressure of capital and the bourgeois state,
      the bourgeoisie is depriving the revolutionary proletariat of
      its press. 
 To combat this, the Communist parties must create a new type
      of periodical press for mass distribution among the workers:
      first, legal publications, which, without calling themselves
      communist and without publicising their links with the Party,
      must learn to make use of any legal opportunity, however slight,
      just as the Bolsheviks did under the tsar, after 1905; secondly,
      illegal leaflets, even the briefest and published at irregular
      intervals, but reprinted at numerous printshops by workers
      (secretly, or, if the movement has become strong enough, by the
      revolutionary seizure of printshops), and providing the
      proletariat with outspoken revolutionary information and
      revolutionary slogans. 
 Preparations for the dictatorship of the proletariat is
      impossible without a revolutionary struggle, into which the
      masses are drawn, for the freedom of the communist press. 
      

Rectification Of The Political Line—Partly Also Of The Composition—Of Parties
      Affiliated Or Desiring To Affiliate To The Communist
      International
    
14.The measure in which the proletariat in countries most
      important from the viewpoint of world economics and politics is
      prepared to establish its dictatorship can be seen with the
      greatest objectivity and precision in the fact that the most
      influential parties of the Second International, viz., the
      French Socialist Party, the Independent Social-Democratic Party
      of Germany, the Independent Labour Party of Great Britain and
      the Socialist Party of America,[7]  have withdrawn
      from this yellow International, and have decided—the first
      three conditionally, the latter even unconditionally—to
      affiliate to the Third In ternational. This proves that not only
      the vanguard of the revolutionary proletariat but its majority
      too have begun to come over to our side, convinced by the entire
      course of events. The main thing now is the ability to
      consummate this process and to consolidate firmly in point of
      organisation what has been achieved, so as to advance all along
      the line, without the slightest wavering. 

      15.All the activities of the parties mentioned (to which
      should be added the Socialist Party of Switzerland,[8]  if the telegraph reports of
      its decision to join the Third International are true)
      show—as any periodical of these parties will
      strikingly confirm—that they are not yet communist,
      and quite often run directly counter to the fundamental
      principles of the Third International, viz., the
      recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat and
      Soviet government in place of bourgeois democracy. 
 Accordingly, the Second Congress of the Communist
      International must resolve that it cannot immediately accept the
      affiliation of these parties; that it endorses the reply given
      by the Executive Committee of the Third International to the
      German “Independents”[9] ; that it confirms
      its readiness to conduct negotiations with any party that
      withdraws from the Second International and desires to enter
      into closer relations with the Third International; that it will
      admit the delegates of such parties in a deliberative capacity
      to all its congresses and conferences; that it sets the
      following conditions for the complete adhesion of these (and
      similar), parties with the Communist International: 
    


 1)All decisions of all Congresses of the Communist
      International and of its Executive Committee to be published in
      all the periodicals of the parties concerned; 
 2)These decisions to be discussed at special meetings of all
      sections or local organisations of the parties; 
 3)After such discussion, special congresses of the parties
      to be convened to sum up the results, and for the purpose
      of—
 4)Purging the parties of elements that continue to act in
      the spirit of the Second International; 
 5)All periodical publications of the parties to be placed
      under exclusively Communist editorship. 
 The Second Congress of the Third International should
      instruct its Executive Committee formally to accept these and
      similar parties into the Third International after ascertaining
      that all these conditions have actually been met and that the
      activities of the parties have assumed a communist
      character. 
 16.As to the question of the conduct of Communists now
      holding a minority of the responsible posts in these and similar
      parties, the Second Congress of the Communist International
      should resolve that, in view of the obvious growth of sincere
      sympathy for communism among working men belonging to these
      parties, it would be undesirable for Communists to resign from
      the latter, as long as they can carry on work within them for
      the recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat and
      Soviet government, and as long as it is possible to criticise
      the opportunists and Centrists who still remain in these
      parties. 
 At the same time, the Second Congress of the Third
      International should declare in favour of Communist groups and
      organisations, or groups and organisations sympathising with
      communism, joining the Labour Party in Great Britain, despite
      its membership in the Second International. As long as this
      party ensures its affiliated organisations their present freedom
      of criticism and freedom to carry on work of propaganda,
      agitation and organisation in favour of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat and Soviet government, and as long as this party
      preserves the character of a federation of all trade union
      organisations of the working class, it is imperative for
      Communists to do everything and to make certain compromises in
      order to be able to exercise their influence on the broadest
      masses of the workers, to expose their opportunist leaders from
      a higher tribune, that is in fuller view of the masses, and to
      hasten the transfer of political power from the direct
      representatives of the bourgeoisie to the “labour
      lieutenants of the capitalist class”, so that the masses
      may be more quickly weaned away from their last illusions on
      this score. 
 17.Concerning the Socialist Party of Italy, the Second
      Congress of the Third International considers that the criticism
      of that party and the practical proposals submitted to the
      National Council of the Socialist Party of Italy in the name of
      the party’s Turin section,[10]  as set forth in
      L’Ordine Nuovo of May 8, 1920, are in the main
      correct and are fully in keeping with the fundamental principles
      of the Third International. 
 Accordingly, the Second Congress of the Third International
      requests the Socialist Party of Italy to convene a special
      congress to discuss these proposals and also all the decisions
      of the two Congresses of the Communist International for the
      purpose of rectifying the party’s line and of purging it,
      particularly its parliamentary group, of non-Communist
      elements. 
 18.The Second Congress of the Third International considers
      erroneous the views on the Party’s relation to the class
      and to the masses, and the view that it is not obligatory for
      Communist parties to participate in bourgeois parliaments and in
      reactionary trade unions. These views have been refuted in
      detail in special decisions of the present Congress, and
      advocated most fully by the Communist Workers’ Party of
      Germany, and partly by the Communist Party of Switzerland[11] , by Kommunismus, organ of
      the East-European Secretariat of the Communist International in
      Vienna, by the now dissolved secretariat in Amsterdam, by
      several Dutch comrades, by several Communist organisations in
      Great Britain, as, for example, the Workers’ Socialist
      Federation, etc., and also by the Industrial Workers of the
      World in the U.S.A. and the Shop Stewards’ Committees in
      Great Britain, etc. 
 Nevertheless, the Second. Congress of the Third
      International considers it possible and desirable that those of
      the above-mentioned organisations which have not yet officially
      affiliated to the Communist International should do so
      immediately; for in the present instance, particularly as
      regards the Industrial Workers of the World in the U.S.A. and
      Australia, as well as the Shop Stewards’ Committees in
      Great Britain, we are dealing with a profoundly proletarian and
      mass movement, which in all essentials actually stands by the
      basic principles of the Communist International. The erroneous
      views held by these organisations regarding participation in
      bourgeois parliaments can be explained, not so much by the
      influence of elements coming from the bourgeoisie, who bring
      their essentially petty-bourgeois views into the
      movement—views such as anarchists often hold—as by
      the political inexperience of proletarians who are quite
      revolutionary and connected with the masses. 
 For this reason, the Second Congress of the Third
      International requests all Communist organisations and groups in
      the Anglo-Saxon countries, even if the Industrial Workers of the
      World and the Shop Stewards’ Committees do not immediately
      affiliate to the Third International, to pursue a very friendly
      policy towards these organisations, to establish closer contacts
      with them and the masses that sympathise with them, and to
      explain to them in a friendly spirit—on the basis of the
      experience of all revolutions, and particularly of the three
      Russian revolutions of the twentieth century—the
      erroneousness of their views as set forth above, and not to
      desist from further efforts to amalgamate with these
      organisations to form a single Communist party. 
 19.In this connection, the Congress draws the attention of
      all comrades, particularly in the Latin and Anglo-Saxon
      countries, to the fact that, since the war, a profound
      ideological division has been taking place among anarchists all
      over the world regarding the attitude to be adopted towards the
      dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet government. Moreover,
      a proper understanding of these principles is particularly to be
      seen among proletarian elements that have often been impelled
      towards anarchism by a perfectly legitimate hatred of the
      opportunism and reformism of the parties of the Second
      International. That understanding is growing the more widespread
      among them, the more familiar they become with the experience of
      Russia, Finland, Hungary, Latvia, Poland and Germany. 
 The Congress therefore considers it the duty of all
      Communists to do everything to help all proletarian mass
      elements to abandon anarchism and come over to the side of the
      Third International. The Congress points out that the measure in
      which genuinely Communist parties succeed in winning mass
      proletarian elements rather than intellectual, and
      petty-bourgeois elements away from anarchism, is a criterion of
      the success of those Parties. 
July 4, 1920


Endnotes
[6]
    Lenin is quoting from Marx’s work “Zur Kritik der
    Hegelschen Rechtsphilosophie” (see Marx/Engels,
    Werke, Bd. 1, S. 385).
[7]
    The American Socialist Party was formed in July 1901 at a
    congress held in Indianapolis, as the result of a merger of groups
    that had broken away from the Socialist Workers’ Party and
    the Social-Democratic Party of the U.S.A. Among the new
    party’s organisers was Eugene Debs, a popular figure in the
    U.S. labour movement. The social composition of the party was not
    uniform, it contained native-born and immigrant workers, as well
    as small farmers and people of petty-bourgeois origin. The
    Centrist and the Right-wing opportunist leaders of the party
    (Victor Berger, Morris Hillquit and others) denied the necessity
    of the proletarian dictatorship, renounced revolutionary methods
    of struggle, and reduced all party activities to participation in
    election campaigns. During the First World War (1914-18) three
    trends appeared in the Socialist Party: the social-chauvinists,
    who supported the imperialist policy of the Administration, the
    Centrists, who opposed the imperialist war only in word, and the
    revolutionary minority, who took an internationalist stand and
    struggled against the war.
 The Socialist Party’s Left wing, headed
    by Charles Ruthenberg, William Foster, William Haywood and others,
    relying on the proletarian elements, waged a struggle against the
    party’s opportunist leadership, for independent proletarian
    action and the formation of industrial trade unions based on the
    principles of the class struggle. In 1919 a split took place in
    the Socialist Party. The party’s Left wing broke away,
    bccoming the initiator and nucleus of the Communist Party of the
    U.S.A. At present the Socialist Party is a small sectarian
    organisation.
[8] 
      The Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland (known as
      the Swiss Socialist Party) was formed in the seventies of the
      last century and affiliated to the First International. The
      party was re-formed in 1888. The opportunists were very
      influential in the party, and during the First World War took a
      social-chauvinist stand. In the autumn of 1916, the
      Party’s Right wing broke away to form their own
      organisation. The majority, headed by Robert Grimm, took a
      Centrist, social-pacifist stand, while the Left wing of the
      party adhered to an internationalist stand. The Great October
      Socialist Revolution in Russia influenced and strengthened the
      Left wing which, in December 1920, broke away and joined the
      Communist Party of Switzerland in 1921 (see Note 69). 
[9]
    “Draft (or the Theses) of the R.C.P.’s Reply to a
    Letter from the German Independent Social-Democratic Party”
    (see present edition, Vol. 30, pp. 337-44). 
[10]
    The Turin section accused the Italian Socialist Party
    with its conciliatory leadership, of failing to give a correct
    analysis of events, in the conditions of the revolutionary upsurge
    in Italy (1919-20) that had created the possibility of the seizure
    of political power by the proletariat, and of having failed to
    advance any slogan acceptable to the revolutionary masses, and
    expel the reformists from its ranks. The section made a number of
    practical proposals: the expulsion of the opportunists from the
    party; the formation of communist groups in each factory, in the
    trade unions, co-operatives, and army barracks, the setting-up of
    factory T.U. committees to organise control of production in
    industry and agriculture. The section demanded that work to
    prepare the working masses for the creation of Soviets should be
    begun at once.
[11]
    In October 1918, part of the Social-Democrat Left wing united to
    form the Communist Party of Switzerland. It was not a big party at
    the time, being represented by two delegates at the Second
    Congress of the Comintern. 
In December 1920, the Left wing of the Swiss
    Social-Democratic Party broke away from it, and raised the
    question of forming a strong section of the Communist
    International in Switzerland. At a congress held in Zurich in
    March 1921, attended by 28 delegates from the Communist Party and
    145 delegates representing the former Left wing of the
    Social-Democratic Party, the two groups officially united to form
    a single Communist Party of Switzerland.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Reply to A Letter
    From The Joint Provisional Committee For the Communist Party Of
    Britain










Reply To A Letter From The Joint Provisional Committee For The Communist Party Of Britain



V. I. Lenin
Reply To A Letter From The Joint Provisional Committee For
 The Communist Party Of Britain[1] 


Written: 8 July, 1920 
First Published: Published in English in The Call (London) No. 224, July 22, 1920; First published in Russian in the Fourth Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 2021
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


I have received a letter from the Joint Provisional
    Committee for the Communist Party of Britain, dated June 20, and,
    in accordance with their request, I hasten to reply that I am in
    complete sympathy with their plans for the immediate organisation
    of a single Communist Party of Britain. I consider erroneous the
    tactics pursued by Comrade Sylvia Pankhurst and the Workers’
    Socialist Federation, who refuse to collaborate in the
    amalgamation of the British Socialist Party, the Socialist Labour
    Party and others to form a single Communist party. Personally I am
    in favour of participation in Parliament and of affiliation to the
    Labour Party, given wholly free and independent communist
    activities. I shall defend these tactics at the Second Congress of
    the Third International on July 15, 1920 in Moscow. I consider it
    most desirable that a single Communist party be speedily organised
    on the basis of the decisions of the Third International, and that
    such a party should establish the closest contact with the
    Industrial Workers of the World and the Shop Stewards’
    Committees, in order to bring about a complete merger with them in
    the near future.

    
N. Lenin


      8.7.1920

Endnotes
[1]
    “Reply to a Letter from the Hoint Provisional Committee for
    the Communist Party of ritain” was broadcasted and published
    in English in The Call (No. 224, July 22, 1920), organ of
    the British Socialist Party. The reply was also read to the
    Congress of British Communists, which took place on July 31-August
    1, 1920.—Editor


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

Alternate Translation








==========

## 
    Telephone Message to J. V. Stalin










Telephone Message to J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telephone Message to J. V. Stalin


Phoned: July 12 or 13, 1920 
First Published: First published in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript copy; revised and amended by V. I. Lenin
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 203-204
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


By telephone to Stalin, Kharkov
A Note has been received from Curzon. He proposes
      an armistice with Poland on the following terms: the Polish army
      to withdraw beyond the line fixed by last year’s peace
      conference," viz., Grodno, Yalovka, Nemirov, Brest-Litovsk,
      Dorogiisk, Ustilug, Krylov. This line cuts across Galicia between
      Przemysl and Rava-Russkaya, right up to the Carpathians. We keep
      everything east of this line. Our army is to withdraw 50
      kilometres east of this line. A conference of representatives of
      Soviet Russia, Poland, Latvia, Lithuania and Finland is to be held
      in London under the auspices of the peace
      conference. Representatives of Eastern Galicia will be allowed to
      attend. We can send anybody we like as our representative. It has
      been proposed to us that we conclude an armistice with Wrangel,
      provided he withdraws to the Crimea. Wrangel is going to London to
      discuss the fate of his army, but not as member of the
      conference. We have been given a week for our reply. Besides, the
      Curzon Note says that the Polish Government has given its consent
      to a peace with Russia, on the basis of these terms.
Such is the Curzon Note. I ask Stalin:
1) to expedite execution of the order to
      furiously inten-sify the offensive;

    

      2) to inform me of his (Stalin’s) opinion. 

    

      For my part, I
      think that all this is a piece of knavery aimed at the
      annexation of the Crimea, which is advanced so insolently in
      the Note. The idea is to snatch victory out of our hands with
      the aid of false promises.
Lenin

Stalin’s reply to be recorded and sent on to
      me by telephone.
Lenin



Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Telegram to J. V.
    Stalin










Telegram to J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin


Wired: 17 July, 1920 
First Published: Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 205
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Kharkov
Revolutionary Council of the South-Western Front
To Stalin, urgent

      17.7.1920
The Central Committee plenum has adopted almost in full the
      proposals I have made.[1] You will receive the full text. Keep
      me informed without fail, twice weekly in cipher and in detail,
      regarding the development of opera-tions and the course of
      events.
Lenin

Endnotes
[1]
      The refence is to Lenin’s proposals regarding the reply to
      the Curzon Note of July 12, 1920. These proposals were accepted by
      the Central Committee Plenum of July 16, 1920.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
    Terms of Admission into Communist International










Terms of Admission into Communist International



V. I. Lenin
Terms of Admission into Communist International


Written: July, 1920 
First Published: First published in 1921in the book The Second Congress of the Communist International, Verbatum Report. Published by the Communist International, Petrograd; Published according to the text of the book
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 206-211
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 The First, Inaugural Congress of the Communist International[1] did not draw up precise conditions for the admission of parties into the Third International. When the First Congress was convened, only communist trends and groups existed in most countries. 
It is in a different situation that the Second World Congress of the Communist International is meeting. In most countries, Communist parties and organisations, not merely trends, now exist. 
Parties and groups only recently affiliated to the Second International are more and more frequently applying for membership in the Third International, though they have not become really Communist. The Second International has definitely been smashed. Aware that the Second International is beyond hope, the intermediate parties and groups of the “Centre” are trying to lean on the Communist International, which is steadily gaining in strength. At the same time, however, they hope to retain a degree of “autonomy” that will enable them to pursue their previous opportunist or “Centrist” policies. The Communist International is, to a certain extent, becoming the vogue. 
The desire of certain leading “Centre” groups to join the Third International provides oblique confirmation that it has won the sympathy of the vast majority of class conscious workers throughout the world, and is becoming a more powerful force with each day. 
In certain circumstances, the Communist International may be faced with the danger of dilution by the influx of wavering and irresolute groups that have not as yet broken with their Second International ideology. 
Besides, some of the big parties (Italy, Sweden), in which the majority have adopted the communist standpoint, still contain a strong reformist and social-pacifist wing that is only waiting for an opportune moment to raise its head again, begin active sabotage of the proletarian revolution, and thereby help the bourgeoisie and the Second International. 
No Communist should forget the lessons of the Hungarian Soviet Republic. The Hungarian proletariat paid dearly for the Hungarian Communists having united with the reformists. 
In view of all this, the Second World Congress deems it necessary to lay down absolutely precise terms for the admission of new parties, and also to set forth the obligations incurred by the parties already affiliated. 
The Second Congress of the Communist International resolves that the following are the terms of Comintern membership:
1. Day-by-day propaganda and agitation must be genuinely communist in character. All press organs belonging to the parties must be edited by reliable Communists who have given proof of their devotion to the cause of the proletarian revolution. The dictatorship of the proletariat should not be discussed merely as a stock phrase to be learned by rote; it should be popularised in such a way that the practical facts systematically dealt with in our press day by day will drive home to every rank-and-file working man and working woman, every soldier and peasant, that it is indispensable to them. Third International supporters should use all media to which they have access—the press, public meetings, trade unions, and co-operative societies—to expose systematically and relentlessly, not only the bourgeoisie but also its accomplices—the reformists of every shade. 
2. Any organisation that wishes to join the Communist International must consistently and systematically dismiss reformists and “Centrists” from positions of any responsibility in the working-class movement (party organisations, editorial boards, trade unions, parliamentary groups, co-operative societies, municipal councils, etc.), replacing them by reliable Communists. The fact that in some cases rank-and-file workers may at first have to replace “experienced” leaders should be no deterrent. 
3. In countries where a state of siege or emergency legislation makes it impossible for Communists to conduct their activities legally, it is absolutely essential that legal and illegal work should be combined. In almost all the countries of Europe and America, the class struggle is entering the phase of civil war. In these conditions, Communists can place no trust in bourgeois legality. They must everywhere build up a parallel illegal organisation, which, at the decisive moment, will be in a position to help the Party fulfil its duty to the revolution. 
4. Persistent and systematic propaganda and agitation must be conducted in the armed forces, and Communist cells formed in every military unit. In the main Communists will have to do this work illegally; failure to engage in it would be tantamount to a betrayal of their revolutionary duty and incompatible with membership in the Third International. 
5. Regular and systematic agitation is indispensable in the countryside. The working class cannot consolidate its victory without support from at least a section of the farm labourers and poor peasants, and without neutralising, through its policy, part of the rest of the rural population. In the present period communist activity in the countryside is of primary importance. It should be conducted, in the main, through revolutionary worker-Communists who have contacts with the rural areas. To forgo this work or entrust it to unreliable semi-reformist elements is tantamount to renouncing the proletarian revolution. 
6. It is the duty of any party wishing to belong to the Third International to expose, not only avowed social-patriotism, but also the falsehood and hypocrisy of social-pacifism. It must systematically demonstrate to the workers that, without the revolutionary overthrow of capitalism, no international arbitration courts, no talk about a reduction of armaments, no “democratic” reorganisation of the League of Nations will save mankind from new imperialist wars.  
 7. It is the duty of parties wishing to belong to the Communist International to recognise the need for a complete and absolute break with reformism and “Centrist” policy, and to conduct propaganda among the party membership for that break. Without this, a consistent communist policy is impossible. 
The Communist International demands imperatively and uncompromisingly that this break be effected at the earliest possible date. It cannot tolerate a situation in which avowed reformists, such as Turati, Modigliani and others, are entitled to consider themselves members of the Third International. Such a state of affairs would lead to the Third International strongly resembling the defunct Second International. 
8. Parties in countries whose bourgeoisie possess colonies and oppress other nations must pursue a most well-defined and clear-cut policy in respect of colonies and oppressed nations. Any party wishing to join the Third International must ruthlessly expose the colonial machinations of the imperialists of its “own” country, must support—in deed, not merely in word—every colonial liberation movement, demand the expulsion of its compatriot imperialists from the colonies, inculcate in the hearts of the workers of its own country an attitude of true brotherhood with the working population of the colonies and the oppressed nations, and conduct systematic agitation among the armed forces against all oppression of the colonial peoples. 
9. It is the duty of any party wishing to join the Communist International to conduct systematic and unflagging communist work in the trade unions, co-operative societies and other mass workers’ organisations. Communist cells should be formed in the trade unions, and, by their sustained and unflagging work, win the unions over to the communist cause. In every phase of their day-by-day activity these cells must unmask the treachery of the social-patriots and the vacillation of the “Centrists”. The cells must be completely subordinate to the party as a whole. 
10. It is the duty of any party belonging to the Communist International to wage a determined struggle against the Amsterdam “International” of yellow trade unions.[2] Its indefatigable propaganda should show the organised workers the need to break with the yellow Anusterdam International. It must give every support to the emerging international federation of Red trade unions [3] which are associated with the Communist International. 
11. It is the duty of parties wishing to join the Third International to re-examine the composition of their parliamentary groups, eliminate unreliable elements and effectively subordinate these groups to the Party Central Committees. They must demand that every Communist proletarian should subordinate all his activities to the interests of truly revolutionary propaganda and agitation. 
12. The periodical and non-periodical press, and all publishing enterprises, must likewise be fully subordinate to the Party Central Committee, whether the party as a whole is legal or illegal at the time. Publishing enterprises should not be allowed to abuse their autonomy and pursue any policies that are not in full accord with that of the Party. 
13. Parties belonging to the Communist International must be organised on the principle of democratic centralism. In this period of acute civil war, the Communist parties can perform their duty only if they are organised in a most centralised manner, are marked by an iron discipline bordering on military discipline, and have strong and authoritative party centres invested with wide powers and enjoying the unanimous confidence of the membership. 
14. Communist parties in countries where Communists can conduct their work legally must carry out periodic membership purges (re-registrations) with the aim of systematically ridding the party of petty-bourgeois elements that inevitably percolate into them. 
15. It is the duty of any party wishing to join the Communist International selflessly to help any Soviet republic in its struggle against counter-revolutionary forces. Communist parties must conduct incessant propaganda urging the workers to refuse to transport war materials destined for the enemies of the Soviet republics; they must conduct legal or illegal propaganda in the armed forces dispatched to strangle the workers’ republics, etc. 
16. It is the duty of parties which have still kept their old Social-Democratic programmes to revise them as speedily as possible and draw up new communist programmes  in conformity with the specific conditions in their respective countries, and in the spirit of (Communist International decisions. As a rule, the programmes of all parties belonging to the Communist International must be approved by a regular Congress of the Communist International or by its Executive Committee. In the event of the Executive Committee withholding approval, the party is entitled to appeal to the Congress of the Communist International. 
17. All decisions of the Communist International ’s congresses and of its Executive Committee are binding on all affiliated parties. Operating in conditions of acute civil war, the Communist International must be far more centralised than the Second International was. It stands to reason, however, that in every aspect of their work the Communist International and its Executive Committee must take into account the diversity of conditions in which the respective parties have to fight and work, and adopt decisions binding on all parties only on matters in which such decisions are possible. 
18. In view of the foregoing, parties wishing to join the Communist International must change their name. Any party seeking affiliation must call itself the Communist Party of the country in question (Section of the Third, Communist International). The question of a party’s name is not merely a formality, but a matter of major political importance. The Communist International has declared a resolute war on the bourgeois world and all yellow Social-Democratic parties. The difference between the Communist parties and the old and official “Social-Democratic”, or “socialist”, parties, which have betrayed the banner of the working class, must be made absolutely clear to every rank-and-file worker. 
19. After the conclusion of the proceedings of the Second World Congress of the Communist International, any party wishing to join the Communist International must at the earliest date convene an extraordinary congress for official acceptance of the above obligations on behalf of the entire party. 

Endnotes
[1] The First Congress of the Communist International was held on March 2-6, 1919, in Moscow. Fifty-two delegates attended, 34 with the right to vote and 18Âwith voice but no vote. The following Communist and Socialist parties, organisations and groups were represented: the Communist Parties of Russia, Germany, German Austria, Hungary, Poland, Finland, the Ukraine, Latvia, Lithuania and Byelorussia, Estonia, Armenia, of the German colonies in Russia, the Swedish Left Social-Democratic Party, the Norwegian Social-Democratic Party, the Swiss Social-Democratic Party (Opposition), the Revolutionary Balkan Federation, the United Group of the Eastern Tribes of Russia, the French Zimmerwaldian Left, the Czech, Bulgarian, Yugoslav, British, French, and Swiss Communist groups, the Dutch Social-Democratic Party, the American League of Socialist Propaganda, the American Socialist Labour Party, the Chinese Socialist Labour Party, the Korean Workers’ League, the Turkestan, Turkish, Georgian, Azerbaijan and Persian Sections of the Central Bureau of Eastern Nations and the Zimmerwald Commission. 
   The first meeting of the Comintern passed a decision "to consider this meeting as an international communist conference", and adopted the following agenda: 1) the inauguration, 2) reports, 3) the platform of the international communist conference, 4) bourgeois democracy and prolotarian dictatorship, 5) the Berne Conference and the attitude towards socialist trends, 6) the international situation and the policy of the Entente, 7) the Manifesto, 8) the White terror, 9) elections to the Bureau, and various organisational questions. 
   The conference, whose work centred on Lenin’s theses and report on bourgeois democracy and proletarian dictatorship, unanimously expressed solidarity with Lenin’s theses and adopted a decision to refer them to the Bureau for dissemination in the various countries. The conference also adopted a resolution tabled by Lenin, in addition to the theses. 
   On March 4, after the theses and the resolution on Lenin’s report had been adopted, the conference decided to constitute itself as the Third International, and to take the name of the Communist International. On the same day a rosolution was unanimously passed to consider the Zimmerwald Left dissolved, and the Comintern platform was approved, on the following main principles: 1) the inevitability of the capitalist social system being replaced by a communist system; 2) the necessity of the proletariat’s revolutionary struggle to overthrow bourgeois governments; 3) the abolition of the bourgeois state and its replacement by a state of a new type, i.e., the state of the proletariat, of the Soviet type, which will ensure the transition to a communist society. 
 One of the most important documents of the Congress was the Manifesto to the world proletariat, which declared that the Communist International was the successor of Marx’s and Engels’s ideas as expressed in the Communist Manifesto. The Congress called upon the workers of the world to support Soviet Russia, and demanded non-interference by the Entente in the internal affairs of the Soviet Republic, the withdrawal of the interventionist troops from Russian territory, recognition of the Soviet state, the raising of the economic blockade, and the resumption of trade relations. 
 In its resolution on “The Attitude Towards the ’Socialist’ Parties and the Berne Conference”, the Congress condemned the attempts to re-establish the Second International, which was "an instrument of the bourgeoisle only", and declared that the revolutionary proletariat had nothing in common with that conference.
The establishment of the Third, Communist International played a tremendous part in restoring links between the working people of many countries, in forming and consolidating Communist partles, and in exposing opportunism in the working-class movement.
[2] The Amsterdam “International” of yellow trade unions (the International Federation of Trade Unions) was established by reformist trade union leaders of a number of countries, at a conference held in Amsterdam on July 26-August 2, 1919. The trade union organisations of 14 countries merged to form this federation, viz., Britain, France, Germany, the U.S.A., Belgium Denmark, Holland, Luxemburg, Norway, Sweden, Austria Czechoslovakia, Switzerland and Spain. The reactionary trade union leaders of Britain and France were predominant in the Amsterdam International of trade unions, whose entire activities were connected with the policies of the opportunist parties of the Second International. The Amsterdam International came out in favour of the proletariat’s collaboration with the bourgeoisie, and rejected revolutionary forms of the proletariat’s struggle. The leaders of the Amsterdam International pursued a policy of splitting the working-class movement, excluded Left-wing trade unions from the organisation, and rejected all proposals by the Red International of Labour Unions for joint action against capital, the threat of war, reaction and fascism, and to establish world-wide trade union unity. The leaders of the Amsterdam International supported the anti-Soviet policy of the ruling circles of the imperialist states. 

   During the Second World War the Amsterdam International’s activities ceased. 
[3]  The Red International of Labour Unions (the Profintern )—an in ternational organisation of revolutionary trade unions. It was organised in 1921, and existed till the end of 1937. It amalgamated trade union centres which had not entered the reformist Amsterdam International of trade unions, i.e., the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, the Unitary General Confederation of Labour of France, the national revolutionary trade union centres of Australia, Belgium, Holland, Indonesia, Ireland, Canada, China, Colombia, Korea, Lithuania, Mongolia, Iran, Peru, Uruguay, Czechoslovakia, Chile and Estonia, as well as opposition groups and trends within the reformist trade unions in a number of capitalist countries. The Red Trade Union International waged a struggle for unity in the trade union movement, on the basis of a revolutionary struggle, in defence of the demands of the working class, against capital and fascism, against the danger of imperialist war, and for solidarity with the working class of Soviet Russia. 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Article Twenty
    Of The Terms Of Admission Into the Communist
    International










Article Twenty Of The Terms Of Admission into Communist International



V. I. Lenin
Article Twenty Of The Terms Of Admission
 Into The Communist International[1]


Written: July, 1920 
First Published: First published in 1921in the book The Second Congress of the Communist International, Verbatum Report. Published by the Communist International, Petrograd; Published according to the text of the book
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 212
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Parties which now wish to join the Third International but have not yet radically changed their previous tactics, must do everything necessary, before joining the International, for at least two-thirds of their respective Central Committees and all the principal central Party bodies to be made up of comrades who came out publicly, prior to the Second Congress of the Communist International, with unambiguous-statements in favour of joining the Third International. Exceptions may be allowed with the consent of the Executive Committee of the Third International. The latter has the right to make exceptions also for representatives of the “Centre”, named in §7

Endnotes
[1]  This article was proposed by Lenin at a sitting of the commission of the Comintern Second Congress on July 25, 1920, during the discussion of his theses on the terms of admission into the Communist International. Both the commission and the Congress approved the article. Lenin’s theses entitled “The Terms of Admission into the Communist International” and published before the Congress met contained 19 articles. The Congress adopted 21 articres, the last article reading as follows: "Party members who reject in principle the obligations and theses laid down by the Communist International shall be expelled from the Party. 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive






==========

## 
    The Second Congress of the Communist International





The Second Congress of the Communist International






V. I. Lenin
The Second Congress Of 
The Communist 
      International[1]
 July 19-August 7, 1920 


Written: July, 1920 
First Published: In full in 1921 in
      the book The Second Congress 
of the Communist International, Verbatum Report. Published by the 
      Communist International, Petrograd; The Report on the
      International Situation is published according to the text of
      the book, checked against the verbatum report as emended by
      Lenin; speeched are published according to the text of the
      book, checked against the verbatum report in German
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th
      English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 213-263

      
Translated: Julius Katzer

      
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R.
      Cymbala

Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
      License


1. Report On The International
    Situation And The Fundamental Tasks Of The Communist
    International, July 19
2. Speech On The Role Of The
    Communist Party, July 23
3. Report Of The Commission On The
    National And Colonial Questions, July 26
4. Speech On The Terms Of Admission
    Into The Communist International July 30
5. Speech On Parliamentarianism,
    August 2
6. Speech On Affiliation To The
    British Labour Party, August 6.
Endnotes


1

      Report On The International Situation 
      And The Fundamental Tasks Of
      The Communist International 
      July 19 
    

      (An ovation breaks out. All present rise to their feet and
      applaud. The speaker tries to begin, but the applause and cries
      in all languages continue. The ovation does not abate.)
      Comrades, the theses on the questions of the fundamental tasks
      of the Communist International have been published in all
      languages and contain nothing that is materially new
      (particularly to the Russian comrades). That is because, in a
      considerable measure, they extend several of the main features
      of our revolutionary experience and the lessons of our
      revolutionary movement to a number of Western countries, to
      Western Europe. My report will therefore deal at greater length,
      if in brief outline, with the first part of my subject, namely,
      the international situation. 
Imperialism’s economic relations constitute the core of
    the entire international situation as it now exists. Throughout
    the twentieth century, this new, highest and final stage of
    capitalism has fully taken shape. Of course, you all know that the
    enormous dimensions that capital has reached are the most
    characteristic and essential feature of imperialism. The place of
    free competition has been taken by huge monopolies. An
    insignificant number of capitalists have, in some cases, been able
    to concentrate in their hands entire branches of industry; these
    have passed into the hands of combines, cartels, syndicates and
    trusts, not infrequently of an international nature. Thus, entire
    branches of industry, not only in single countries, but all over
    the world, have been taken over by monopolists in the field of
    finance, property rights, and partly of production. This has
    formed the basis for the unprecedented domination exercised by an
    insignificant number of very big banks, financial tycoons,
    financial magnates who have, in fact, transformed even the freest
    republics into financial monarchies. Before the war this was
    publicly recognised by such far from revolutionary writers as, for
    example, Lysis in France. 
This domination by a handful of capitalists achieved full
    development when the whole world had been partitioned, not only in
    the sense that the various sources of raw materials and means of
    production had been seized by the biggest capitalists, but also in
    the sense that the preliminary partition of the colonies had been
    completed. Some forty years ago, the population of the colonies
    stood at somewhat over 250,000,000, who were subordinated to six
    capitalist powers. Before the war of 1914, the population of the
    colonies was estimated at about 600,000,000, and if we add
    countries like Persia, Turkey, and China, which were already
    semi-colonies, we shall get, in round figures, a population of a
    thousand million people oppressed through colonial dependence by
    the richest, most civilised and freest countries. And you know
    that, apart from direct political and juridical dependence,
    colonial dependence presumes a number of relations of financial
    and economic dependence, a number of wars, which were not regarded
    as wars because very often they amounted to sheer massacres, when
    European and American imperialist troops, armed with the most
    up-to-date weapons of destruction, slaughtered the unarmed and
    defenceless inhabitants of colonial countries. 
The first imperialist war of 1914-18 was the inevitable outcome
    of this partition of the whole world, of this domination by the
    capitalist monopolies, of this great power wielded by an
    insignificant number of very big banks—two, three, four or
    five in each country. This war was waged for the repartitioning of
    the whole world. It was waged in order to decide which of the
    small groups of the biggest states—the British or the
    German—was to obtain the opportunity and the right to rob,
    strangle and exploit the whole world. You know that the war
    settled this question in favour of the British group. And, as a
    result of this war, all capitalist contradictions have become
    immeasurably more acute. At a single stroke the war relegated
    about 250,000,000 of the world’s inhabitants to what is
    equivalent to colonial status, viz., Russia, whose population can
    be taken at about 130,000,000, and Austria-Hungary, Germany and
    Bulgaria, with a total population of not less than
    120,000,000. That means 250,000,000 people living in countries, of
    which some, like Germany, are among the most advanced, most
    enlightened, most cultured, and on a level with modern technical
    progress. By means of the Treaty of Versailles, the war imposed
    such terms upon these countries that advanced peoples have been
    reduced to a state of colonial dependence, poverty, starvation,
    ruin, and loss of rights: this treaty binds them for many
    generations, placing them in conditions that no civilised nation
    has ever lived in. The following is the post-war picture of the
    world: at least 1, 250 million people are at
    once brought under the colonial yoke, exploited by a brutal
    capitalism, which once boasted of its love for peace, and ha~ some
    right to do so some fifty years ago, when the world was not yet
    partitioned, the monopolies did not as yet rule, and capitalism
    could still develop in a relatively peaceful way, without
    tremendous military conflicts. 
Today, after this “peaceful” period, we see a
    monstrous intensification of oppression, the reversion to a
    colonial and military oppression that is far worse than
    before. The Treaty of Versailles has placed Germany and the other
    defeated countries in a position that makes their economic
    existence physically impossible, deprives them of all rights, and
    humiliates them. 
How many nations are the beneficiaries? To answer this question
    we must recall that the population of the United States—the
    only full beneficiary from the war, a country which, from a heavy
    debtor, has become a general creditor—is no more than
    100,000,000. The population of Japan—which gained a great
    deal by keeping out of the European-American conflict and by
    seizing the enormous Asian continent—is 50,000,000. The
    population of Britain, which next to the above-mentioned countries
    gained most, is about 50,000,000. If we add the neutral countries
    with their very small populations, countries which were enriched
    by the war, we shall get, in round figures, some 250,000,000
    people. 
Thus you get the broad outlines of the picture of the world as
    it appeared after the imperialist war. In the oppressed
    colonies—countries which are being dismembered, such as
    Persia, Turkey and China, and in countries that were defeated and
    have been relegated to the position of colonies—there are
    1,250 million inhabitants. Not more than 250,000,000 inhabit
    countries that have retained their old positions, but have become
    economically dependent upon America, and all of which, during the
    war, were militarily dependent, once the war involved the whole
    world and did not permit a single state to remain really
    neutral. And, finally, we have not more than 250,000 000
    inhabitants in countries whose top stratum, the capitaiists alone,
    benefited from the partition of the world. We thus get a total of
    about 1,750 million comprising the entire population of the
    world. I would like to remind you of this picture of the world,
    for all the basic contradictions of capitalism, of imperialism,
    which are leading up to revolution, all the basic contradictions
    in the working-class movement that have led up to the furious
    struggle against the Second International, facts our chairman has
    referred to, are all connected with this partitioning of the
    world’s population. 
Of course, these figures give the economic picture of the world
    only approximately, in broad outline. And, comrades, it is naturaI
    that, with the population of the world divided in this way,
    exploitation by finance capital, the capitalist monopolies, has
    increased many times over. 
Not only have the colonial and the defeated countries been
    reduced to a state of dependence; within each victor state the
    contradictions have grown more acute; all the capitalist
    contradictions have become aggravated. I shall illustrate this
    briefly with a few examples. 
Let us take the national debts. We know that the debts of the
    principal European states increased no less than
    sevenfold in the period between 1914 and 1920. I shall
    quote another economic source, one of particular
    significance—Keynes, the British diplomat and author of
    The Economic Consequenices of the Peace, who, on
    instructions from his government, took part in the Versailles
    peace negotiations, observed them on the spot from thc purely
    bourgeois point of view, studied the subject in detail, step by
    step, and took part in the conferences as an economist. He has
    arrived at conclusions which are more weighty, more striking and
    more instructive than any a Communist revolutionary could draw,
    because they are the conclusions of a well-known bourgeois and
    implacable enemy of Bolshevism, which he, like the British
    philistine he is, imagines as something monstrous, ferocious, and
    bestial. Keynes has reached the conclusion that after the Peace of
    Versailles, Europe and the whole world are heading for
    bankruptcy. He has resigned, and thrown his book in the
    government’s face with the words: “What you are doing
    is madness”. I shall quote his figures, which can be summed
    up as follows. 
What are the debtor-creditor relations that have developed
    between the principal powers? I shall convert pounds sterling into
    gold rubles, at a rate of ten gold rubles to one pound. Here is
    what we get: the United States has assets amounting to 19,000
    million, its liabilities are nil. Before the war it was in
    Britain’s debt. In his report on April 14, 1920, to the last
    congress of the Communist Party of Germany, Comrade Levi very
    correctly pointed out that there are now only two powers in the
    world that can act independently, viz., Britain and
    America. America alone is absolutely independent
    financially. Before the war she was a debtor; she is now a
    creditor only. All the other powers in the world are
    debtors. Britain has been reduced to a position in which her
    assets total 17,000 million, and her liabilities 8,000
    million. She is already half-way to becoming a debtor
    nation. Moreover, her assets include about 6,000 million owed to
    her by Russia. Included in the debt are military supplies received
    by Russia during the war. When Krasin, as representative of the
    Russian Soviet Government, recently had occasion to discuss with
    Lloyd George the subject of debt agreements, he made it plain to
    the scientists and politicians, to the British Government’s
    leaders, that they were labouring under a strange delusion if they
    were counting on getting these debts repaid. The British diplomat
    Keynes has already laid this delusion bare. 
Of course, it is not only or even not at all a question of the
    Russian revolutionary government having no wish to pay the
    debts. No government would pay, because these debts are usurious
    interest on a sum that has been paid twenty times over, and the
    selfsame bourgeois Keynes, who does not in the least sympathise
    with the Russian revolutionary movement, says: “It is clear
    that these debts cannot be taken into account.” 
In regard to France, Keynes quotes the following figures: her
    assets amount to 3,500 million, and her liabilities to 10,500
    million! And this is a country which the French themselves called
    the world’s money-lender, because her “savings”
    were enormous; the proceeds of colonial and financial
    pillage—a gigantic capital—enabled her to grant
    thousands upon thousands of millions in loans, particularly to
    Russia. These loans brought in an enormous
    revenue. Notwithstanding this and notwithstanding victory, France
    has been reduced to debtor status. 
A bourgeois American source, quoted by Comrade Braun, a
    Communist, in his book Who Must Pay the War Debts?
    (Leipzig, 1920), estimates the ratio of debts to national wealth
    as follows: in the victor countries, Britain and Francc, the ratio
    of debts to aggregate national wealth is over 50 per cent; in
    Italy the percentage is between 60 and 70, and in Russia 90. As
    you know, however, these debts do not disturb us, because we
    followed Keynes’s excellent advice just a little before his
    book appeared—we annulled all our debts. (Stormy
    applause.) 
In this, however, Keynes reveals the usual crankiness of the
    philistine: while advising that all debts should be annulled, he
    goes on to say that, of course, France only stands to gain by it,
    that, of course, Britain will not lose very much, as nothing can
    be got out of Russia in any case; America will lose a fair amount,
    but Keynes counts on American “generosity”! On this
    point our views differ from those of Keynes and other
    petty-bourgeois pacifists. We think that to get the debts annulled
    they will have to wait for something else to happen, and will have
    to try working in a direction other than counting on the
    “generosity” of the capitalists. 
These few figures go to show that the imperialist war has
    created an impossible situation for the victor powers as
    well. This is further shown by the enormous disparity between
    wages and price rises. On March 8 of this year, the Supreme
    Economic Council, an institution charged with protecting the
    bourgeois system throughout the world from the mounting
    revolution, adopted a resolution which ended with an appeal for
    order, industry and thrift, provided, of course, the workers
    remain the slaves of capital. This Supreme Economic Council, organ
    of the Entente and of the capitalists of the whole world,
    presented the following summary. 
In the United States of America food prices have risen, on the
    average, by 120 per cent, whereas wages have increased only by 100
    per cent. In Britain, food prices have gone up by 170 per cent,
    and wages 130 per cent; in France, food prices—300 per
    cent,. and wages 200 per cent; in Japan—food prices 130 per
    cent, and wages 60 per cent (I have analysed Comrade Braun’s
    figures in his pamphlet and those of the Supreme Economic Council
    as published in The Times of March 10, 1920). 
In such circumstances, the workers’ mounting resentment,
    the growth of a revolutionary temper and ideas, and the increase
    in spontaneous mass strikes are obviously inevitable, since the
    position of the workers is becoming intolerable. The
    workers’ own experience is convincing them that the
    capitalists have become prodigiously enriched by the war and are
    placing the burden of war costs and debts upon the workers’
    shoulders. We recently learnt by cable that America wants to
    deport another 500 Communists to Russia so as to get rid of
    “dangerous agitators”. 
Even if America deports to our country, not 500 but 500,000
    Russian, American, Japanese and French “agitators”
    that will make no difference, because there will still be the
    disparity between prices and wages, which they can do nothing
    about. The reason why they can do nothing about it is because
    private property is most strictly safeguarded, is
    “sacred” there. That should not be forgotten, because
    it is only in Russia that the exploiters’ private property
    has been abolished. The capitalists can do nothing about the gap
    between prices and wages, and the workers cannot live on their
    previous wages. The old methods are useless against this
    calamity. Nothing can be achieved by isolated strikes, the
    parliamentary struggle, or the vote, because “private
    property is sacred”, and the capitalists have accumulated
    such debts that the whole world is in bondage to a handful of
    men. Meanwhile the workers’ living conditions are becoming
    more and more unbearable. There is no other way out but to abolish
    the exploiters’ “private property”. 
In his pamphlet Britain and the World Revolution,
    valuable extracts from which were published by our Bulletin of
    the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs of
    February 1920, Comrade Lapinsky points out that in Britain coal
    export prices have doubled as against those anticipated by
    official industrial circles. 
In Lancashire things have gone so far that shares are at a
    premium of 400 per cent. Bank profits are at least 40-50 per
    cent. It should, moreover, be noted that, in determining bank
    profits, all bank officials are able to conceal the lion’s
    share of profits by calling them, not profits but bonuses,
    commissions, etc. So here, too, indisputable economic facts prove
    that the wealth of a tiny handful of people has grown prodigiously
    and that their luxury beggars description, while the poverty of
    the working class is steadily growing. We must particularly note
    the further circumstance brought out very clearly by Comrade Levi
    in the report I have just referred to, namely, the change in the
    value of money. Money has everywhere depreciated as a result of
    the debts, the issue of paper currency, etc. The same bourgeois
    source I have already mentioned, namely, the statement of the
    Supreme Economic Council of March 8, 1920, has calculated that in
    Britain the depreciation in the value of currency as against the
    dollar is approximately one-third, in France and Italy two-thirds,
    and in Germany as much as 96 per cent. 
This fact shows that the “mechanism” of the world
    capitalist economy is falling apart. The trade relations on which
    the acquisition of raw materials and the sale of commodities hinge
    under capitalism cannot go on; they cannot continue to be based on
    the subordination of a number of countries to a single
    country—the reason being the change in the value of
    money. No wealthy country can exist or trade unless it sells its
    goods and obtains raw materials. 
Thus we have a situation in which America, a wealthy country
    that all countries are subordinate to, cannot buy or sell. And the
    selfsame Keynes who went through the entire gamut of the
    Versailles negotiations has been compelled to acknowledge this
    impossibility despite his unyielding determination to defend
    capitalism, and all his hatred of Bolshevism. Incidentally, I do
    not think any communist manifesto, or one that is revolutionary in
    general, could compare in forcefulness with those pages in
    Keynes’s book which depict Wilson and
    “Wilsonism” in action. Wilson was the idol of
    philistines and pacifists like Keynes and a number of heroes of
    the Second International (and even of the
    “Two-and-a-Half” International[2]), who
    exalted the “Fourteen Points” and even wrote
    “learned” books about the “roots “ of
    Wilson ’s policy; they hoped that Wilson would save
    “social peace”, reconcile exploiters and exploited,
    and bring about social reforms. Keynes showed vividly how Wilson
    was made a fool of, and all these illusions were shattered at the
    first impact with the practical, mercantile and huckster policy of
    capital as personified by Clemenceau and Lloyd George. The masses
    of the workers now see more clearly than ever, from their own
    experience—and the learned pedants could see it just by
    reading Keynes’s book—that the “roots” of
    Wilson’s policy lay in sanctimonious piffle, petty-bourgeois
    phrase-mongering, and an utter inability to understand the class
    struggle. 
In consequence of all this, two conditions, two fundamental
    situations, have inevitably and naturally emerged. On the one
    hand, the impoverishment of the masses has grown incredibly,
    primarily among 1,250 million people, i.e., 70 per cent of the
    world’s population. These are the colonial and dependent
    countries whose inhabitants possess no legal rights, countries
    “mandated” to the brigands of finance. Besides, the
    enslavement of the defeated countries has been sanctioned by the
    Treaty of Versailles and by existing secret treaties regarding
    Russia, whose validity, it is true, is sometimes about as real as
    that of the scraps of paper stating that we owe so many thousands
    of millions. For the first time in world history, we see robbery,
    slavery, dependence, poverty and starvation imposed upon 1,250
    million people by a legal act. 
On the other hand, the workers in each of the creditor
    countries have found themselves in conditions that are
    intolerable. The war has led to an unprecedented aggravation of
    all capitalist contradictions, this being the origin of the
    intense revolutionary ferment that is ever growing. During the war
    people were put under military discipline, hurled into the ranks
    of death, or threatened with immediate wartime punishment. Because
    of the war conditions people could not see the economic
    realities. Writers, poets, the clergy, the whole press were
    engaged in nothing but glorifying the war. Now that the war has
    ended, the exposures have begun: German imperialism with its Peace
    of Brest-Litovsk has been laid bare; the Treaty of Versailles,
    which was to have been a victory for imperialism but proved its
    defeat, has been exposed. Incidentally, the example of Keynes
    shows that in Europe and America tens and hundreds of thousands of
    petty-bourgeois, intellectuals, and simply more or less literate
    and educated people, have had to follow the road taken by Keynes,
    who resigned and threw in the face of the government a book
    exposing it. Keynes has shown what is taking place and will take
    place in the minds of thousands and hundreds of thousands of
    people when they realise that all the speeches about a “war
    for liberty”, etc., were sheer deception, and that as a
    result only a handful of people were enriched, while the others
    were ruined and reduced to slavery. Is it not a fact that the
    bourgeois Keynes declares that, to survive and save the British
    economy, the British must secure the resumption of free commercial
    intercourse between Germany and Russia? How can this be achieved?
    By cancelling all debts, as Keynes proposes. This is an idea that
    has been arrived at not only by Keynes, the learned economist;
    millions of people are or will be getting the same idea. And
    millions of people hear bourgeois economists declare that there is
    no way out except annulling the debts; therefore “damn the
    Bolsheviks” (who have annulled the debts), and let us appeal
    to America’s “generosity”! I think that, on
    behalf of the Congress of the Communist International, we should
    send a message of thanks to these economists, who have been
    agitating for Bolshevism. 
If, on the one hand, the economic position of the masses has
    become intolerable, and, on the other hand, the disintegration
    described by Keynes has set in and is growing among the negligible
    minority of all-powerful victor countries, then we are in the
    presence of the maturing of the two conditions for the world
    revolution. 
We now have before us a somewhat more complete picture of the
    whole world. We know what dependence upon a handful of rich men
    means to 1,250 million people who have been placed in intolerable
    conditions of existence. On the other hand, when the peoples were
    presented with the League of Nations Covenant, declaring that the
    League had put an end to war and would henceforth not permit
    anyone to break the peace, and when this Covenant, the last hope
    of working people all over the world, came into force, it proved
    to be a victory of the first order for us. Before it came into
    force, people used to say that it was impossible not to impose
    special conditions on a country like Germany, but when the
    Covenant was drawn up, everything would come out all right. Yet,
    when the Covenant was published, the bitterest opponents of
    Bolshevism were obliged to repudiate it. When the Covenant came
    into operation, it appeared that a small group of the richest
    countries, the “Big Four"—in the persons of
    Clemenceau, Lloyd George, Orlando and Wilson—had been put on
    the job of creating the new relations! When the machinery of the
    Covenant was put into operation, this led to a complete
    breakdown. 
We saw this in the case of the wars against Russia. Weak,
    ruined and crushed, Russia, a most backward country, fought
    against all the nations, against a league of the rich and powerful
    states that dominate the world, and emerged victorious. We could
    not put up a force that was anything like the equal of theirs, and
    yet we proved the victors. Why was that? Because there was not a
    jot of unity among them, because each power worked against the
    other. France wanted Russia to pay her debts and become a
    formidable force against Germany; Britain wanted to partition
    Russia, and attempted to seize the Baku oilfields and conclude a
    treaty with the border states of Russia. Among the official
    British documents there is a Paper which scrupulously enumerates
    all the states (fourteen in all) which some six months ago, in
    December 1919, pledged themselves to take Moscow and
    Petrograd. Britain based her policy on these states, to whom she
    granted loans running into millions. All these calculations have
    now misfired, and all the loans are unrecoverable. 
Such is the situation created by the League of Nations. Every
    day of this Covenant’s existence provides the best
    propaganda for Bolshevism, since the most powerful adherents of
    the capitalist “order” are revealing that, on every
    question, they put spokes in one another’s wheels. Furious
    wrangling over the partitioning of Turkey, Persia, Mesopotamia and
    China is going on between Japan, Britain, America and France. The
    bourgeois press in these countries is full of the bitterest
    attacks and the angriest statements against their
    “colleagues” for trying to snatch the booty from under
    their noses. We see complete discord at the top, among this
    handful, this very small number of extremely rich countries. There
    are 1,250 million people who find it impossible to live in the
    conditions of servitude which “advanced” and civilised
    capitalism wishes to impose on them: after all, these represent 70
    per cent of the world’s population. This handful of the
    richest states—Britain, America and Japan (though Japan was
    able to plunder the Eastern, the Asian countries, she cannot
    constitute an independent financial and military force without
    support from another country)—these two or three countries
    are unable to organise economic relations, and are directing their
    policies toward disrupting policies of their colleagues and
    partners in the League of Nations. Hence the world crisis; it is
    these economic roots of the crisis that provide the chief reason
    of the brilliant successes the Communist International is
    achieving. 
Comrades, we have now come to the question of the revolutionary
    crisis as the basis of our revolutionary action. And here we must
    first of all note two widespread errors. On the one hand,
    bourgeois economists depict this crisis simply as
    “unrest”, to use the elegant expression of the
    British. On the other hand, revolutionaries sometimes try to prove
    that the crisis is absolutely insoluble. 
 This is a mistake. There is no such thing as an absolutely
    hopeless situation. The bourgeoisie are behaving like barefaced
    plunderers who have lost their heads; they are committing folly
    after folly, thus aggravating the situation and hastening their
    doom. All that is true. But nobody can “prove” that it
    is absolutely impossible for them to pacify a minority of the
    exploited with some petty concessions, and suppress some movement
    or uprising of some section of the oppressed and exploited. To try
    to “prove” in advance that there is
    “absolutely” no way out of the situation would be
    sheer pedantry, or playing with concepts and catchwords. Practice
    alone can serve as real “proof” in this and similar
    questions. All over the world, the bourgeois system is
    experiencing a tremendous revolutionary crisis. The revolutionary
    parties must now “prove” in practice that they have
    sufficient understanding and organisation, contact with the
    exploited masses, and determination and skill to utilise this
    crisis for a successful, a victorious revolution. 
It is mainly to prepare this “proof” that we have
    gathered at this Congress of the Communist International. 
To illustrate to what extent opportunism still prevails among
    parties that wish to affiliate to the Third International, and how
    far the work of some parties is removed from preparing the
    revolutionary class to utilise the revolution ary crisis, I shall
    quote the leader of the British Independent Labour Party, Ramsay
    MacDonald. In his book, Parliament and Revolution, which
    deals with the basic problems that are now engaging our attention,
    MacDonald describes the state of affairs in what is something like
    a bourgeois pacifist spirit. He admits that there is a
    revolutionary crisis and that revolutionary sentiments are
    growing, that the sympathies of the workers are with the Soviets
    and the dictatorship of the proletariat (note that this refers to
    Britain) and that the dictatorship of the proletariat is better
    than the present dictatorship of the British bourgeoisie. 
But MacDonald remains a thorough-paced bourgeois pacifist and
    compromiser, a petty bourgeois who dreams of a government that
    stands above classes. Like all bourgeois liars, sophists and
    pedants, MacDonald recognises the class struggle merely as a
    “descriptive fact”. He ignores the experience of
    Kerensky, the Mensheviks and the Socialist Revolutionaries of
    Russia, the similar experience of Hungary, Germany, etc., in
    regard to creating a “democratic” government allegedly
    standing above classes. MacDonald lulls his party and those
    workers who have the misfortune to regard this bourgeois as a
    socialist, this philistine as a leader, with the words: “We
    know that all this [i.e., the revolutionary crisis, the
    revolutionary ferment] will pass . . . settle down.” The
    war, he says, inevitably provoked the crisis, but after the war it
    will all “settle down”, even if not at once! 
That is what has been written by a man who is leader of a party
    that wants to affiliate to the Third International. This is a
    revelation—the more valuable for its rare
    outspokenness—of what is no less frequently to be seen in
    the top ranks of the French Socialist Party and the German
    Independent Social-Democratic Party, namely, not merely an
    inability, but also an unwillingness to take advantage, in a
    revolutionary sense, of the revolutionary crisis, or, in other
    words, both an inability and an unwillingness to really prepare
    the party and the class in revolutionary fashion for the
    dictatorship of the proletariat. 
That is the main evil in very many parties which are now
    leaving the Second International. This is precisely why, in the
    theses I have submitted to the present Congress, I have dwelt most
    of all on the tasks connected with preparations for the
    dictatorship of the proletariat, and have given as concrete and
    exact a definition of them as possible. 
Here is another example. A new book against Bolshevism was
    recently published. An unusually large number of books of this,
    kind are now coming out in Europe and America; the more
    anti-Bolshevik books are brought out, the more strong ly and
    rapidly mass sympathy for Bolshevism grows. I am referring to Otto
    Bauer’s Bolshevism or Social-Democracy? This book
    clearly demonstrates to the Germans the essence of Menshevism,
    whose shameful role in the Russian revolution is understood well
    enough by the workers of all countries. Otto Bauer has produced a
    thoroughgoing Menshevik pamphlet, although he has concealed his
    own sympathy with Menshevism. In Europe and America, however, more
    precise information should now be disseminated about what
    Menshevism actually is, for it is a generic term for all allegedly
    socialist, Social-Democratic and other trends that are hostile to
    Bolshevism. It would be dull writing if we Russians were to
    explain to Europeans what Menshevism is. Otto Bauer has shown that
    in his book, and we thank in advance the bourgeois and opportunist
    publishers who will publish it and translate it into various
    languages. Bauer’s book will be a useful if peculiar
    supplement to the textbooks on communism. Take any paragraph, any
    argument in Otto Bauer’s book and indicate the Menshevism in
    it, where the roots lie of views that lead up to the actions of
    the traitors to socialism, of the friends of Kerensky,
    Scheidemann, etc.—this is a question that could be very
    usefully and successfully set in “examinations”
    designed to test whether communism has been properly
    assimilated. If you cannot answer this question, you are not yet a
    Communist, and should not join the Communist
    Party. (Applause.) 
Otto Bauer has excellently expressed in a single sentence the
    essence of the views of world opportunism; for this, if we could
    do as we please in Vienna, we would put up a monument to him in
    his lifetime. The use of force in the class struggle in modern
    democracies, Otto Bauer says, would be “violence exercised
    against the social factors of force”. 
You may think that this sounds queer and unintelligible. It is
    an example of what Marxism has been reduced to, of the kind of
    banality and defence of the exploiters to which the most
    revolutionary theory can be reduced. A German variety of
    philistinism is required, and you get the “theory”
    that the “social factors of force” are: number; the
    degree of organisation; the place held in the process of
    production and distribution; activity and education. If a rural
    agricultural labourer or an urban working man practices
    revolutionary violence against a landowner or a capitalist, that
    is no dictatorship of the proletarlat, no violence against the
    exploiters and the oppressors of the people. Oh, no! This is
    “violence against the social factors of force”. 
 Perhaps my example sounds something like a jest. However, such
    is the nature of present-day opportunism that its struggle against
    Bolshevism becomes a jest. The task of involving the working
    class, all its thinking elements, in the struggle hetween
    international Menshevism (the MacDonalds, Otto Bauers and Co.) and
    Bolshevism is highly useful and very urgent to Europe and
    America. 
Here we must ask: how is the persistence of such trends in
    Europe to be explained? Why is this opportunism stronger in
    Western Europe than in our country? It is because the culture of
    the advanced countries has been, and still is, the result of their
    being able to live at the expense of a thousand million oppressed
    people. It is because the capitalists of these countries obtain a
    great deal more in this way than they could obtain as profits by
    plundering the workers in their own countries. 
Before the war, it was calculated that the three richest
    countries—Britain, France and Germany—got between
    eight and ten thousand million francs a year from the export of
    capital alone, apart from other sources. 
It goes without saying that, out of this tidy sum, at least
    five hundred millions can be spent as a sop to the labour leaders
    and the labour aristocracy, i.e., on all sorts of bribes. The
    whole thing boils down to nothing but bribery. It is done in a
    thousand different ways: by increasing cultural facilities in the
    largest centres, by creating educational institutions, and by
    providing co-operative, trade union and parliamentary leaders with
    thousands of cushy jobs. This is done wherever present-day
    civilised capitalist relations exist. It is these thousands of
    millions in super-profits that form the economic basis of
    opportunism in the working-class movement. In America, Britain and
    France we see a far greater persistence of the opportunist
    leaders, of the upper crust of the working class, the labour
    aristocracy; they offer stronger resistance to the Communist
    movement. That is why we must be prepared to find it harder for
    the European and American workers’ parties to get rid of
    this disease than was the case in our country. We know that
    enormous successes have been achieved in the treatment of this
    disease since the Third International was formed, but we have not
    yet finished the job; the purg- ing of the workers’ parties,
    the revolutionary parties of the proletariat all over the world,
    of bourgeois influences, of the opportunists in their ranks, is
    very far from complete. 
I shall not dwell on the concrete manner in which we must do
    that; that is dealt with in my published theses. My task consists
    in indicating the deep economic roots of this phenomenon. The
    disease is a protracted one; the cure takes longer than the
    optimists hoped it-would. Opportunism is our principal
    enemy. Opportunism in the upper ranks of the working-class
    movement is bourgeois socialism, not proletarian socialism. It has
    been shown in practice that working-class activists who follow the
    opportunist trend are better defenders of the bourgeoisie than the
    bourgeois themselves. Without their leadership of the workers, the
    bourgeoisie could not remain in power. This has been proved, not
    only by the history of the Kerensky regime in Russia; it has also
    been proved by the democratic republic in Germany under its
    Social-Democratic government, as well as by Albert Thomas’s
    attitude towards his bourgeois government. It has been proved by
    similar experience in Britain and the United States. This is where
    our principal enemy is, an enemy we must overcome. We must leave
    this Congress firmly resolved to carry on this struggle to the
    very end, in all parties. That is our main task. 
Compared with this task, the rectification of the errors of the
    “Left” trend in communism will be an easy one. In a
    number of countries anti-parliamentarianism is to be seen, which
    has not been so much introduced by people of petty-bourgeois
    origin as fostered by certain advanced contingents of the
    proletariat out of hatred for the old parliamentarianism, out of a
    legitimate, proper and necessary hatred for the conduct of members
    of parliament in Britain, France, Italy, in all lands. Directives
    must be issued by the Communist International and the comrades
    must be made more familiar with the experience of Russia, with the
    significance of a genuinely proletarian political party. Our work
    will consist in accomplishing this task. The fight against these
    errors in the proletarian movement, against these shortcomings,
    will be a thousand times easier than fighting against those
    bourgeois who, in the guise of reformists, belong to the old
    parties of the Second International and conduct the whole of their
    work in a bourgeois, not proletarian, spirit.
 Comrades, in conclusion I shall deal with one other aspect of
    the subject. Our comrade, the chairman, has said that our Congress
    merits the title of a World Congress. I think he is right,
    particularly because we have here quite a number of
    representatives of the revolutionary movement in the colonial and
    backward countries. This is only a small beginning, but the
    important thing is that a beginning has been made. At this
    Congress we see taking place a union between revolutionary
    proletarians of the capitalist, advanced countries, and the
    revolutionary masses of those countries where there is no or
    hardly any proletariat, i.e., the oppressed masses of colonial,
    Eastern countries. It is on ourselves that the consolidation of
    unity depends, and I am sure we shall achieve it. World
    imperialism shall fall when the revolutionary onslaught of the
    exploited and oppressed workers in each country, overcoming
    resistance from petty-bourgeois elements and the influence of the
    small upper crust of labour aristocrats, merges with the
    revolutionary onslaught of hundreds of millions of people who have
    hitherto stood beyond the pale of history, and have been regarded
    merely as the object of history. 
The imperialist war has helped the revolution: from the
    colonies, the backward countries, and the isolation they lived in,
    the bourgeoisie levied soldiers for this imperialist war. The
    British bourgeoisie impressed on the soldiers from India that it
    was the duty of the Indian peasants to defend Great Britain
    against Germany; the French bourgeoisie impressed on soldiers from
    the French colonies that it was their duty to defend France. They
    taught them the use of arms, a very useful thing, for which we
    might express our deep gratitude to the bourgeoisie—express
    our gratitude on behalf of all the Russian workers and peasants,
    and particularly on behalf of all the Russian Red Army. The
    imperialist war has drawn the dependent peoples into world
    history. And one of the most important tasks now confronting us is
    to consider how the foundation-stone of the organisation of the
    Soviet movement Can be laid in the non-capitalist
    countries. Soviets are possible there; they will not be
    workers’ Soviets, but peasants’ Soviets, or Soviets of
    working people. 
Much work will have to be done; errors will be inevitable; many
    difficulties will be encountered along this road. It is the
    fundamental task of the Second Congress to elaborate or indicate
    the practical principles that will enable the work, till now
    carried on in an unorganised fashion among hundreds of millions of
    people, to be carried on in an organised, coherent and systematic
    fashion. 
Now, a year or a little more after the First Congress of the
    Communist International, we have emerged victors over the Second
    International; it is not only among the workers of the civilised
    countries that the ideas of the Soviets have spread; it is not
    only to them that they have become known and intelligible. The
    warkers of all lands are ridiculing the wiseacres, not a few of
    whom call themselves socialists and argue in a learned or almost
    learned manner about the Soviet “system”, as the
    German systematists are fond of calling it, or the Soviet
    “idea” as the British Guild Socialists[3] call
    it. Not infrequently, these arguments about the Soviet
    “system” or “idea” becloud the
    workers’ eyes and their minds. However, the workers are
    brushing this pedantic rubbish aside and are taking up the weapon
    provided by the Soviets. A recognition of the role and
    significance of the Soviets has now also spread to the lands of
    the East. 
The groundwork has been laid for the Soviet movement all over
    the East, all over Asia, among all the colonial peoples. 
The proposition that the exploited must rise up against the
    exploiters and establish their Soviets is not a very complex
    one. After our experience, after two and a half years of the
    existence of the Soviet Republic in Russia, and after the First
    Congress of the Third International, this idea is becoming
    accessible to hundreds of millions of people oppressed by the
    exploiters all over the world. We in Russia are often obliged to
    compromise, to bide our time, since we are weaker than the
    international imperialists, yet we know that we are defending the
    interests of this mass of a thousand and a quarter million
    people. For the time being, we are hampered by barriers,
    prejudices and ignorance which are receding into the past with
    every passing hour; but we are more and more becoming
    representatives and genuine defenders of this 70 per cent of the
    world’s population, this mass of working and exploited
    people. It is with pride that we can say: at the First Congress we
    were in fact merely propagandists; we were only spreading the
    fundamental ideas among tbe world’s proletariat; we only
    issued the call for struggle; we were merely asking where the
    people were who were capable of taking this path. Today the
    advanced proletariat is everywhere with us. A proletarian army
    exists everywhere, although sometimes it is poorly organised and
    needs reorganising. If our comrades in all lands help us now to
    organise a united army, no shortcomings will prevent us from
    accomplishing our task. That task is the world proletarian
    revolution, the creation of a world Soviet
    republic. (Prolonged applause.) 

2
Speech On The Role Of The Communist Party 
      July 23
 Comrades, I would like to make a few remarks concerning the
    speeches of Comrades Tanner and McLaine. Tanner says that he
    stands for the dictatorship of the proletariat, but he does not
    see the dictatorship of the proletariat quite in the way we do. He
    says that by the dictatorship of the proletariat we actualiy mean
    the dictatorship of the organised and class-conscious minority of
    the proletariat. 
True enough, in the era of capitalism, when the masses of the
    workers are subjected to constant exploitation and cannot develop
    their human capacities, the most characteristic feature of
    working-class political parties is that they can involve only a
    minority of their class. A political party can comprise only a
    minority of a class, in the same way as the really class-conscious
    workers in any capitalist society constitute only a minority of
    all workers. We are therefore obliged to recognise that it is only
    this class-conscious minority that can direct and lead the broad
    masses of the workers. And if Comrade Tanner says that he is
    opposed to parties, but at the same time is in favour of a
    minority that represents the best organised and most revolutionary
    workers showing the way to the entire proletariat, then I say that
    there is really no difference between us. What is this organised
    minority? If this minority is really class-conscious, if it is
    able to lead the masses, if it is able to reply to every question
    that appears on the order of the day, then it is a party in
    reality. But if comrades like Tanner, to whom we pay special heed
    as representatives of a mass movement—which cannot, without
    a certain exaggeration, be said of the representatives of the
    British Socialist Party—if these comrades are in favour of
    there being a minority that will fight resolutely for the
    dictatorship of the proletariat and will educate the masses of the
    workers along these lines, then this minority is in reality
    nothing but a party. Comrade Tanner says that this minority should
    organise and lead the entire mass of workers. If Comrade Tanner
    and the other comrades of the Shop Stewards’ group and the
    Industrial Workers of the World accept this—and we see from
    the daily talks we have had with them that they do accept
    it—if they approve the idea that the class-conscious
    Communist minority of the working class leads the proletariat,
    then they must also agree that this is exactly the meaning of all
    our resolutions. In that case the only difference between us lies
    in their avoidance of the word “party” because there
    exists among the British comrades a certain mistrust of political
    parties. They can conceive of political parties only in the image
    of the parties of Gompers and Henderson,[4] parties of
    parliamentary smart dealers and traitors to the working class. But
    if, by parliamentarianism, they mean what exists in Britain and
    America today, then we too are opposed to such parliamentarianism
    and to such political parties. What we want is new and different
    parties. We want parties that will be in constant and real contact
    with the masses and will be able to lead those masses. 
I now come to the third question I want to touch upon in
    connection with Comrade McLaine ’s speech. He is in favour
    of the British Communist Party affiliating to the Labour Party. I
    have already expressed my opinion on this score in my theses on
    affiliation to the Third International.[5] In my pamphlet I left
    the question open.[6] However, after discussing the matter
    with a number of comrades, I have come to the conclusion that the
    decision to remain within the Labour Party is the only correct
    tactic. But here is Comrade Tanner, who declares,
    “Don’t be too dogmatic.” I consider his remark
    quite out of place here. Comrade Ramsay says: “Please let us
    British Communists decide this question for ourselves.” What
    would the International be like if every little group were to come
    along and say: “Some of us are in favour of this thing and
    some are against; leave it to us to decide the matter for
    ourselves"? What then would be the use of having an International,
    a congress, and all this discussion? Comrade McLaine spoke only of
    the role of a political party. But the same applies to the trade
    unions and to parliamentarianism. It is quite true that a larger
    section of the finest revolutionaries are against affiliation to
    the Labour Party because they are opposed to parliamentarianism as
    a means of struggle. Perhaps it would be best to refer this
    question to a commission, where it should be discussed and
    studied, and then decided at this very Congress of the Communist
    International. We cannot agree that it concerns only the British
    Communists. We must say, in general, which are the correct
    tactics. 
I will now deal with some of Comrade McLaine’s arguments
    concerning the question of the British Labour Party. We must say
    frankly that the Party of Communists can join the Labour Party
    only on condition that it preserves full freedom of criticism and
    is able to conduct its own policy. This is of supreme
    importance. When, in this connection Comrade Serrati speaks of
    class collaboration, I affirm that this will not be class
    collaboration. When the Italian comrades tolerate, in their party,
    opportunists like Turati and Co., i.e., bourgeois elements, that
    is indeed class collaboration. In this instance, however, with
    regard to the British Labour Party, it is simply a matter of
    collaboration between the advanced minority of the British workers
    and their vast majority. Members of the Labour Party are all
    members of trade unions. It has a very unusual structure, to be
    found in no other country. It is an organisation that embraces
    four million workers out of the six or seven million organised in
    trade unions. They are not asked to state what their political
    opinions are. Let Comrade Serrati prove to me that anyone there
    will prevent us from exercising our right of criticism. Only by
    proving that, will you prove Comrade McLaine wrong. The British
    Socialist Party can quite freely call Henderson a traitor and yet
    remain in the Labour Party. Here we have collaboration between the
    vanguard of the working class and the rearguard, the backward
    workers. This collaboration is so important to the entire movement
    that we categorically insist on the British Communists serving as
    a link between the Party, that is, the minority of the working
    class, and the rest of the workers. If the minority is unable to
    lead the masses and establish close links with them, then it is
    not a party, and is worthless in general, even if it calls itself
    a party or the National Shop Stewards’ Committee—as
    far as I know, the Shop Stewards’ Committees in Britain have
    a National Committee, a central body, and that is a step towards a
    party. Consequently, until it is refuted that the British Labour
    Party consists of proletarians, this is co-operation between the
    vanguard of the working class and the backward workers; if this
    co-operation is not carried on systematically, the Communist Party
    will be worthless and there can be no question of the dictatorship
    of the proletariat at all. If our Italian comrades cannot produce
    more convincing arguments, we shall have to definitely settle the
    question later here, on the basis of what we know—and we
    shall come to the conclusion that affiliation is the correct
    tactic. 
Comrades Tanner and Ramsay tell us that the majority of British
    Communists will not accept affiliation. But must we always agree
    with the majority? Not at all. If they have not yet understood
    which are the correct tactics, then perhaps it would be better to
    wait. Even the parallel existence for a time of two parties would
    be better than refusing to reply to the question as to which
    tactics are correct. Of course, acting on the experience of all
    Congress delegates and on the arguments that have been brought
    forward here, you will not insist on passing a resolution here and
    now, calling for the immediate formation of a single Communist
    Party in each country. That is impossible. But we can frankly
    express our opinion, and give directives. We must study in a
    special commission the question raised by the British delegation
    and then we shall say: affiliation to the Labour Party is the
    correct tactic. If the majority is against it, we must organise a
    separate minority. That will be of educational value. If the
    masses of the British workers still believe in the old tactics, we
    shall verify our conclusions at the next congress. We cannot,
    however, say that this question concerns Britain alone—that
    would mean copying the worst habits of the Second
    International. We must express our opinion frankly. If the British
    Communists do not reach agreement, and if a mass party is not
    formed, a split is inevitable one way or another.[6b]


3
 Report Of The Commission On The National 
      and The Colonial Questions 
Comrades, I shall confine myself to a brief introduction, after
    which Comrade Maring, who has been secretary to our commission,
    will give you a detailed account of the changes we have made in
    the theses. He will be followed by Comrade Roy, who has formulated
    the supplementary theses. Our commission have unanimously adopted
    both the preliminary theses, as amended, and the supplementary
    theses. We have thus reached complete unanimity on all major
    issues. I shall now make a few brief remarks. 
First, what is the cardinal idea underlying our theses? It is
    the distinction between oppressed and oppressor nations. Unlike
    the Second International and bourgeois democracy, we emphasise
    this distinction. In this age of imperialism, it is particularly
    important for the proletariat and the Communist International to
    establish the concrete economic facts and to proceed from concrete
    realities, not from abstract postulates, in all colonial and
    national problems. 
The characteristic feature of imperialism consists in the whole
    world, as we now see, being divided into a large number of
    oppressed nations and an insignificant number of oppressor
    nations, the latter possessing colossal wealth and powerful armed
    forces. The vast majority of the world’s population, over a
    thousand million, perhaps even 1,250 million people, if we take
    the total population of the world as 1,750 million, in other
    words, about 70 per cent of the world’s population, belong
    to the oppressed nations, which are either in a state of direct
    colonial dependence or are semi-colonies, as, for example, Persia,
    Turkey and China, or else, conquered by some big imperialist
    power, have become greatly dependent on that power by virtue of
    peace treaties. This idea of distinction, of dividing the nations
    into oppressor and oppressed, runs through the theses, not only
    the first theses published earlier over my signature, but also
    those submitted by Comrade Roy. The latter were framed chiefly
    from the standpoint of the situation in India and other big Asian
    countries oppressed by Britain. Herein lies their great importance
    to us. 
The second basic idea in our theses is that, in the present
    world situation following the imperialist war, reciprocal
    relations between peoples and the world political system as a
    whole are determined by the struggle waged by a small group of
    imperialist nations against the Soviet movement and the Soviet
    states headed by Soviet Russia. Unless we bear that in mind, we
    shall not be able to pose a single national or colonial problem
    correctly, even if it concerns a most outlying part of the
    world. The Communist parties, in civilised and backward countries
    alike, can pose and solve political problems correctly only if
    they make this postulate their starting-point. 
Third, I should like especially to emphasise the question of
    the bourgeois-democratic movement in backward countries. This is a
    question that has given rise to certain differences. We have
    discussed whether it would be right or wrong, in principle and in
    theory, to state that the Communist International and the
    Communist parties must support the bourgeois-democratic movement
    in backward countries. As a result of our discussion, we have
    arrived at the unanimous decision to speak of the
    national-revolutionary movement rather than of the
    “bourgeois-democratic” movement. It is beyond doubt
    that any national movement can only be a bourgeois-democratic
    movement, since the overwhelming mass of the population in the
    backward countries consist of peasants who represent
    bourgeois-capitalist relationships. It would be utopian to believe
    that proletarian parties in these backward countries, if indeed
    they can emerge in them, can pursue communist tactics and a
    communist policy, without establishing definite relations with the
    peasant movement and without giving it effective support. However,
    the objections have been raised that, if we speak of the
    bourgeois-democratic movement, we shall be obliterating all
    distinctions between the reformist and the revolutionary
    movements. Yet that distinction has been very clearly revealed of
    late in the backward and colonial countries, since the imperialist
    bourgeoisie is doing everything in its power to implant a
    reformist movement among the oppressed nations too. There has been
    a certain rapprochement between the bourgeoisie of the
    exploiting countries and that of the colonies, so that very
    often—perhaps even in most cases—the bourgeoisie of
    the oppressed countries, while it does support the national
    movement, is in full accord with the imperialist bourgeoisie,
    i.e., joins forces with it against all revolutionary movements and
    revolutionary classes. This was irrefutably proved in the
    commission, and we decided that the only correct attitude was to
    take this distinction into account and, in nearly all cases,
    substitute the term “national-revolutionary” for the
    term “bourgeois-democratic”. The significance of this
    change is that we, as Communists, should and will support
    bourgeois-liberation movements in the colonies only when they are
    genuinely revolutionary, and when their exponents do not hinder
    our work of educating and organising in a revolutionary spirit the
    peasantry and the masses of the exploited. If these conditions do
    not exist, the Communists in these countries must combat the
    reformist bourgeoisie, to whom the heroes of the Second
    International also belong. Reformist parties already exist in the
    colonial countries, and in some cases their spokesmen call
    themselves Social-Democrats and socialists. The distinction I have
    referred to has been made in all the theses with the result, I
    think, that our view is now formulated much more precisely. 
Next, I would like to make a remark on the subject of
    peasants’ Soviets. The Russian Communists’ practical
    activities in the former tsarist colonies, in such backward
    countries as Turkestan, etc., have confronted us with the question
    of how to apply the communist tactics and policy in pre-capitalist
    conditions. The preponderance of pre-capitalist relationships is
    still the main determining feature in these countries, so that
    there can be no question of a purely proletarian movement in
    them. There is practically no industrial proletariat in these
    cotmtries. Nevertheless, we have assumed, we must assume, the role
    of leader even there. Experience has shown us that tremendous
    difficulties have to be surmounted in these countries. However,
    the practical results of our work have also shown that despite
    these difficulties we are in a position to inspire in the masses
    an urge for independent political thinking and independent
    political action, even where a proletariat is practically
    non-existent. This work has been more difficult for us than it
    will be for comrades in the West-European countries, because in
    Russia the proletariat is engrossed in the work of state
    administration. It will reaaily be understood that peasants living
    in conditions of semi-feudal dependence can easily assimilate and
    give effect to the idea of Soviet organisation. It is also clear
    that the oppressed masses, those who are exploited, not only by
    merchant capital but also by the feudalists, and by a state based
    on feudalism, can apply this weapon, this type of organisation, in
    their conditions too. The idea of Soviet organisation is a simple
    one, and is applicable, not only to proletarian, but also to
    peasant feudal and semi-feudal relations. Our experience in this
    respect is not as yet very considerable. However, the debate in
    the commission, in which several representatives from colonial
    countries participated, demonstrated convincingly that the
    Communist International’s theses should point out that
    peasants’ Soviets, Soviets of the exploited, are a weapon
    which can be employed, not only in capitalist countries but also
    in countries with pre-capitalist relations, and that it is the
    absolute duty of Communist parties and of elements prepared to
    form Communist parties, everywhere to conduct propaganda in favour
    of peasants’ Soviets or of working people’s Soviets,
    this to include backward and colonial countries. Wherever
    conditions permit, they should at once make attempts to set up
    Soviets the working people. 
This opens up a very interesting and very important field for
    our practical work. So far our joint experience in this respect
    has not been extensive, but more and more data will gradually
    accumulate. It is unquestionable that the proletariat of the
    advanced countries can and should give help to the working masses
    of the backward countries, and that the backward countries can
    emerge from their present stage of development when the victorious
    proletariat of the Soviet Republics extends a helping hand to
    these masses and is in a position to give them support. 
There was quite a lively debate on this question in the
    commission, not only in connection with the theses I signed, but
    still more in connection with Comrade Roy’s theses, which he
    will defend here, and certain amendments to which were unanimously
    adopted. 
The question was posed as follows: are we to consider as
    correct the assertion that the capitalist stage of economic
    development is inevitable for backward nations now on the road to
    emancipation and among whom a certain advance towards progress is
    to be seen since the war? We replied in the negative. If the
    victorious revolutionary proletariat conducts systematic
    propaganda among them, and the Soviet governments come to their
    aid with all the means at their disposal—in that event it
    will be mistaken to assume that the backward peoples must
    inevitably go through the capitalist stage of development. Not
    only should we create independent contingents of fighters and
    party organisations in the colonies and the backward countries,
    not only at once launch propaganda for the organisation of
    peasants’ Soviets and strive to adapt them to the
    pre-capitalist conditions, but the Communist International should
    advance the proposition, with the appropriate theoretical
    grounding, that with the aid of the proletariat of the advanced
    countries, backward countries can go over to the Soviet system
    and, through certain stages of development, to communism, without
    having to pass through the capitalist stage. 
The necessary means for this cannot be indicated in
    advance. These will be prompted by practical experience. It has,
    however, been definitely established that the idea of the Soviets
    is understood by the mass of the working people in even the most
    remote nations, that the Soviets should be adapted to the
    conditions of a pre-capitalist social system, and that the
    Communist parties should immediately begin work in this direction
    in all parts of the world.
 I would also like to emphasise the importance of revolutionary
    work by the Communist parties, not only in their own, but also in
    the colonial countries, and particularly among the troops employed
    by the exploiting nations to keep the colonial peoples in
    subjection. 
Comrade Quelch of the British Socialist Party spoke of this in
    our commission. He said that the rank-and-file British worker
    would consider it treasonable to help the enslaved nations in
    their uprisings against British rule. True, the jingoist and
    chauvinist-minded labour aristocrats of Britain and America
    present a very great danger to socialism, and are a bulwark of the
    Second International. Here we are confronted with the greatest
    treachery on the part of leaders and workers belonging to this
    bourgeois International. The colonial question has been discussed
    in the Second International as well.[7] The Basle Manifesto[8] is quite clear on this point, too. The
    parties of the Second International have pledged themselves to
    revolutionary action, but they have given no sign of genuine
    revolutionary work or of assistance to the exploited and dependent
    nations in their revolt against the oppressor nations. This, I
    think, applies also to most of the parties that have withdrawn
    from the Second International and wish to join the Third
    International. We must proclaim this publicly for all to hear, and
    it is irrefutable. We shall see if any attempt is made to deny
    it. 
All these considerations have formed the basis of our
    resolutions, which undoubtedly are too lengthy but will
    nevertheless, I am sure, prove of use and will promote the
    development and organisation of genuine revolutionary work in
    connection with the national and the colonial questions. And that
    is our principal task. 

4
Speech On The Terms Of Admission 
      Into The Communist International 
      July 
      30 [9]

      Comrades, Serrati has said that we have not yet invented a
      sincerometer—meaning by this French neologism an
      instrument for measuring sincerity. No such instrument has been
      invented yet. We have no need of one. But we do already have an
      instrument for defining trends. Comrade Serrati’s error,
      which I shall deal with later, consists in his having failed to
      use this instrument, which has been known for a long time. 
I would like to say only a few words about Comrade Crispien. I
    am very sorry that he is not present. (Dittmann:
    “He is ill.”) I am very sorry to hear it. His speech
    is a most important document, and expresses explicitly the
    political line of the Right wing of the Independent
    Social-Democratic Party. I shall speak, not of personal
    circumstances or individual cases but only of the ideas clearly
    expressed in Crispien’s speech. I think I shall be able to
    prove that the entire speech was thoroughly in the Kautskian
    spirit, and that Comrade Crispien shares the Kautskian views on
    the dictatorship of the proletariat. Replying to a rejoinder,
    Crispien said: “Dictatorship is nothing new, it was already
    mentioned in the Erfurt Programme.”[10] The Erfurt Programme
    says nothing about the dictatorship of the proletariat, and
    history has proved that this was not due to chance. When in
    1902-03, we were drawing up our Party’s first programme, we
    always had before us the example of the Erfurt Programme;
    Plekhanov, that very Plekhanov who rightly said at the time,
    “Either Bernstein will bury Social-Democracy, or
    Social-Democracy will bury Bernstein”, laid special emphasis
    on the fact that the Erfurt Programme’s failure to mention
    the dictatorship of the proletariat was erroneous from the
    standpoint of theory and, in practice was a cowardly concession to
    the opportunists. The dictatorship of the proletariat has been in
    our programme since 1903.[11] 
When Comrade Crispien now says that the dictatorship of the
    proletariat is nothing new, and goes on to say: “We have
    always stood for the conquest of political power”, he is
    evading the gist of the matter. Conquest of political power is
    recognised, but not dictatorship. All the socialist
    literature—not only German, but French and British as
    well—shows that the leaders of the opportunist parties, for
    instance, MacDonald in Britain, stand for the conquest of
    political power. They are, in all conscience, sincere socialists,
    but they are against the dictatorship of the proletariat! Since we
    have a good revolutionary party worthy of the name of Communist,
    it should conduct propaganda for the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, as distinct from the old conception of the Second
    International. This has been glossed over and obscured by Comrade
    Crispien, which is the fundamental error common to all of
    Kautsky’s adherents. 
“We are leaders elected by the masses, “ Comrade
    Crispien continues. This is a formal and erroneous point of view,
    since a struggle of trends was clearly to be seen at the latest
    Party congress of the German Independents. There is no need to
    seek for a sincerometer and to wax humorous on the subject, as
    Comrade Serrati does, in order to establish the simple fact that a
    struggle of trends must and does exist: one trend is that of the
    revolutionary workers who have just joined us and are opposed to
    the labour aristocracy; the other is that of the labour
    aristocracy, which in all civilised countries is headed by the old
    leaders. Does Crispien belong to the trend of the old leaders and
    the labour aristocracy, or to that of the new revolutionary masses
    of workers, who are opposed to the labour aristocracy? That is a
    question Comrade Crispien has failed to clarify. 
In what kind of tone does Comrade Crispien speak of the split?
    He has said that the split was a bitter necessity, and deplored
    the matter at length. That is quite in the Kautskian spirit. Who
    did they break away from? Wasit not from Scheidemann? Of course,
    it was. Crispien has said: “We have split away.” In
    the first place, this was done too late. Since we are on the
    subject, that has to be said. Second, the Independents should not
    deplore this, but should say: “The international working
    class is still under the sway of the labour aristocracy and the
    opportunists.” Such is the position both in France and in
    Great Britain. Comrade Crispien does not regard the split like a
    Communist, but quite in the spirit of Kautsky, who is supposed to
    have no influence. Then Crispien went on to speak of high
    wages. The position in Germany, he said, is that the workers are
    quite well off compared with the workers in Russia or in general,
    in the East of Europe. A revolution, as he sees it, can be made
    only if it does not worsen the workers’ conditions
    “too much”. Is it permissible, in a Communist Party,
    to speak in a tone like this, I ask? This is the language of
    counter-revolution. The standard of living in Russia is
    undoubtedly lower than in Germany, and when we established the
    dictatorship, this led to the workers beginning to go more hungry
    and to their conditions becoming even worse. The workers’
    victory cannot be achieved without sacrifices, without a temporary
    deterioration of their conditions. We must tell the workers the
    very opposite of what Crispien has said. If, in desiring to
    prepare the workers for the dictatorship, one tells them that
    their conditions will not be worsened “too much”, one
    is losing sight of the main thing, namely, that it was by helping
    their “own” bourgeoisie to conquer and strangle the
    whole world by imperialist methods, with the aim of thereby
    ensuring better pay for themselves, that the labour aristocracy
    developed. If the German workers now want to work for the
    revolution they must make sacrifices, and not be afraid to do
    so. 
In the general and world-historical sense, it is true that in a
    backward country like China, the coolie cannot bring about a
    proletarian revolution; however, to tell the workers in the
    handful of rich countries where life is easier, thanks to
    imperialist pillage, that they must be afraid of “too
    great” impoverishment, is counter-revolutionary. It is the
    reverse that they should be told. The labour aristocracy that is
    afraid of sacrifices, afraid of “too great” impover-
    ishment during the revolutionary struggle, cannot belong to the
    Party. Otherwise the dictatorship is impossible, especially in
    West-European countries. 
What does Crispien say about terror and coercion? He has said
    that these are two different things. Perhaps such a distinction is
    possible in a manual of sociology, but it cannot be made in
    political practice, especially in the conditions of Germany. We
    are forced to resort to coercion and terror against people who
    behave like the German officers did when they murdered Liebknecht
    and Rosa Luxemburg, or against people like Stinnes and Krupp, who
    buy up the press. Of course, there is no need to proclaim in
    advance that we shall positively resort to terror but if the
    German officers and the Kappists remain the same as they now are
    and if Krupp and Stinnes remain the same as they now are, the
    employment of terror will be inevitable. Not only Kautsky, but
    Ledebour and Crispien as well, speak of coercion and terror in a
    wholly counter revolutionary spirit. A party that makes shift with
    such ideas cannot participate in the dictatorship. That is self
    evident. 
Then there is the agrarian question. Here Crispien has got very
    worked up and tried to impute a petty-bourgeois spirit to us: to
    do anything for the small peasant at the expense of the big
    landowner is alleged to be petty-bourgeois action. He says the
    landed proprietors should be dispossessed and their land handed
    over to co-operative associations. This is a pedantic
    viewpoint. Even in highly developed countries, including Germany,
    there are a sufficient number of latifundia, landed estates that
    are cultivated by semi-feudal, not large-scale capitalist,
    methods. Part of such land may be cut off and turned over to the
    small peasants, without injury to farming. Large-scale farming can
    be preserved, and yet the small peasants can be provided with
    something of considerable importance to them. No thought is given
    to this, unfortunately, but in practice that has to be done, for
    otherwise you will fall into error. This has been borne out, for
    example, in a book by Varga (former People’s Commissar for
    the National Economy in the Hungarian Soviet Republic), who writes
    that the establishment of the proletarian dictatorship hardly
    changed anything in the Hun-garian countryside, that the
    day-labourers saw no changes, and the small peasants got
    nothing. There are large latifundia in Hungary, and a semi-feudal
    economy is conducted in large areas. Sections of large estates can
    and must always be found, part of which can be turned over to the
    small peasants, perhaps not as their property, but on lease, so
    that even the smallest peasant may get some part of the
    confiscated estates. Otherwise, the small peasant will see no
    difference between the old order and the dictatorship of the
    Soviets. If the proletarian state authority does not act in this
    way, it will be unable to retain power. 
Although Crispien did say: “You cannot deny that we have
    our revolutionary convictions”, I shall reply that I do deny
    them. I do not say that you would not like to act in revolutionary
    manner, but I do say that you are unable to reason in a
    revolutionary fashion. I am willing to wager that if we chose any
    commission of educated people, and gave them a dozen
    Kautsky’s books and then Crispien’s speech, the
    commission would say: “The whole speech is thoroughly
    Kautskian, is imbued through and through with Kautsky’s
    views.” The entire method of Crispien’s argumentation
    is fundamentally Kautskian, yet Crispien comes along and says,
    “Kautsky no longer has any influence whatever in our
    party.” No influence, perhaps, on the revolutionary workers
    who have joined recently. However, it must be accepted as
    absolutely proved that Kautsky has had and still has an enormous
    influence on Crispien, on his entire line of thought, all his
    ideas. This is manifest in his speech. That is why, without
    inventing any sincerometers, any instruments for measuring
    sincerity, we can say that Crispien’s orientation is not
    that of the Communist International. In saying this, we are
    defining the orientation of the entire Communist
    International. 
Comrades Wijnkoop and Munzenberg have expressed dissatisfaction
    with the fact that we have invited the Independent Socialist Party
    and are holding talks with its representatives. I think they are
    wrong. When Kautsky attacks us and brings out books against us, we
    polemise with him as our class enemy. But when the Independent
    Social-Democratic Party, which has expanded as a result of an
    influx of revolutionary workers, comes here for negoti- ations, we
    must talk to its representatives, since they are a section of the
    revolutionary workers. We cannot reach an immediate agreement with
    the German Independents, or with the French and the British,
    regarding the International. In every speech he delivers, Comrade
    Wijnkoop reveals that he shares almost all the errors of Comrade
    Pannekoek. Wijnkoop has stated that he does not share
    Pannekoek’s views; but his speeches prove the
    reverse. Herein lies the main error of this “Left”
    group, but this, in general, is an error of a proletarian movement
    that is developing. The speeches of Comrades Crispien and Dittmann
    are imbued with a bourgeois spirit which will not help us prepare
    for the dictatorship of the proletariat. When Comrades Wijnkoop
    and Muinzenberg go still further on the subject of the Independent
    Social-Democratic Party, we are not in agreement with them. 
Of course, we have no instrument for measuring sincerity, as
    Serrati has put it, for testing a man’s conscience; we quite
    agree that the matter is not one of forming an opinion of people,
    but of appraising a situation. I am sorry to say that although
    Serrati did speak he said nothing new. His was the sort of speech
    we used to hear in the Second International as well. 
Serrati was wrong in saying: “In France the situation is
    not revolutionary; in Germany it is revolutionary; in Italy it is
    revolutionary.” 
Even if the situation is non-revolutionary, the Second
    International is in error and carries a heavy responsibility if it
    is really unwilling to organise revolutionary propaganda and
    agitation, since, as has been proved by the entire history of the
    Bolshevik Party, revolutionary propaganda can and should be
    conducted even in a situation that is not revolutionary. The
    difference between the socialists and the Communists consists in
    the former refusing to act in the way we act in any situation,
    i.e., conduct revolutionary work. 
Serrati merely repeats what Crispien has said. We do not mean
    to say that Turati should be expelled on such and such a
    date. That question has already been touched upon by the Executive
    Committee, and Serrati has said to us: “Not expulsions, but
    a Party purge.” We must simply tellthe Italian comrades that
    it is the line of L’Ordine Nuovo members that
    corresponds to the line of the Communist International, and not
    that of the present majority of the Socialist Party’s
    leaders and their parliamentary group. They claim that they want
    to defend the proletariat against the reactionaries. Chernov, the
    Mensheviks and many others in Russia are also
    “defending” the proletariat against the reactionaries,
    but that is not sufficient reason for accepting them into our
    midst. 
That is why we must say to the Italian comrades and all parties
    that have a Right wing: this reformist tendency has nothing in
    common with communism. 
We ask our Italian comrades to call a congress and have our
    theses and resolutions submitted to it. I am sure that the Italian
    workers will want to remain in the Communist International. 

5
Speech On Parliamentarianism 
      August 2
Comrade Bordige seems to have wanted to defend the Italian
    Marxists’ point of view here, yet he has failed to reply to
    any of the arguments advanced by other Marxists in favour of
    parliamentary action. 
Comrade Bordiga has admitted that historical experience is not
    created artificially. He has just told us that the struggle must
    be carried into another sphere. Is he not aware that every
    revolutionary crisis has been attended by a parliamentary crisis?
    True, he has said that the struggle must be carried into another
    sphere, into the Soviets. Bordiga, however, has himself admitted
    that Soviets cannot be created artificially. The example of Russia
    shows that Soviets can be organised either during a revolution or
    on the eve of a revolution. Even in the Kerensky period, the
    Soviets (which were Menshevik Soviets) were organised in such a
    way that they could not possibly constitute a proletarian
    government. Parliament is a product of historical development, and
    we cannot eliminate it until we are strong enough to disperse the
    bourgeois parliament. It is only as a member of the bourgeois
    parliament that one can, in the given historical conditions, wage
    a struggle against bourgeois society and parliamentarianism. The
    same weapon as the bourgeoisie employs in the struggle must also
    be used by the proletariat, of course, with entirely different
    aims. You cannot assert that that is not the case, and if you want
    to challenge it, you will have thereby to erase the experience of
    all revolutionary developments in the world. 
You have said that the trade unions are also opportunist, that
    they, too, constitute a danger. On the other hand, however, you
    have said that an exception must be made in the case of trade
    unions, because they are workers’ organisations. But that is
    true only up to a certain point. There are very backward elements
    in the trade unions too: a section of the proletarianised petty
    bourgeoisie, the backward workers, and the small peasants. All
    these elements really think that their interests are represented
    in parliament. This idea must be combated by work within
    parliament and by citing the facts, so as to show the masses the
    truth. Theory will have no effect on the backward masses; they
    need practical experience. 
This was to be seen in the case of Russia too. We were obliged
    to convene the Constituent Assembly even after the victory of the
    proletariat, so as to prove to the backward proletarians that they
    had nothing to gain from that Assembly. To bring home the
    difference between the two, we had to concretely contrapose the
    Soviets and the Constituent Assembly and to show the Soviets as
    the only solution. 
Comrade Souchy, a revolutionary syndicalist, advocated the same
    theory, but he had no logic on his side. He said that he was not a
    Marxist, so everything can be readily understood. But you, Comrade
    Bordiga, assert that you are a Marxist, so we must expect more
    logic from you. You must know how parliament can be smashed. If
    you can do it by an armed uprising in all countries, well and
    good. You are aware that we in Russia proved our determination to
    destroy the bourgeois parliament, not only in theory, but in
    practice as well. You, however, have lost sight of the fact that
    this is impossible without fairly long preparations, and that in
    most countries it is as yet impossible to destroy parliament at
    one stroke. We are obliged to carry on a struggle within
    parliament for the destruction of parliament. For the conditions
    determining the political line of all classes in modern society
    you substitute your revolutionary determination; that is why you
    forget that to destroy the bourgeois parliament in Russia we were
    first obliged to convene the Constituent Assembly, even after our
    victory. You say: “It is a fact that the Russian revolution
    is a case that is not in accord with conditions in Western
    Europe”, but you have not produced a single weighty argument
    to prove that to us. We went through a period of bourgeois
    democracy. We went through it rapidly at a time when we had to
    agitate for elections to the Constituent Assembly. Later, when the
    working class was able to seize power, the peasants still believed
    in the necessity of a bourgeois parliament. 
Taking account of these backward elements, we had to proclaim
    the elections and show the masses, by example and by facts, that
    the Constituent Assembly, which was elected at a time of dire and
    universal need, did not express the aspirations and demands of the
    exploited classes. In this way the conflict between Soviet and
    bourgeois government became quite clear, not only to us, the
    vanguard of the working class, but also to the vast majority of
    the peasantry, to the petty office employees, the petty
    bourgeoisie, etc. In all capitalist countries there are backward
    elements in the working class who are convinced that parliament is
    the true representative of the people and do not see the
    unscrupulous methods employed there. You say that parliament is an
    instrument with the aid of which the bourgeoisie deceive the
    masses. But this argument should be turned against you, and it
    does turn against your theses. How will you reveal the true
    character of parliament to the really backward masses, who are
    deceived by the bourgeoisie? How will you expose the various
    parliamentary manoeuvres, or the positions of the various parties,
    if you are not in parliament, if you remain outside parliament? If
    you are Marxists, you must admit that, in capitalist society,
    there is a close link between the relations of classes and the
    relations of parties. How, I repeat, will you show all this if you
    are not members of parliament, and if you renounce parliamentary
    action? The history of the Russian revolution has clearly shown
    that the masses of the working class, the peasantry, and petty
    office employees could not have been convinced by any arguments,
    unless their own experience had convinced them. 
It has been claimed here that it is a waste of time to
    participate in the parliamentary struggle. Can one conceive of any
    other institution in which all classes are as interested as they
    are in parliament? This cannot be created artificially. If all
    classes are drawn into the parliamentary struggle, it is because
    the class interests and conaicts are reflected in parliament. If
    it were possible everywhere and immediately to bring about, let us
    say, a decisive general strike so as to overthrow capitalism at a
    single stroke, the revolution would have already taken place in a
    number of countries. But we must reckon with the facts, and
    parliament is a scene of the class struggle. Comrade Bordiga and
    those who share his views must tell the masses the truth. Germany
    provides the best example that a Communist group in parliament is
    possible. That is why you should have frankly said to the masses:
    “We are too weak to create a party with a strong
    organisation.” That would be the truth that ought to be
    told. But if you confessed your weakness to the masses, they would
    become your opponents, not your supporters; they would become
    supporters of parliamentarianism. 
If you say: “Fellow workers, we are so weak that we
    cannot form a party disciplined enough to compel its members of
    parliament to submit to it”, the workers would abandon you,
    for they would ask themselves: “How can we set up a
    dictatorship of the proletariat with such weaklings?” 
You are very naïve if you think that the intelligentsia,
    the middle class, and the petty bourgeoisie will turn Communist
    the day the proletariat is victorious. 
If you do not harbour this illusion, you should begin right
    away to prepare the proletariat to pursue its own line. You will
    find no exceptions to this rule in any branch of state affairs. On
    the day following the revolution, you will everywhere find
    advocates of opportunism who call themselves-Communists, i.e.,
    petty bourgeois who refuse to recognise the discipline of the
    Communist Party or of the proletarian state. Unless you prepare
    the workers for the creation of a really disciplined party, which
    will compel its members to submit to its discipline, you will
    never prepare for the dictatorship of the proletariat. I think
    that this accounts for your unwillingness to admit that the
    repudiation of parliamentary action by a great many of the new
    Communist parties stems from their weakness. I am convinced that
    the vast majority of the really revolutionary workers will follow
    us and speak up against your anti-parliamentary theses. 

6
 Speech On Affiliation To The British Labour 

      Party[12] 
      August 6
    
Comrades, Comrade Gallacher began his speech by expressing
    regret at our having been compelled to listen here for the
    hundredth and the thousandth time to sentences that Comrade
    McLaine and other British comrades have reiterated a thousand
    times in speeches, newspapers and magazines. I think there is no
    need for regret. The old International used the method of
    referring such questions for decision to the individual parties in
    the countries concerned. That was a grave error. We may not be
    fully familiar with the conditions in one country or another, but
    in this case we are dealing with the principles underlying a
    Communist Party’s tactics. That is very important and, in
    the name of the Third International, we must herewith clearly
    state the communist point of view. 
First of all, I should like to mention a slight inaccuracy on
    the part of Comrade McLaine, which cannot be agreed to. He called
    the Labour Party the political organisation of the trade union
    movement, and later repeated the statement when he said that the
    Labour Party is “the political expression of the workers
    organised in trade unions”. I have met the same view several
    times in the paper of the British Socialist Party. It is
    erroneous, and is partly the cause of the opposition, fully
    justified in some measure, coming from the British revolutionary
    workers. Indeed, the concepts “political department of the
    trade unions “ or “political expression” of the
    trade union movement, are erroneous. Of course, most of the Labour
    Party’s members are workingmen. However, whether or not a
    party is really a political party of the workers does not depend
    solely upon a membership of workers but also upon the men that
    lead it, and the content of its actions and its political
    tactics. Only this latter determines whether we really have before
    us a political party of the proletariat. Regarded from this, the
    only correct, point of view, the Labour Party is a thoroughly
    bourgeois party, because, although made up of workers, it is led
    by reactionaries, and the worst kind of reactionaries at that, who
    act quite in the spirit of the bourgeoisie. It is an organisation
    of the bourgeoisie, which exists to systematically dupe the
    workers with the aid of the British Noskes and Scheidemanns. 
We have also heard another point of view, defended by Comrade
    Sylvia Pankhurst and Comrade Gallacher, who have voiced their
    opinion in the matter. What was the substance of the speeches
    delivered by Gallacher and many of his friends? They have told us
    that they are insufficiently linked with the masses. But take the
    instance of the British Socialist Party, they went on. It is still
    less linked with the masses and it is a very weak party. Comrade
    Gallacher has told us here how he and his comrades have organised,
    and done so really splendidly, the revolutionary movement in
    Glasgow, in Scotland, how in their wartime tactics they manoeuvred
    skillfully, how they gave able support to the petty-bourgeois
    pacifists Ramsay MacDonald and Snowden when they came to Glasgow,
    and used this support to organise a mass movement against the
    war. 
It is our aim to integrate this new and excellent revolutionary
    movement—represented here by Comrade Gallacher and his
    friends—into a Communist Party with genuinely communist,
    i.e., Marxist tactics. That is our task today. On the one hand,
    the British Socialist Party is too weak and incapable of properly
    carrying on agitation among the masses; on the other hand, we have
    the younger revolutionary elements so well represented here by
    Comrade Gallacher, who, although in touch with the masses, are not
    a political party, and in this sense are even weaker than the
    British Socialist Party and are totally unable to organise their
    political work. Under these circumstances, we must express our
    frank opinion on the correct tactics. When, in speaking of the
    British Socialist Party, Comrade Gallacher said that it is
    “hopelessly reformist”, he was undoubtedly
    exaggerating. But the general tenor and content of all the
    resolutions we 
    have adopted here show with absolute clarity that we demand a
    change, in this spirit, in the tactics of the British Socialist
    Party; the only correct tactics of Gallacher’s friends will
    consist in their joining the Communist Party without delay, so as
    to modify its tactics in the spirit of the resolutions adopted
    here. If you have so many supporters that you are able to organise
    mass meetings in Glasgow, it will not be difficult for you to
    bring more than ten thousand new members into the Party. The
    latest Conference of the British Socialist Party, held in London
    three or four days ago, decided to assume the name of the
    Communist Party and introduced into its programme a clause
    providing for participation in parliamentary elections and
    affiliation to the Labour Party. Ten thousand organised members
    were represented at the Conference. It will therefore not be at
    all difficult for the Scottish comrades to bring into this
    “Communist Party of Great Britain” more than ten
    thousand revolutionary workers who are better versed in the art of
    working among the masses, and thus to modify the old tactics of
    the British Socialist Party in the sense of better agitation and
    more revolutionary action. In the commission, Comrade Sylvia
    Pankhurst pointed out several times that Britain needed
    “Lefts”. I, of course, replied that this was
    absolutely true, but that one must not overdo this
    “Leftism”. Furthermore she said that they were better
    pioneers, but for the moment were rather noisy. I do not take this
    in a bad sense, but rather in a good one, namely, that they are
    better able to carry on revolutionary agitation. We do and should
    value this. We expressed this in all our resolutions, for we
    always emphasise that we can consider a party to be a
    workers’ party only when it is really linked up with the
    masses and fights against the old and quite corrupt leaders,
    against both the Right-wing chauvinists and those who, like the
    Right Independents in Germany, take up an intermediate
    position. We have asserted and reiterated this a dozen times and
    more in all our resolutions, which means that we demand a
    transformation of the old party, in the sense of bringing it
    closer to the masses. 
Sylvia Pankhurst also asked: “Is it possible for a
    Communist Party to join another political party which still belongs
    to the Second International?” She replied that it was
    not. It should, however, be borne in mind that the British Labour
    Party is in a very special position: it is a highly original type
    of party, or rather, it is not at all a party in the ordinary
    sense of the word. It is made up of members of all trade unions,
    and has a membership of about four million, and allows sufficient
    freedom to all affiliated political parties. It thus includes a
    vast number of British workers who follow the lead of the worst
    bourgeois elements, the social-traitors, who are even worse than
    Scheidemann, Noske and similar people. At the same time, however,
    the Labour Party has let the British Socialist Party into its
    ranks, permitting it to have its own press organs, in which
    members of the selfsame Labour Party can freely and openly declare
    that the party leaders are social-traitors. Comrade McLaine has
    cited quotations from such statements by the British Socialist
    Party. I, too, can certify that I have seen in The Call,
    organ of the British Socialist Party, statements that the Labour
    Party leaders are social-patriots and social-traitors. This shows
    that a party affiliated to the Labour Party is able, not only to
    severely criticise but openly and specifically to mention the old
    leaders by name, and call them social-traitors. This is a very
    original situation: a party which unites enormous masses of
    workers, so that it might seem a political party, is nevertheless
    obliged to grant its members complete latitude. Comrade McLaine
    has told us here that, at the Labour Party Conference, the British
    Scheidemanns were obliged to openly raise the question of
    affiliation to the Third International, and that all party
    branches and sections were obliged to discuss the matter. In such
    circumstances, it would be a mistake not to join this party. 
In a private talk, Comrade Pankhurst said to me: “If we
    are real revolutionaries and join the Labour Party, these
    gentlemen will expel us.” But that would not be bad at
    all. Our resolution says that we favour affiliation insofar as the
    Labour Party permits sufficient freedom of criticism. On that
    point we are absolutely consistent. Comrade McLaine has emphasised
    that the conditions now prevailing in Britain are such that,
    should it so desire, a political party may remain a revolutionary
    workers’ party even if it is connected with a special kind
    of labour organisation of four million members, which is half
    trade union and half political and is headed by bourgeois
    leaders. In such circumstances it would be highly erroneous for
    the best revolutionary elements not to do everything possible to
    remain in such a party. Let the Thomases and other
    social-traitors, whom you have called by that name, expel
    you. That will have an excellent effect upon the mass of the
    British workers. 
The comrades have emphasised that the labour aristocracy is
    stronger in Britain than in any other country. That is true. After
    all, the labour aristocracy has existed in Britain, not for
    decades but for centuries. The British bourgeoisie, which has had
    far more experience—democratic experience—than that of
    any other country, has been able to buy workers over and to create
    among them a sizable stratum, greater than in any other country,
    but one that is not so great compared with the masses of the
    workers. This stratum is thoroughly imbued with bourgeois
    prejudices and pursues a definitely bourgeois reformist policy. In
    Ireland, for instance, there are two hundred thousand British
    soldiers who are applying ferocious terror methods to suppress the
    Irish. The British Socialists are not conducting any revolutionary
    propaganda among these soldiers, though our resolutions clearly
    state that we can accept into the Communist International only
    those British parties that conduct genuinely revolutionary
    propaganda among the British workers and soldiers. I emphasise
    that we have heard no objections to this either here or in the
    commissions. 
Comrades Gallacher and Sylvia Pankhurst cannot deny that. They
    cannot refute the fact that, in the ranks of the Labour Party, the
    British Socialist Party enjoys sufficient freedom to write that
    certain leaders of the Labour Party are traitors; that these old
    leaders represent the interests of the bourgeoisie; that they are
    agents of the bourgeoisie in the working-class movement. They
    cannot deny all this because it is the absolute truth. When
    Communists enjoy such freedom it is their duty to join the Labour
    Party if they take due account of the experience of
    revolutionaries in all countries, not only of the Russian
    revolution (for here we are not at a Russian congress but at one
    that is international). Comrade Gallacher has said ironically that
    in the present instance we are under the influence of the British
    Socialist Party. That is not true; it is the experience of all
    revolutions in all countries that has convinced us. We think that
    we must say that to the masses. The British Communist Party must
    retain the freedom necessary to expose and criticise the betrayers
    of the working class, who are much more powerful in Britain than
    in any other country. That is readily understandable. Comrade
    Gallacher is wrong in asserting that by advocating affiliation to
    the Labour Party we shall repel the best elements among the
    British workers. We must test this by experience. We are convinced
    that all the resolutions and decisions that will be adopted by our
    Congress will be published in all British revolutionary socialist
    newspapers and that all the branches and sections will be able to
    discuss them. The entire content of our resolutions shows with
    crystal clarity that we are representatives of working-class
    revolutionary tactics in all countries and that our aim is to
    fight against the old reformism and opportunism. The events reveal
    that our tactics are indeed defeating the old reformism. In that
    case the finest revolutionary elements in the working class, who
    are dissatisfied with the slow progress being made—and
    progress in Britain will perhaps be slower than in other
    countries—will all come over to us. Progress is slow because
    the British bourgeoisie are in a position to create better
    conditions for the labour aristocracy and thereby to retard the
    revolutionary movement in Britain. That is why the British
    comrades should strive, not only to revolutionise the
    masses—they are doing that splendidly (as Comrade Gallacher
    has shown), but must at the same time strive to create a real
    working-class political party. Comrade Gallacher and Comrade
    Sylvia Pankhurst, who have both spoken here, do not as yet belong
    to a revolutionary Communist Party. That excellent proletarian
    organisation, the Shop Stewards’ movement, has not yet
    joined a political party. If you organise politically you will
    find that our tactics are based on a correct understanding of
    political developments in the past decades, and that a real
    revolutionary party can be created only when it absorbs the best
    elements of the revolutionary class and uses every opportunity to
    fight the reactionary leaders, wherever they show themselves. 
If the British Communist Party starts by acting in a
    revolutionary manner in the Labour Party, and if the Hendersons
    are obliged to expel this Party, that will be a great victory for
    the communist and revolutionary working class movement in
    Britain. 
    


Endnotes
[1]
      The Second Congress of the Communist International met
      from July 19 to August 7, 1920. The opening session was held in
      Petrograd and the subsequent sessions in Moscow. It was attended
      by over 200 delegates who represented workers ’
      organisations of 37 countries. Apart from delegates representing
      the Communist parties and organisations of 31 countries, there
      were delegates from the Independent Social-Democratic Party of
      Germany, the Socialist parties of Italy and France, Industrial
      Workers of the World (Australia, Britain and Ireland), the
      National Confederation of Labour of Spain and other
      organisations. 
 Lenin directed all the preparatory work before
    the Congress. At its first session he made a report on the
    international situation and the fundamental tasks of the Communist
    International. Throughout the Congress, in his reports and
    speeches, Lenin fought uncompromisingly against the opportunist
    Centrist parties, who were attempting to penetrate into the Third
    International, and levelled sharp criticism at the
    anarcho-syndicalist trends and “Left” sectarianism of
    a number of communist organisations. Lenin took part in the work
    of various commissions and delivered reports and speeches on the
    international situation and the fundamental tasks of the Communist
    International, the national and the colonial questions, the
    agrarian question and the terms of admission into the Communist
    International. Lenin’s theses on the fundamental tasks of
    the Second Congress of the Communist International, the national
    and the colonial questions, the agrarian question and the terms of
    admission into the Communist International were endorsed as
    Congress decisions.
 The Second Congress laid the foundations of
    the programme, organisational principles, strategy and tactics of
    the Communist International;—Editor. 
[2]
      This international organisation was being set up at the time by
      the Centrist socialist parties and groups which had left the
      Second International under pressure from the revolutionary
      masses. The International Union of the Socialist Parties, as the
      new organisation was officially called was formed at a
      conference in Vienna in February 1921 and; was also known as the
      Two-and-a-Half or Vienna International. Professing opposition to
      the Second International, the leaders of the Two-and-a-Half
      International actually pursued the same opportunist and
      splitting policy on the most important questions of the
      proletarian movement and tried to make the new organisation a
      counter-balance to the growing innuence of the Communists among
      the workers. Lenin wrote, “The gentlemen of the
      Two-and-a-Half International pose as revolutionaries; but in
      every serious situation they prove to be counter-revolutionaries
      because they shrink from the violent destruction of the old
      state machine; they have no faith in the forces of the working
      class”
 In May 1923 the Second International and the
    Two-and-a-Half International united to form the so-called Labour
    and Socialist International;—Editor. 
[3]
Guild socialists—a reformist trend in the British
    trade unions which arose before the First World War. They denied
    the class character of the state and sowed illusions among thc
    workers that it was possible to get rid of exploitation without
    the class struggle, by establishing, on the basis of the existing
    trade unions, special associations of producers, so-called guilds
    whose federation was to take over industrial management. In this
    way the guild socialists hoped to build socialism.
 After the October Socialist Revolution the
    Guild socialists stepped up their propaganda, contraposing the
    “theory” of guild socialism to the ideas of the class
    struggle and the dictatorship of the proletariat. In the 1920s
    guild socialism lost all its influence on the British
    workers;—Editor. 
 [4]
    The reference is to the American Federation of Labor and the
    British Labour Party. 
 The American Federation of Labor was
    formed in 1881, on the guild principle. In the main it organised
    the labour aristocracy. The reformist A.F.L. Ieaders denied the
    principles of socialism and the class struggle, preached
    “class co-operationn and championed the capitalist
    system. They followed a splitting policy in the international
    working-class movement, giving active support to the aggressive
    policy of the U.S. imperialists. In 1955 the A.F.L. merged with
    the C.I.O;—Editor.
[5]
      See pp. 198-99 in this
      volume;—Editor.
[6] 
      See p. 89 in this
      volume;—Editor.
[6b]Issue No. 5 of the Bulletin of The Sccond
    Congress of the Communist International gave the concluding
    sentences of this speech as follows: 

    

      “We must express our opinion frankly, whatever it may
      be. If the British Communists do not reach agreement on the
      question of the organisation of the mass movement, and if a
      split takes place in this issue, then better a split than
      rejection of the organisation of the mass movement. It is better
      to rise to definite and sufficiently clear tactics and ideology
      than to go on remaining in the previous
      chaos.”—Editor. 
[7]
      The commission on the national and the colonial questions, formed by
      the Second Congress of the Communist International included
      representatives of the Communist parties of Russia, Bulgaria, France,
      Holland, Germany, Hungary, the U.S.A., India, Persia, China, Korea
      and Britain. The work of the commission was guided by Lenin, whose
      theses on the national and the colonial questions were discussed at
      the fourth and fifth sessions of the Congress, and were adopted on
      July 28;—Editor.
[8]
      The Basle Manifesto was adopted by the Extraordinary
      International Socialist Congress held in Basle on November
      24-25, 1912. It gave a warning against the imminent world
      imperialist war, whose predatory aims it unmasked, and called
      upon the workers of all countries to wage a determined fight for
      peace and “to pit against the might of capitalist
      imperialism the international solidarity of the
      proletariat”. The Manifesto denounced the expansionist
      policy of the imperialist countries and urged socialists to
      fight against all oppression of small nations and manifestations
      of chauvinism. 
[9] 
      The terms of admission into the Communist International were
      first discussed by a commission appointed by the Congress. The
      commission included representatives of the Communist parties of
      Russia, Germany, Bulgaria, the U.S.A., HunRary, Austria,
      Holland, the Irish I.W.W., the Left wing of the Socialist Party
      of Switzerland and the French Communist group. In its work the
      commission proceeded from Lenin’s theses “The Terms of Admission into the Communist
      International”. Lenin also worked on the
      commission. The terms of admission into the Communist
      International were discussed at three Congress sessions, July 29
      and 30, and were adopted on August
      6;—Editor. 
[10] 
      Lenin is referring to the German Social-Democratic Party’s
      programme which was adopted at its congress in Erfurt in October
      1891. This programme marked an advance over the Gotha Programme
      of 1875, since it was based on the Marsist thesis that the
      capitalist mode of production was doomed and would be inevitably
      replaced by the socialist mode of production; it stressed the
      need for the working class to wage a political struggle and
      defined the party’s role as leader in that struggle, but
      it too made serious concessions to opportunism. Engels gave a
      profound criticism of the draft of the programme in his work
      “Zur Kritik des sozialdemokratischen Programmentwurfes
      1891” (see Marx/Engels, Werke, Dietz Verlag,
      Berlin, 1963, Bd. 22, S. 225-40). In fact, Engels criticised the
      opportunism of the entire Second International. However, in
      working out the final version of the programme, the German
      Social-Democratic leaders concealed Engels’s criticism
      from the Party rank and file and disregarded his most important
      remarks. According to Lenin, the fact that the Erfurt Programme
      made no mention of the dictatorship of the proletafiat was the
      main defect in the programme, and a cowardly concession to
      opportunism;—Editor.
[11]
      See KPSS v rezolutsiyakh i resheniyakh syezdov, konfercntsii
      i plenumov TsK (The C.P.S.U. in the Resolutions and
      Decisions of Its Congresses, Conferences and Plenums of
      the Central Committee), Part I, 1954,
      p. 39;—Editor. 
[12]
      The question of the Communist Party’s affiliation to the
      Labour Party was dealt with during the discussion on
      Lenin’s theses on the fundamental tasks of the Communist
      International, at the closing session of the Congress on August
      6. Following Lenin’s speech the majority (58 votes against
      24, with 2 abstentions) approved affiliation. The Labour
      leaders, however, refused to grant membership to the Communist
      Party. ;—Editor.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Telegram to J. V.
    Stalin










Telegram to J. V. Stalin, August 2, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to J. V. Stalin


Wired: August 2, 1920 
First Published: 1945; In Lenin Miscellany XXXV; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 264
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Stalin
We have just decided, in the Political Bureau, that
    the Army Groups shall be separated, so that you will deal
    exclusively with Wrangel. Following the uprisings, especially in
    the Kuban and then in Siberia, the Wrangel danger is becoming
    enormous, and the opinion is mounting in the Central Committee
    that peace with bourgeois Poland should he concluded
    immediately. Please study the Wrangel situation very carefully and
    let us know your conclusions. I have arranged with the
    Commander-in-Chief that you are to get more ammunition,
    reinforcements and aircraft. Together with his friends,
    Dzerzhinsky has set up a Polish revolutionary committee and has
    issued a manifesto.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 
    Telegram to J. V. Stalin










Telegram to J. V. Stalin, August 4, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to J. V. Stalin


Wired: August 4, 1920 
First Published: 1942; published according to
the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 265
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Stalin
A plenary session of the Central Committee has been
    called for 1800 hours tomorrow. Try to send us, before that hour,
    your conclusions on the nature of the difficulties encountered by
    Budyonny and those on the Wrangel front, as well as the military
    prospects on both fronts. Political decisions of the utmost
    importance may depend on your conclusions.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

##  Telegram to J. V.
    Stalin










Telegram to J. V. Stalin, August 11, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to J. V. Stalin


Wired: August 11 1920 
First Published: 1942; published according to
the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 265
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Stalin
We have just received a dispatch from the head of
    the Soviet delegation in London. Great Britain has flinched from a
    general strike, and Lloyd George has declared that he advises
    Poland to accept our armistice terms, including disarmament, the
    handing over of weapons to the workers, land distribution,
    etc. Our victory is a great one, and will be complete if we smash
    Wrangel. Here we are taking all measures. You, for your part,
    should make every effort to take the whole of the Crimea without
    fail, during the present offensive. Everything now depends on
    that. The Poles are temporising, and have not arrived in
    time. This is of tremendous advantage to us.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 
    Letter to The Austrian Communists










Letter To The Austrian Communists



V. I. Lenin
Letter to the
Austrian Communists[1]


Written: August 15 1920 
First Published: Published in German; in Die Rote Fahne (Vienna) No. 396, August 31, 1920; First published In Russian in 1925; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 267-269
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The Austrian Communist Party has decided to boycott
    the elections to the bourgeois-democratic parliament. The Second
    Congress of the Communist International which ended recently
    recognised as the correct tactics Communist participation
    in elections to and the activities in bourgeois parliaments.
Judging by reports of the Austrian Communist Party’s
    delegates, I have no doubt that it will set a decision by the
    Communist International above that of one of the parties. Neither
    can it be doubted that the Austrian Social-Democrats, those
    traitors to socialism who have gone over to the bourgeoisie, will
    gloat over the Communist International decision, which is at
    variance with the Austrian Communist Party’s boycott
    decision. However, politically-conscious workers will, of course,
    pay no heed to the malicious glee of people like the Austrian
    Social-Democrats, those confederates of the Scheidemanns and
    Noskes, Thomases and Gomperses. The Renners’ servility to
    the bourgeoisie has revealed itself sufficiently, and in all
    countries the workers’ indignation at the heroes of the
    yellow Second International is ever mounting and spreading.
The Austrian Social-Democrats are behaving in the bourgeois
    parliament, as in all spheres of their “work”,
    including their own press, in the manner of petty-bourgeois
    democrats who are capable only of spineless vacillation, while in
    fact they are totally dependent on the capitalist class. We
    Communists enter bourgeois parliaments in order to unmask from
    their rostrums the deception practised by these thoroughly corrupt
    capitalist institutions, which dupe the workers and all working
    people.

    

      One of the Austrian Communists’ arguments against
      participation in the bourgeois parliaments deserves somewhat more
      careful consideration. Here it is:
“Parliament is of importance to Communists
      only as a platform for agitation. We in Austria have the Council
      of Workers’ Deputies as a platform for agitation. We
      therefore refuse to take part in elections to the bourgeois
      parliament. In Germany there is no Council of Workers’
      Deputies which can be taken in earnest. That is why the German
      Communists pursue different tactics.”
I consider this argument erroneous. As long as we are unable to
      disband the bourgeois parliament, we must work against it both
      from without and within. As long as a more or less appreciable
      number of working people (not only proletarians, but also
      semi-proletarians and small peasants) still have confidence in the
      bourgeois-democratic instruments employed by the bourgeoisie for
      duping the workers, we must expose that deception from the
very platform which the backward sections of the workers,
      particularly of the non-proletarian working people, consider most
      important, and authoritative.
As long as we Communists are unable to take over state power
      and hold elections, with working people alone voting for
      their Soviets against the bourgeoisie; as long as the
      bourgeoisie exercise state power and call upon the different
      classes of the population to take part in the elections, we are
      in duty bound to take part in the elections with the purpose of
      conducting agitation among all working people, not only among
      proletarians. As long as the bourgeois parliament remains a
      means of duping the workers, and phrases about
      “democracy” are used to cover up financial swindling
      and every kind of bribery (the particularly “subtle”
      brand of bribery the bourgeoisie practise with regard to
      writers, N. P.s, lawyers, and others is nowhere to be seen on so
      wide a scale as in the bourgeois parliament), we Communists are
      in duty bound to be in this very institution (which is supposed
      to express the people’s will but actually covers
      up the deception of the people by the wealthy) to
      untiringly expose this deception, and expose each and every case
      of the Renners and Co.’s desertion to the capitalists,
      against the workers. It is in parliament that the relations
      between bourgeois parties and groups manifest themselves most
      frequently and reflect the relations between all the classes of
      bourgeois society. That is why it is in the bourgeois
      parliament, from. within it, that we Communists must tell the
      people the truth about the relation between classes and
      parties, and the attitude of the landowners to the farm
      labourers, of the rich peasants to the poor peasants, of big
      capital to employees and petty proprietors, etc.
The proletariat must know all this, so as to learn to see
      through. all the vile and refined machinations of the capitalists,
      and to learn to influence the petty-bourgeois masses, the
      non-proletarian masses of the working people. Without this
      “schooling” the proletariat cannot cope successfully
      with the tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat,
      for even then the bourgeoisie, operating from its new position
      (that of a deposed class), will carry on, in different forms and
      in different fields, its policy of duping the peasants, of bribing
      and intimidating employees, of covering up its self-seeking and
      unsavoury aspirations with phrases about
      “democracy”.
No, the Austrian Communists will not be frightened by the
      malicious glee of the Renners and similar lackeys of the
      bourgeoisie. The Austrian Communists will not be afraid to declare
      their open and forthright recognition of international proletarian
      discipline. We are proud that we settle the great problems of the
      workers’ struggle for their emancipation by submitting to
      the international discipline of the revolutionary proletariat,
      with due account of the experience of the workers in different
      countries, reckoning with their knowledge and their will, and thus
      giving effect in deed (and not in word, as the Renners, Fritz
      Adlers and Otto Bauers do) to the unity of the workers’
      class struggle for communism throughout the world.
N. Lenin

    

      August 15, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    Lenin wrote this letter in connection with the Austrian Communist
    Party’s decision to boycott parliamentary elections. On
    September 1, 1920, the Party Conference decided to participate in
    the elections. The Party’s election campaign was conducted
    under the slogan of the revolutionary unity of the working
    class.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  The Second
    Congress of the Communist International










The Second Congress Of The Communist International



V. I. Lenin
The Second Congress Of
 The Communist International


Written: August 1920 
First Published: Kommunishia No. 3-4, August-September 1920; Published according to the journal text

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 270-272
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The Second Congress of the Communist International
      ended on August 7. A little over a year has elapsed since its
      foundation, during which brief period immense and decisive
      successes have been achieved.
Held a year ago, the First Congress only unfurled the banner of
    communism, around which the forces of the revolutionary
    proletariat were to rally. War was declared on the yellow Second
    International, which unites the social-traitors, who have sided
    with the bourgeoisie against the proletariat and are in alliance
    with the capitalists against the workers’ revolution.
The huge measure of success achieved in a year can be seen,
    among other things, in the fact that the growing sympathy with
    communism among the masses of workers has compelled the withdrawal
    from the Second International of some of its leading European and
    American parties, namely, the French Socialist Party, the German
    and the British “Independent” parties, and the
    American Socialist Party.
In every country of the world the finest representatives of the
    revolutionary workers have already ranged themselves on the side
    of communism, Soviet rule and the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. In all the advanced countries of Europe and America,
    there already exist Communist parties or numerous Communist
    groups. At the Congress which ended on August 7, it was not only
    the heralds of the proletarian revolution who joined forces, but
    delegates from strong and powerful organisations linked with the
    proletarian masses. A world army of the revolutionary
    proletariat-that is what now stands for communism, and, at the
    Congress just ended, received organisational form and a clear,
    precise and detailed programme of action.
The Congress refused to admit immediately into the Communist
    International such parties that still retain in their ranks
    influential representatives of “Menshevism”,
    social-treachery and opportunism, similar to the abovementioned
    parties which have withdrawn from the yellow Second
    International.
In a number of precisely worded resolutions, the Congress
    blocked every avenue of access for opportunism, and demanded a
    total break with it. The incontestable facts reported to the
    Congress showed that the working-class masses are with us, and
    that the opportunists shall now be utterly routed.
The Congress rectified the errors committed in certain
    countries by Communists who were bent on turning to the
    “Left” and denied the need to work in bourgeois
    parliaments, reactionary trade unions, and wherever there are
    millions of workers who are still being duped by the capitalists
    and by their lackeys from among the workers, i.e., by members of
    the yellow Second International.
The Congress created a degree of unity and discipline among the
    world’s Communist parties such as has never before existed
    and will make it possible for the vanguard of the workers’
    revolution to march forward with giant strides to its great goal,
    the overthrow of the yoke of capital.
Thanks to the international conference of working women which
    was organised simultaneously, the Congress will strengthen ties
    with the communist women’s movement.
Communist parties and groups in the East, in the colonial and
    backward countries, which are so brutally robbed, oppressed and
    enslaved by the “civilised” league of predatory
    nations, were likewise represented at the Congress. The
    revolutionary movement in the advanced countries would in fact be
    nothing but a sheer fraud if, in their struggle against capital,
    the workers of Europe and America were not closely and completely
    united with the hundreds upon hundreds of millions of
    “colonial” slaves, who are oppressed by that
    capital.
Great are the military victories of the workers’ and
    peasants’ Soviet Republic over the landowners and the
    capitalists, over the Yudeniches, the Koichaks, and the Denikins,
    the Polish Whites and their accomplices-France, Britain, America
    and Japan.
But greater still is our victory over the minds and hearts of
    the masses of the workers, of all those who toil and are oppressed
    by capital-the victory of the communist ideas and communist
    organisations all over the world.
The revolution of the proletariat, the overthrow of the yoke of
    capitalism, .is on the march and shall come about in every country
    in the world.



Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 







==========

## 
    Reply to Mr. Segrue, Daily News Correspondent









Reply To Mr. Segrue, Daily News Correspondent



V. I. Lenin
Reply To Mr. Segrue,
Daily News Correspondent


Written: September 8, 1920 
First Published:Pravda No. 202 and Izvestia No. 202, September 12, 1920; Published according to
the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 273-274
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


With reference to your telegraphic inquiry of
    September 3, 1920,[1]  I would like to inform you that the
    attacks on Bolshevism on the part of the German
    Independents’ Right wing, by people like Dittmann, for
    instance, do not surprise me. In my speech at the Comintern
    Congress in Moscow, I showed that Crispien’s ideas are quite
    Kautskian. Kautskians like Crispien and Dittmann are, of course,
    dissatisfied with Bolshevism. It would be deplorable if such
    people were satisfied with us. It is quite natural that, in the
    decisive struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie,
    petty-bourgeois democrats like Dittmann, who is very similar to
    our Mensheviks, are often to be found on the side of the
    bourgeoisie. Dittmann is Indignant at the shootings, but it is
    natural that, in such cases, Mensheviks are shot at by
    revolutionary workers, which cannot be altogether to
    Dittmann’s liking. The Third, Communist International would
    not be worth much if it admitted into its ranks Dittmanns of the
    German, French or any other variety.
If, however, you consider that the reports by the French, the
    German and the British workers’ delegations have done more
    harm to Bolshevism than the entire antiBolshevik propaganda has
    done, I willingly accept the conclusion that logically
    follows.
Let the two of us reach an understanding-you on behalf of the
    anti-Bolshevik bourgeoisie of all countries, and I on behalf of
    the Russian Soviet Republic. Accordingly, let delegations
    consisting of workers and small peasants (i.e., of working people,
    those whose labour creates profit on capital) be sent to Russia
    from all countries, each delegation to stay here for about two
    months. If these delegations’ reports are useful to the
    cause of anti-Bolshevik propaganda, the entire cost of their visit
    shall be borne by the international bourgeoisie. However, as the
    bourgeoisie is very weak and poor in all countries in the world,
    while we in Russia are rich and strong, I agree to secure the
    consent of the Soviet Government to defray three-quarters of the
    expenses, a more quarter to be borne by the millionaires of all
    lands.
I hope that you, who in your telegram call yourself an honest
    journalist, will not refuse always and everywhere to publicise
    this understanding between the Soviet Republic and the
    international bourgeoisie—of course, in the interests of
    anti-Bolshevik propaganda.
Lenin

    

      September 8, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    The radio message of the correspondent of the London Daily
    News Mr. Segrue was published in Pravda No. 202,
    September 12, 1920, along with Lenin’s reply. In his
    message, Segrue pointed out that some socialists who had visited
    Soviet Russia had published anti-Soviet articles, and asked Lenin
    to comment on this.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

##  Speech Delivered
    at the Ninth All-Russia Conference of the Russian
  Communist Party








Speech Delivered At The Ninth All-Russia Conference Of The Russian Communist Party September 22, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at the
 Ninth All-Russia Conference of the Russian Communist
      Party
(Bolsheviks)[1]
September 22, 1920
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 22 September, 1920 
First Published: Pravda No. 216,September 29. 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 275-279
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The war against Poland, or, to be more precise, the
      July-August campaign, has radically changed the international
      political situation.
The Poles’ attack against us was preceded by an episode
      typical of the international relations existing at the
      time. When, in January, we offered Poland peace terms that were
      most favourable to her and most unfavourable to us, the
      diplomatists of all lands interpreted the fact in their own way:
      since the Bolsheviks were making such tremendous concessions,
      that should be taken to mean that they were very weak. This was
      merely more confirmation of bourgeois diplomacy’s
      inability to understand the methods employed by our new
      diplomacy, that of direct and frank declarations. That was why
      our proposals evoked merely an outburst of savage chauvinism in
      Poland, France and other countries, and prompted Poland to
      attack us. At first the Poles captured Kiev, but our
      forces’ counter-attack then brought them right up to
      Warsaw. Then came a turn in the events, and we fell back for
      over a hundred versts.
The undoubtedly difficult situation that resulted has not been
      a total loss to us. We have completely upset the
      diplomatists’ expectations to make use of our weakness and
      have proved that Poland cannot defeat us, whereas we have never
      been and are not far from victory over Poland. At present we
      still hold a hundred versts of captured territory. Finally, our
      advance on Warsaw has had such a powerful effect on Western
      Europe and on the entire world situation that it has profoundly
      changed the alignment of the struggling internal and external
      political forces.
Our army’s close approach to Warsaw has incontestably
      shown that the centre of world imperialism’s entire
      system, which rests on the Treaty of Versailles, lies somewhere
      very close to the Polish capital. Poland, the last
      anti-Bolshevik stronghold fully controlled by the Entente, is
      such an important element in that system that when the Red Army
      threatened that stronghold the entire structure was shaken. The
      Soviet Republic has become a major factor in world politics.
The new situation which has arisen has, in the first place,
      revealed the tremendously significant fact that the bourgeoisie
      of the Entente-oppressed countries is in the main for us, and
      these countries contain seventy per cent of the world’s
      population. We have already seen that the small states, which
      have had such a bad time under Entente tutelage (Estonia,
      Georgia, etc.), and have been hanging their Bolsheviks, have
      made peace with us, against the will of the Entente. This has
      been manifesting itself with special force throughout the
      world. All Germany began to seethe when our forces approached
      Warsaw. In that country a situation arose very much like that
      which could be seen in Russia in 1905, when the Black Hundreds
      aroused and involved in political life large and most backward
      sections of the peasantry, which were opposed to the Bolsheviks
      one day, and on the next were demanding all the land from the
      landed proprietors. In Germany too we have seen a similar
      unnatural bloc between the Black Hundreds and the
      Bolsheviks. There has appeared a strange type of Black-Hundred
      revolutionary, like the backward rustic youth from East Prussia
      who, as I read in a German non-Bolshevik newspaper the other
      day, says that the Kaiser will have to return because there is
      no order, but one has to follow the Bolsheviks.
 Our presence at the walls of Warsaw has had, as another
      consequence, a powerful effect on the revolutionary movement in
      Europe, particularly in Britain. Though we have not been able to
      affect the industrial proletariat of Poland

      beyond the Vistula and in Warsaw (this being one of the main
      reasons for our defeat), we have succeeded in influencing the
      British proletariat and in raising the movement there to an
      unprecedented level, to an absolutely new stage in the
      revolution. When the British Government presented an ultimatum
      to us, it transpired that it would first have to consult the
      British workers. The latter, nine-tenths of whose leaders are
      out-and-out Mensheviks, replied to the ultimatum by forming a
      Council of Action.[2]
Alarmed by these developments, the British press raised a
      hullabaloo about what it called.this “duality of
      government”. It had every reason to say so. Britain found
      herself at the same stage of political relationships as Russia
      after February 1917, when the Soviets were obliged to scrutinise
      every step taken by the bourgeois government. This Council of
      Action unites all workers, irrespective of party, just like our
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee of the period when Gotz,
      Dan and others were running things, a kind of association which
      runs parallel with the government, and in which the Mensheviks
      are forced to act in a semi-Bolshevik way. Just as our
      Mensheviks finally got confounded and helped win over the masses
      to our side, the Mensheviks in the Council of Action have been
      forced by the inexorable course of events to clear the way to
      the Bolshevist revolution for the worker masses of
      Britain. According to testimony by competent persons, the
      British Mensheviks already consider themselves a government, and
      are prepared to replace the bourgeois government in the near
      future. This will be the next step in the general process of the
      British proletarian revolution.
These tremendous changes in the British working-class movement
      are exerting a powerful influence on the world working-class
      movement, and first and foremost on the working-class movement in
      France.
Such are the results of our recent Polish campaign in its
      effect on world politics and the relations emerging in Western
      Europe.
We are now faced with the question of war or peace with
      Poland. We want to avoid a winter campaign that will be hard on
      us, and are again offering Poland a peace that is to her
      advantage and our disadvantage. However, the bourgeois
      diplomatists, following their old habit, may possibly interpret
      our frank statement as a sign of weakness. They have probably
      decided on a winter campaign. At this stage we have to ascertain
      the conditions in which we shall probably have to enter a new
      period of the war.
In Western Europe our defeat has brought about certain changes
      and rallied against us heterogeneous elements that are hostile to
      us. However, we have on more than one occasion seen even more
      powerful groups and currents hostile to us, which nevertheless
      could not achieve anything.
We have against us a bloc consisting of Poland, France and
    Wrangel. France pins her hopes on the latter. However, this bloc
    suffers from the same old malady-the antagonism among its
    elements, and the fear felt by the Polish petty bourgeoisie with
    regard to Black-Hundred Russia and to Wrangel, its typical
    representative. Petty-bourgeois and patriotic Poland, the Polish
    Socialist Party, the Ludowa Party, i.e., the well-to-do
    peasants-all of these want peace. Here is what spokesmen of these
    parties said to us in Minsk, “We know that it was not the
    Entente that saved Warsaw and Poland; it was unable to save us. It
    was the upsurge of patriotism, that saved us.” Such lessons
    are not to be forgotten. The Poles realise very clearly that this
    war will ruin them financially. War has to be paid for, and France
    upholds the “sanctity of private property”. The
    representatives of the petty-bourgeois parties are aware that
    Poland was on the eve of a crisis even before the war, and that a
    war will mean further ruination; that is why they prefer peace. We
    want to make use of this by offering peace to Poland.
Another factor of the utmost importance has appeared the change
    in the social composition of the Polish army. We defeated Kolchak
    and Denikin only after the social composition of their armies had
    changed, when their basic cadres were watered down in the mass of
    mobilised peasants. The same kind of process is under way in the
    Polish army, the government has been obliged to call up workers
    and peasants of the older age groups, who have gone through the
    even harsher imperialist war. This army is now made up, not of
    youngsters, who can easily be “brain-washed”, but of
    older men, who will not let themselves be talked over.

    Poland has passed the point which at first assured her total
    victory, and then total defeat.
If we have to wage a winter campaign, we shall win despite
    exhaustion and fatigue. There can be no doubt on that score. Our
    economic situation also vouches for that outcome. It has improved
    considerably. Compared with last year, we have acquired a firm
    economic basis. 11 11917-18 we gathered in 30 million
    poods of grain, in 1918-19- 110 million poods,
    and in 1919-20-260 million; next year  we expect to collect 400
    million poods. These are far  higher figures than those
    of the time when we struggled  desperately to make both ends
    meet. No longer shall we look with  such horror upon the
    multi-coloured banknotes that run into the thousands of millions,
    and today clearly show us  that they are the wreckage, the
    tatters, of the old bourgeois vestments.
We now have over a hundred million poods of oil. The
    Donets Basin now provides us with between twenty and thirty
    million poods of coal a month. The firewood situation has
    greatly improved. As recently as last year we had only firewood-no
    oil or coal.
All this gives us the right to say that, if we close our ranks
    and bend every effort, we shall win the victory.

Endnotes
[1]
    The Ninth All-Russia Conference of the R.C.P.(B.), held
    in Moscow from September 22 to September 25, 1920, was attended by
    241 delegates (110 with the right to vote and 125 with voice but
    no vote). Among the items on the agenda were: the political and
    organisational reports of the Central Committee; the immediate
    tasks of Party development; a report of the commission in charge
    of the Party history studies, and a report on the Second Congress
    of the Communist International. The Conference also heard a report
    from the Polish Communists’ delegate. Lenin opened the
    Conference, delivered the Central Committee’s political
    report, and took the floor during the debate on the immediate
    tasks of Party development. The political report dealt mainly with
    the two subjects-the question of war and peace with Poland, and
    the organisation of Wrangel’s defeat. The Conference passed
    a unani- mous resolution on the conditions of peace with Poland,
    and approved the statement by the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee on the specific peace terms drawn up on Lenin’s
    instructions and edited by Lenin. The resolution on “The
    Immediate Tasks of Party Development” provided for practical
    measures to extend inner-Party democracy, strengthen Party unity
    and discipline, combat red tape in government and economic bodies
    and improve the communist training of young Party members. The
    Conference deemed it necessary to set up a Control Commission, to
    be elected at Party congresses, and Party commissions under
    gubernia Party committees, to be elected at gubernia Party
    conferences. The Conference gave a rebuff to the “Democratic
    Centralism” group, who denied Party discipline and the
    Party’s guiding role in the Soviets and the trade
    unions.
[2]
    The Council of Action was set up at a joint conference of
    representatives from the Parliamentary Committee of the trade
    unions, the Labour Party Executive Committee and the Parliamentary
    Labour Party on August 9, 1920. Its aim was to prevent Britain
    making war on Russia. Besides the Central Council of Action in
    London, local councils of action were also set up. There were 150
    councils by the end of August, the figure doubling within the next
    month. The Communist Party was largely instrumental in getting
    councils organised. It called upon its members to extend Communist
    representation in the councils and to win key positions on the
    strike committees in order to “withstand any attempts by
    trade union and Labour leaders to frustrate the desires of the
    rank and file, by capitulating at the crucial moment” (The
    (Communist No. 2, London, August 12, 1920). 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 
    Letter to The German and the French Workers Regarding The Discussion
    On The Second Congress Of The Communist International










Letter To The German and the French Workers Regarding The Discussion On The Second Congress Of The Communist International



V. I. Lenin
Letter To
 The German and the French Workers
Regarding The Discussion On The Second Congress
      Of The Communist International[1]


Delivered: 25 September, 1920 
First Published: Pravda No. 213, September 25, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 280-282
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, the bourgeois press of Germany and France
    is devoting much attention to the discussion within the German
    Independent Social-Democratic Party and the Socialist Party of
    France on affiliation to the Communist International. It is
    vigorously supporting the views of the Right-wing opportunist
    sections in the two parties.
That can be readily understood, for these Right-wing elements
    are in essence petty-bourgeois democrats, who, like Dittmann and
    Crispien, cannot think in terms of revolution, and are incapable
    of helping the working class prepare for and carry out the
    revolution. A break with these Right-wing and opportunist elements
    is necessary; it is the only way to rally all the genuinely
    revolutionary and genuinely proletarian masses.
All the clamour about Moscow’s “dictates”,
    etc., is simply a red herring. As a matter of fact, only five of
    the twenty members of the Communist International’s
    Executive Committee belong to the Russian Communist Party. All
    this talk about “dictates”, etc., is either
    self-deception or deception of the workers. It serves to cover up
    the bankruptcy of certain opportunist leaders, just as similar
    talk in the K.A.P.D. (Communist Workers’ Party of
    Germany) has served to cover up the bankruptcy of several of its
    leaders, who have abandoned the path of proletarian
    revolutionism. The outcry that the “Moscow dictators”,
    making use of the terms of admission to the Communist
    international, are persecuting certain individuals is likewise
    self-deception or deception of others. Article 20 of the terms of
    admission says clearly in black and white that
    “exceptions” (Ausnahmen) to the strict rules
    in regard of Right-wing leaders and members of central bodies can
    be made with the consent of the Executive Committee of the
    Third International.
Since exceptions are expressly declared to be permissible,
    there can be no talk of an absolute bar against specific
    individuals. Consequently, there is full recognition of the need
    to take into account, not the past but the present, the change in
    the views and conduct of individuals, of individual leaders. Since
    exceptions are declared to be permissible with the consent of the
    Executive Committee of the Third International—in which
    Russians constitute only one-fourth of the membership—it
    follows that the clamour about “dictates”, etc., is
    stuff and nonsense, sheer falsehood.
All this clamour is simply a red herring. In fact, a struggle
    is going on between the revolutionary proletarian
    elements and the opportunist petty-bourgeois
    elements. Today as in the past, the latter include the
    Hilferdings, the Dittmauns, the Crispiens, numerous members of the
    parliamentary groups in Germany and France, etc. A struggle
    between these two political trends is in progress in
    every country without exception. This struggle has a long
    history. It grew extremely acute everywhere during the imperialist
    war, and has become aggravated since then. Opportunism is
    represented by elements of the “labour aristocracy”,
    the old bureaucracy in the trade unions, co-operative societies,
    etc., by the intellectualist petty-bourgeois strata, etc. Without
    the elimination of this trend—which, by its vacillation and
    its “Menshevism” (the Dittmanns and Crispiens fully
    resemble our Mensheviks) in fact exerts the bourgeoisie’s
    influence on the proletariat from within the
    working-class movement, from within the socialist
    parties—without the elimination of this trend, a break with
    it, and the expulsion of all its prominent representatives, it
    will be impossible to rally the revolutionary proletariat.
By their constant veering towards reformism and Menshevism, and
    their inability to think and act in terms of revolution, the
    Dittmanns, the Crispiens, etc., without realising the fact, are
    actually carrying bourgeois influence into the proletariat from
    within the proletarian party—they subordinate the
    proletariat to bourgeois reformism. Only a break with
    such and similar people can lead to international unity
    of the revolutionary proletariat, against the
    bourgeoisie, and for the overthrow of the bourgeoisie.
The events in Italy should open eyes most stubbornly closed to
    the harmfulness of “unity” and “peace”
    with the Crispiens and the Dittmanns. The Italian Crispiens and
    Dittmanns (Turati, Prampolini and D’Aragona) began at once
    to hinder the revolution in Italy as soon as things reached the
    stage of a real revolution. Throughout Europe and the world things
    are moving in that direction more or less rapidly, and more or
    less arduously and painfully.
It is high time to discard, once and for all, these most
    harmful illusions about the possibility of “unity” or
    “peace” with the Dittmanns and the Crispiens, with the
    Right wing of the German Independent Social-Democratic Party, the
    British Independent Labour Party, the French Socialist Party,
    etc. It is high time for all revolutionary workers to purge their
    parties of these trends, and form genuinely united Communist
    parties of the proletariat.
N. Lenin

    

      September 24, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    The letter was published in Die Rote Fahne, organ of the Communist
    Party of Germany, l’Humanite, organ of the
    Socialist Party of France and The Communist, organ of the
    Communist Party of Great Britain, in the period from September to
    November 1920, p. 280
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

##  Tasks of the
    Youth Leagues







The Tasks of the Youth Leagues



Vladimir Lenin's

      The Tasks of the Youth Leagues
    



Written: October 2, 1920
      
Source: Collected Works, Volume 31
      
First Published: Pravda Nos. 221, 222 and 223,
      October 5, 6 and 7, 1920

      
Online Version: marx.org in 1997, marxists.org
      1999

      
Transcribed: Colin S. Cavell

HTML Markup: Brian Baggins and David Walters




      Speech Delivered At The Third All-Russia Congress
      
      of The Russian Young Communist League [1]


(The Congress greets Lenin with a tremendous ovation.)

      Comrades, today I would
      like to talk on the fundamental tasks of the Young Communist
      League and, in this connection, on what the youth organisations
      in a socialist republic should be like in general.

    
It is all the more necessary to dwell on this question because
      in a certain sense it may be said that it is the youth that will
      be faced with the actual task of creating a communist
      society. For it is clear that the generation of working people
      brought up in capitalist society can, at best, accomplish the
      task of destroying the foundations of the old, the capitalist
      way of life, which was built on exploitation. At best it will be
      able to accomplish the tasks of creating a social system that
      will help the proletariat and the working classes retain power
      and lay a firm foundation, which can be built on only by a
      generation that is starting to work under the new conditions, in
      a situation in which relations based on the exploitation of man
      by man no longer exist.

    
And so, in dealing from this angle with the tasks confronting
      the youth, I must say that the tasks of the youth in general,
      and of the Young Communist Leagues and all other organisations
      in particular, might be summed up in a single word: learn.

    
Of course, this is only a "single word". It does not reply to
      the principal and most essential questions: what to learn, and
      how to learn? And the whole point here is that, with the
      transformation of the old, capitalist society, the upbringing,
      training and education of the new generations that will create
      the communist society cannot be conducted on the old lines. The
      teaching, training and education of the youth must proceed from
      the material that has been left to us by the old society.  We
      can build communism only on the basis of the totality of
      knowledge, organisations and institutions, only by using the
      stock of human forces and means that have been left to us by the
      old society. Only by radically remoulding the teaching,
      organisation and training of the youth shall we be able to
      ensure that the efforts of the younger generation will result in
      the creation of a society that will be unlike the old society,
      i.e., in the creation of a communist society. That is why we
      must deal in detail with the question of what we should teach
      the youth and how the youth should learn if it really wants to
      justify the name of communist youth, and how it should be
      trained so as to be able to complete and consummate what we have
      started.

    
I must say that the first and most natural reply would
      seem to be that the Youth League, and the youth in general, who want to
      advance to communism, should learn communism.

    
But this reply -- "learn communism" -- is too general.  What do
      we need in order to learn communism? What must be singled out
      from the sum of general knowledge so as to acquire a knowledge
      of communism?  Here a number of dangers arise, which very often
      manifest themselves whenever the task of learning communism is
      presented incorrectly, or when it is interpreted in too
      one-sided a manner.

    
Naturally, the first thought that enters one's mind is that
      learning communism means assimilating the sum of knowledge that
      is contained in communist manuals, pamphlets and books. But such
      a definition of the study of communism would be too crude and
      inadequate. If the study of communism consisted solely in
      assimilating what is contained in communist books and pamphlets,
      we might all too easily obtain communist text-jugglers or
      braggarts, and this would very often do us harm, because such
      people, after learning by rote what is set forth in communist
      books and pamphlets, would prove incapable of combining the
      various branches of knowledge, and would be unable to act in the
      way communism really demands.

    
One of the greatest evils and misfortunes left to us by the
      old, capitalist society is the complete rift between books and
      practical life; we have had books explaining everything in the
      best possible manner, yet in most cases these books contained
      the most pernicious and hypocritical lies, a false description
      of capitalist society.

    
That is why it would be most mistaken merely to assimilate book
      knowledge about communism. No longer do our speeches and
      articles merely reiterate what used to be said about communism,
      because our speeches and articles are connected with our daily
      work in all fields. Without work and without struggle, book
      knowledge of communism obtained from communist pamphlets and
      works is absolutely worthless, for it would continue the old
      separation of theory and practice, the old rift which was the
      most pernicious feature of the old, bourgeois society.

    
It would be still more dangerous to set about assimilating only
      communist slogans. Had we not realised this danger in time, and
      had we not directed all our efforts to averting this danger, the
      half million or million young men and women who would have
      called themselves Communists after studying communism in this
      way would only greatly prejudice the cause of communism.

    
The question arises: how is all this to be blended for the
      study of communism? What must we take from the old schools, from
      the old kind of science? It was the declared aim of the old type
      of school to produce men with an all-round education, to teach
      the sciences in general.  We know that this was utterly false,
      since the whole of society was based and maintained on the
      division of people into classes, into exploiters and
      oppressed. Since they were thoroughly imbued with the class
      spirit, the old schools naturally gave knowledge only to the
      children of the bourgeoisie.  Every word was falsified in the
      interests of the bourgeoisie. In these schools the younger
      generation of workers and peasants were not so much educated as
      drilled in the interests of that bourgeoisie. They were trained
      in such a way as to be useful servants of the bourgeoisie, able
      to create profits for it without disturbing its peace and
      leisure. That is why, while rejecting the old type of schools,
      we have made it our task to take from it only what we require
      for genuine communist education.

    
This brings me to the reproaches and accusations which we
      constantly hear levelled at the old schools, and which often
      lead to wholly wrong conclusions. It is said that the old school
      was a school of purely book knowledge, of ceaseless drilling and
      grinding. That is true, but we must distinguish between what was
      bad in the old schools and what is useful to us, and we must be
      able to select from it what is necessary for communism.

    
The old schools provided purely book knowledge; they compelled
      their pupils to assimilate a mass of useless, superfluous and
      barren knowledge, which cluttered up the brain and turned the
      younger generation into bureaucrats regimented according to a
      single pattern. But it would mean falling into a grave error for
      you to try to draw the conclusion that one can become a
      Communist without assimilating the wealth of knowledge amassed
      by mankind.  It would be mistaken to think it sufficient to
      learn communist slogans and the conclusions of communist
      science, without acquiring that sum of knowledge of which
      communism itself is a result. Marxism is an example which shows
      how communism arose out of the sum of human knowledge.

    
You have read and heard that communist theory -- the science of
      communism created in the main by Marx, this doctrine of Marxism
      -- has ceased to be the work of a single socialist of the
      nineteenth century, even though he was a genius, and that it has
      become the doctrine of millions and tens of millions of
      proletarians all over the world, who are applying it in their
      struggle against capitalism. If you were to ask why the
      teachings of Marx have been able to win the hearts and minds of
      millions and tens of millions of the most revolutionary class,
      you would receive only one answer: it was because Marx based his
      work on the firm foundation of the human knowledge acquired
      under capitalism. After making a study of the laws governing the
      development of human society, Marx realised the inevitability of
      capitalism developing towards communism. What is most important
      is that he proved this on the sole basis of a most precise,
      detailed and profound study of this capitalist society, by fully
      assimilating all that earlier science had produced. He
      critically reshaped everything that had been created by human
      society, without ignoring a single detail. He reconsidered,
      subjected to criticism, and verified on the working-class
      movement everything that human thinking had created, and
      therefrom formulated conclusions which people hemmed in by
      bourgeois limitations or bound by bourgeois prejudices could not
      draw.

    

We must bear this in mind when, for
      example, we talk about proletarian culture.[2] We shall be unable to solve this problem
      unless we clearly realise that only a precise knowledge and
    transformation of the culture created by the entire development of
    mankind will enable us to create a proletarian culture. The latter
    is not clutched out of thin air; it is not an invention of those
    who call themselves experts in proletarian culture. That is all
    nonsense. Proletarian culture must be the logical development of
    the store of knowledge mankind has accumulated under the yoke of
    capitalist, landowner and bureaucratic society. All these roads
    have been leading, and will continue to lead up to proletarian
    culture, in the same way as political economy, as reshaped by
    Marx, has shown us what human society must arrive at, shown us the
    passage to the class struggle, to the beginning of the proletarian
    revolution.

    
When we so often hear representatives of the youth, as well as
      certain advocates of a new system of education, attacking the
      old schools, claiming that they used the system of cramming, we
      say to them that we must take what was good in the old
      schools. We must not borrow the system of encumbering young
      people's minds with an immense acount of knowledge, nine-tenths
      of which was useless and one-tenth distorted. This, however,
      does not mean that we can restrict ourselves to communist
      conclusions and learn only communist slogans. You will not
      create communism that way.  You can become a Communist only when
      you enrich your mind with a knowledge of all the treasures
      created by mankind.

    
We have no need of cramming, but we do need to develop and
      perfect the mind of every student with a knowledge of
      fundamental facts.  Communism will become an empty word, a mere
      signboard, and a Communist a mere boaster, if all the knowledge
      he has acquired is not digested in his mind. You should not
      merely assimilate this knowledge, but assimilate it critically,
      so as not to cram your mind with useless lumber, but enrich it
      with all those facts that are indispensable to the well-educated
      man of today. If a Communist took it into his head to boast
      about his communism becaused of the cut-and-dried conclusions he
      had acquired, without putting in a great deal of serious and
      hard work and without understanding facts he should examine
      critically, he would be a deplorable Communist indeed.  Such
      superficiality would be decidedly fatal. If I know that I know
      little, I shall strive to learn more; but if a man says that he
      is a Communist and that he need not know anything thoroughly, he
      will never become anything like a Communist.

    
The old schools produced servants needed by the capitalists;
      the old schools turned men of science into men who had to write
      and say whatever pleased the capitalists. We must therefore
      abolish them. But does the fact that we must abolish them,
      destroy them, mean that we should not take from them everything
      mankind has accumulated that is essential to man? Does it mean
      that we do not have to distinguish between what was necessary to
      capitalism and what is necessary to communism?

    
We are replacing the old drill-sergeant methods practised in
      bourgeois society, against the will of the majority, with the
      class-conscious discipline of the workers and peasants, who
      combine hatred of the old society with a determination, ability
      and readiness to unite and organise their forces for this
      struggle so as to forge the wills of millions and hundreds of
      millions of people -- disunited, and scattered over the
      territory of a huge country -- into a single will, without which
      defeat is inevitable.  Without this solidarity, without this
      conscious descipline of the workers and peasants, our cause is
      hopeless. Without this, we shall be unable to vanquish the
      capitalists and landowners of the whole world. We shall not even
      consolidate the foundation, let alone build a new, communist
      society on that foundation. Likewise, while condemning the old
      schools, while harbouring an absolutely justified and necessary
      hatred for the old schools, and appreciating the readiness to
      destroy them, we must realise that we must replace the old
      system of instruction, the old cramming and the old drill, with
      an ability to acquire the sum total of human knowledge, and to
      acquire it in such a way that communism shall not be something
      to be learned by rote, but something that you yourselves have
      thought over, something that will embody conclusions inevitable
      from the standpoint of present-day education.

    
That is the way the main tasks should be presented when
      we speak of the aim: learn communism.

    
I shall take a practical example to make this clear to you, and
      to demonstrate the approach to the problem of how you must
      learn.  You all know that, following the military problems,
      those of defending the republic, we are now confronted with
      economic tasks. Communist society, as we know, cannot be built
      unless we restore industry and agriculture, and that, not in the
      old way. They must be re-established on a modern basis, in
      accordance with the last word in science. You know that
      electricity is that basis, and that only after electrification
      of the entire country, of all branches of industry and
      agriculture, only when you have achieved that aim, will you be
      able to build for youselves the communist society which the
      older generation will not be able to build. Confronting you is
      the task of economically reviving the whole country, of
      reorganising and restoring both agriculture and industry on
      modern technical lines, based on modern science and technology,
      on electricity. You realise perfectly well that illiterate
      people cannot tackle electrification, and that elementary
      literacy is not enough either. It is insufficient to understand
      what electricity is; what is needed is the knowledge of how to
      apply it technically in industry and agriculture, and in the
      individual branches of industry and agriculture.  This has to be
      learnt for oneself, and it must be taught to the entire rising
      generation of working people. That is the task confronting every
      class-conscious Communist, every young person who regards
      himself a Communist and who clearly understands that, by joining
      the Young Communist League, he has pledged himself to help the
      Party build communism and to help the whole younger generation
      create a communist society. He must realise that he can create
      it only on the basis of modern education, and if he does not
      acquire this education communism will remain merely a pious
      wish.

    
It was the task of the older generation to overthrow the
      bourgeoisie. The main task then was to criticise the
      bourgeoisie, arouse hatred of the bourgeoisie among the masses,
      and foster class-consciousness and the ability to unite their
      forces. The new generation is confronted with a far more complex
      task. Your duty does not lie only in assembling your forces so
      as to uphold the workers' and peasants' government against an
      invasion instigated by the capitalists. Of course, you must do
      that; that is something you clearly realise, and is distinctly
      seen by the Communist.  However, that is not enough. You have to
      build up a communist society.  In many respects half of the work
      has been done. The old order has been destroyed, just as it
      deserved, it has been turned into a heap of ruins, just as it
      deserved. The ground has been cleared, and on this ground the
      younger communist generation must build a communist society. You
      are faced with the task of construction, and you can accomplish
      that task only by assimilating all modern knowledge, only if you
      are able to transform communism from cut-and-dried and memorised
      formulas, counsels, recipes, prescriptions and programmes into
      that living reality which gives unity to your immediate work,
      and only if you are able to make communism a guide in all your
      practical work.

    
That is the task you should pursue in educating, training and
      rousing the entire younger generation. You must be foremost
      among the millions of builders of a communist society in whose
      ranks every young man and young woman should be. You will not
      build a communist society unless you enlist the mass of young
      workers and peasants in the work of building communism.

    
This naturally brings me to the question of how we should
      teach communism and what the specific features of our methods should be.

    
I first of all shall deal here with the question of communist
      ethics.

    
You must train yourselves to be Communists. It is the task of
      the Youth League to organize its practical activities in such a
      way that, by learning, organising, uniting and fighting, its
      members shall train both themselves and all those who look to it
      for leadership; it should train Communists. The entire purpose
      of training, educating and teaching the youth of today should be
      to imbue them with communist ethics.

    
But is there such a thing as communist ethics? Is there such a
      thing as communist morality? Of course, there is. It is often
      suggested that we have no ethics of our own; very often the
      bourgeoisie accuse us Communists of rejecting all morality. This
      is a method of confusing the issue, of throwing dust in the eyes
      of the workers and peasants.

    
In what sense do we reject ethics, reject morality?

    
In the sense given to it by the bourgeoisie, who based ethics
      on God's commandments. On this point we, of course, say that we
      do not believe in God, and that we know perfectly well that the
      clergy, the landowners and the bourgeoisie invoked the name of
      God so as to further their own interests as exploiters. Or,
      instead of basing ethics on the commandments of morality, on the
      commandments of God, they based it on idealist or semi-idealist
      phrases, which always amounted to something very similar to
      God's commandments.

    
We reject any morality based on extra-human and extra-class
      concepts. We say that this is deception, dupery, stultification of the
      workers and peasants in the interests of the landowners and capitalists.

    
We say that our morality is entirely subordinated to the
      interests of the proletariat's class struggle. Our morality stems from
      the interests of the class struggle of the proletariat.

    
The old society was based on the oppression of all the workers
      and peasants by the landowners and capitalists. We had to
      destroy all that, and overthrow them but to do that we had to
      create unity. That is something that God cannot create.

    
This unity could be provided only by the factories, only by a
      proletariat trained and roused from its long slumber. Only when
      that class was formed did a mass movement arise which has led to
      what we have now -- the victory of the proletarian revolution in
      one of the weakest of countries, which for three years has been
      repelling the onslaught of the bourgeoisie of the whole
      world. We can see how the proletarian revolution is developing
      all over the world. On the basis of experience, we now say that
      only the proletariat could have created the solid force which
      the disunited and scattered peasantry are following and which
      has withstood all onslaughts by the exploiters. Only this class
      can help the working masses unite, rally their ranks and
      conclusively defend, conclusively consolidate and conclusively
      build up a communist society.

    
That is why we say that to us there is no such thing as
      a morality that stands outside human society; that is a fraud. To us morality
      is subordinated to the interests of the proletariat's class struggle.

    
What does that class struggle consist in? It consists
      in overthrowing the tsar, overthrowing the capitalists, and abolishing
      the capitalist class.

    
What are classes in general? Classes are that which permits one
      section of society to appropriate the labour of another
      section. If one section of society appropriates all the land, we
      have a landowner class and a peasant class. If one section of
      society owns the factories, shares and capital, while another
      section works in these factories, we have a capitalist class and
      a proletarian class.

    
It was not difficult to drive out the tsar -- that required
      only a few days. It was not very difficult to drive out the
      landowners -- that was done in a few months. Nor was it very
      difficult to drive out the capitalists. But it is incomparably
      more difficult to abolish classes; we still have the division
      into workers and peasants. If the peasant is installed on his
      plot of land and appropriates his surplus grain, that is, grain
      that he does not need for himself or for his cattle, while the
      rest of the people have to go without bread, then the peasant
      becomes an exploiter. The more grain he clings to, the more
      profitable he finds it; as for the rest, let them starve: "The
      more they starve, the dearer I can sell this grain." All should
      work according to a single common plan, on common land, in
      common factories and in accordance with a common system.  Is
      that easy to attain? You see that it is not as easy as driving
      out the tsar, the landowners and the capitalists. What is
      required is that the proletariat re-educate a section of the
      peasantry; it must win over the working peasants in order to
      crush the resistance of those peasants who are rich and are
      profiting from the poverty and want of the rest. Hence the task
      of the proletarian struggle is not quite completed after we have
      overthrown the tsar and driven out the landowners and
      capitalists; to accomplish that is the task of the system we
      call the dictatorship of the proletariat.

    
The class struggle is continuing; it has merely changed its
      forms. It is the class struggle of the proletariat to prevent
      the return of the old exploiters, to unite in a single union the
      scattered masses of unenlightened peasants. The class struggle
      is continuing and it is our task to subordinate all interests to
      that struggle. Our communist morality is also subordinated to
      that task. We say: morality is what serves to destroy the old
      exploiting society and to unite all the working people around
      the proletariat, which is building up a new, communist society.

    
Communist morality is that which serves this struggle and
      unites the working people against all exploitation, against all
      petty private property; for petty property puts into the hands
      of one person that which has been created by the labour of the
      whole of society. In our country the land is common property.

    
But suppose I take a piece of this common property and grow on
      it twice as much grain as I need, and profiteer on the surplus?
      Suppose I argue that the more starving people there are, the
      more they will pay? Would I then be behaving like a Communist?
      No, I would be behaving like an exploiter, like a
      proprietor. That must be combated. If that is allowed to go on,
      things will revert to the rule of the capitalists, to the rule
      of the bourgeoisie, as has more than once happened in previous
      revolutions. To prevent the restoration of the rule of the
      capitalists and the bourgeoisie, we must not allow profiteering;
      we must not allow individuals to enrich themselves at the
      expense of the rest; the working people must unite with the
      proletariat and form a communist society. This is the principal
      feature of the fundamental task of the League and the
      organisation of the communist youth.

    
Th old society was based on the principle: rob or be robbed;
      work for others or make others work for you; be a slave-owner or
      a slave.  Naturally, people brought up in such a society
      assimilate with their mother's milk, one might say, the
      psychology, the habit, the concept which says: you are either a
      slave-owner or a slave, or else, a small owner, a petty
      employee, a petty official, or an intellectual -- in short, a
      man who is concerned only with himself, and does not care a rap
      for anybody else.

    
If I work this plot of land, I do not care a rap for anybody
      else; if others starve, all the better, I shall get the more for
      my grain.  If I have a job as a doctor, engineer, teacher, or
      clerk, I do not care a rap for anybody else. If I toady to and
      please the powers that be, I may be able to keep my job, and
      even get on in life and become a bourgeois.  A Communist cannot
      harbour such a psychology and such sentiments. When the workers
      and peasants proved that they were able, by their own efforts,
      to defend themselves and create a new society -- that was the
      beginning of the new and communist education, education in the
      struggle against the exploiters, education in alliance with the
      proletariat against the self-seekers and petty proprietors,
      against the psychology and habits which say: I seek my own
      profit and don't care a rap for anything else.

    
That is the reply to the question of how the young and
      rising generation should learn communism.

    
It can learn communism only by linking up every step in its
      studies, training and education with the continuous struggle the
      proletarians and the working people are waging against the old
      society of exploiters.  When people tell us about morality, we
      say: to a Communist all morality lies in this united discipline
      and conscious mass struggle against the exploiters. We do not
      believe in an eternal morality, and we expose the falseness of
      all the fables about morality. Morality serves the purpose of
      helping human society rise to a higher level and rid itself of
      the exploitation of labour.

    
To achieve this we need that generation of young people who
      began to reach political maturity in the midst of a disciplined
      and desperate struggle against the bourgeoisie. In this struggle
      that generation is training genuine Communists; it must
      subordinate to this struggle, and link up with it, each step in
      its studies, education and training. The education of the
      communist youth must consist, not in giving them suave talks and
      moral precepts. This is not what education consists in. When
      people have seen the way in which their fathers and mothers
      lived under the yoke of the landowners and capitalists; when
      they have themselves experienced the sufferings of those who
      began the struggle against the exploiters; when they have seen
      the sacrifices made to keep what has been won, and seen what
      deadly enemies the landowners and capitalists are -- they are
      taught by these conditions to become Communists. Communist
      morality is based on the struggle for the consolidation and
      completion of communism.  That is also the basis of communist
      training, education, and teaching.  That is the reply to the
      question of how communism should be learnt.

    
We could not believe in teaching, training and education if
      they were restricted only to the schoolroom and divorced from
      the ferment of life. As long as the workers and peasants are
      oppressed by the landowners and capitalists, and as long as the
      schools are controlled by the landowners and capitalists, the
      young generation will remain blind and ignorant. Our schools
      must provide the youth with the fundamentals of knowledge, the
      ability to evolve communist views independently; they must make
      educated people of the youth. While they are attending school,
      they must learn to become participants in the struggle for
      emancipation from the exploiters.  The Young Communist League
      will justify its name as the League of the young communist
      generation only when every step in its teaching, training and
      education is linked up with participation in the common struggle
      of all working people against the exploiters. You are well aware
      that, as long as Russia remains the only workers' republic and
      the old, bourgeois system exists in the rest of the world, we
      shall be weaker than they are, and be constantly threatened with
      a new attack; and that only if we learn to be solidly united
      shall we win in the further struggle and -- having gained
      strength -- become really invincible. Thus, to be a Communist
      means that you must organise and unite the entire young
      generation and set an example of training and discipline in this
      struggle. Then you will be able to start building the edifice of
      communist society and bring it to completion.

    
To make this clearer to you, I shall quote an example.  We call
      ourselves Communists. What is a Communist? Communist is a Latin
      word. Communis is the Latin for "common". Communist
      society is a society in which all things -- the land, the
      factories -- are owned in common and the people work in
      common. That is communism.

    
Is it possible to work in common if each one works separately
      on his own plot of land? Work in common cannot be brought about
      all at once. That is impossible. It does not drop from the
      skies. It comes through toil and suffering; it is created in the
      course of struggle. The old books are of no use here; no one
      will believe them. One's own experience of life is neeeded. When
      Kolchak and Denikin were advancing from Siberia and the South,
      the peasants were on their side. They did not like Bolshevism
      because the Bolsheviks took their grain at a fixed price. But
      when the peasants in Siberia and the Ukraine experienced the
      rule of Kolchak and Denikin, they realised that they had only
      one alternative: either to go to the capitalists, who would at
      once hand them over into slavery under the landowners; or to
      follow the workers, who, it is true, did not promise a land
      flowing with milk and honey, and demanded iron discipline and
      firmness in an arduous struggle, but would lead them out of
      enslavement by the capitalists and landowners. When even the
      ignorant peasant saw and realised this from their own
      experience, they became conscious adherents of communism, who
      had gone through a severe school. It is such experience that
      must form the basis of all the activities of the Young Communist
      League.

    
I have replied to the questions of what we must learn, what we
      must take from the old schools and from the old science. I shall
      now try to answer the question of how this must be learnt. The
      answer is: only by inseparably linking each step in the
      activities of the schools, each step in training, education and
      teaching, with the struggle of all the working people against
      the exploiters.

    
I shall quote a few examples from the experience of the work of
      some of the youth organisations so as to illustrate how this
      training in communism should proceed. Everybody is talking about
      abolishing illiteracy.  You know that a communist society cannot
      be built in an illiterate country.  It is not enough for the
      Soviet government to issue an order, or for the Party to issue a
      particular slogan, or to assign a certain number of the best
      workers to this task. The young generation itself must take up
      this work. Communism means that the youth, the young men and
      women who belong to the Youth League, should say: this is our
      job; we shall unite and go into the rural districts to abolish
      illiteracy, so that there shall be no illiterates among our
      young people. We are trying to get the rising generation to
      devote their activities to this work. You know that we cannot
      rapidly transform an ignorant and illiterate Russia into a
      literate country.  But if the Youth League sets to work on the
      job, and if all young people work for the benefit of all, the
      League, with a membership of 400,000 young men and women, will
      be entitled to call itself a Young Communist League.  It is also
      a task of the League, not only to acquire knowledge itself, but
      to help those young people who are unable to extricate
      themselves by their own efforts from the toils of
      illiteracy. Being a member of the Youth League means devoting
      one's labour and efforts to the common cause. That is what a
      communist education means. Only in the course of such work do
      young men and women become real Communists. Only if they achieve
      practical results in this work will they become Communists.

    
Take, for example, work in the suburban vegetable gardens.  Is
      that not a real job of work? It is one of the tasks of the Young
      Communist League. People are starving; there is hunger in the
      factories. To save ourselves from starvation, vegetable gardens
      must be developed. But farming is being carried on in the old
      way. Therefore, more class-conscious elements should engage in
      this work, and then you will find that the number of vegetable
      gardens will increase, their acreage will grow, and the results
      will improve.  The Young Communist League must take an active
      part in this work. Every League and League branch should regard
      this as its duty.

    
The Young Communist League must be a shock force, helping in
      every job and displaying initiative and enterprise. The League
      should be an organisation enabling any worker to see that it
      consists of people whose teachings he perhaps does not
      understand, and whose teachings he may not immediately believe,
      but from whose practical work and activity he can see that they
      are really people who are showing him the right road.

    
If the Young Communist League fails to organise its work in
      this way in all fields, it will mean that it is reverting to the
      old bourgeois path. We must combine our education with the
      struggle of the working people against the exploiters, so as to
      help the former accomplish the tasks set by the teachings of
      communism.

    
The members of the League should use every spare hour to
      improve the vegetable gardens, or to organise the education of
      young people at some factory, and so on. We want to transform
      Russia from a poverty-stricken and wretched country into one
      that is wealthy. The Young Communist League must combine its
      education, learning and training with the labour of the workers
      and peasants, so as not to confine itself to schools or to
      reading communist books and pamphlets. Only by working side by
      side with the workers and peasants can one become a genuine
      Communist. It has to be generally realised that all members of
      the Youth League are literate poeple and at the same time are
      keen at their jobs. When everyone sees that we have ousted the
      old drill-ground methods from the old schools and have replaced
      them with conscious discipline, that all young men and women
      take part in subbotniks, and utilise every suburban farm to help
      the population -- people will cease to regard labour in the old
      way.

    
It is the taks of the Young Communist League to organise
      assistance everywhere, in village or city block, in such matters
      as -- and I shall take a small example -- public hygiene or the
      distribution of food. How was this done in the old, capitalist
      society? Everybody worked only for himself and nobody cared a
      straw for the aged and the sick, or whether housework was the
      concern only of the women, who, in consequence, were in a
      condition of oppression and servitude. Whose business is it to
      combat this? It is the business of the Youth Leagues, which must
      say: we shall change all this; we shall organise detachments of
      young people who will help to assure public hygiene or
      distribute food, who will conduct systematic house-to-house
      inspections, and work in an organised way for the benefit of the
      whole of society, distributing their forces properly and
      demonstrating that labour must be organised.

    
The generation of people who are now at the age of fifty cannot
      expect to see a communist society. This generation will be gone
      before then. But the generation of those who are now fifteen
      will see a communist society, and will itself build this
      society. This generation should know that the entire purpose of
      their lives is to build a communist society. In the old society,
      each family worked separtely and labour was not organised by
      anybody except the landowners and capitalists, who oppressed the
      masses of the people. We must organise all labour, no matter how
      toilsome or messy it may be, in such a way that every worker and
      peasant will be able to say: I am part of the great army of free
      labour, and shall be able to build up my life without the
      landowners and capitalists, able to help establish a communist
      system. The Young Communist League should teach all young people
      to engage in conscious and disciplined labour from an early
      age. In this way we can be confident that the problems now
      confronting us will be solved. We must assume that no less than
      ten years will be required for the electrification of the
      country, so that our impoverished land may profit from the
      latest achievements of technology. And so, the generation of
      those who are now fifteen years old, and will be living in a
      communist society in ten or twenty years' time, should tackle
      all its educational tasks in such a way that every day, in every
      village and city, the young people shall engage in the practical
      solution of some problem of labour in common, even though the
      smallest or the simplest. The success of communist construction
      will be assured when this is done in every village, as communist
      emulation develops, and the youth prove that they can unite
      their labour.  Only by regarding our every step from the
      standpoint of the success of that construction, and only by
      asking ourselves whether we have done all we can to be united
      and politically-conscious working people will the Young
      Communist League succeed in uniting its half a million members
      into a single army of labour and win universal respect. (Stormy
      applause.)

    


Footnotes


[1] The Third
      All-Russia Congress of the Russian Young Communist League took
      place in Moscow between October 2 and 10, and was attended by
      some 600 delegates. Lenin addressed the Congress at the first
      session in the evening of October 2. For more information read
      an abstract of this document.
    


[2] Lenin is
      referring to Proletcult, a cultural and educational
      organisation which arose in September 1917 as an independent
      workers' organisation. After the October Revolution Proletcult,
      whose leadership fell into the hands of Bogdanov and his
      supporters, continued to insist on independence, thus setting
      itself in opposition to the proletarian state. This led to the
      infiltration of bourgeois intellectuals, who began to exert a
      decisive influence on Proletcult. Its members actually denied
      the cultural legacy of the past, neglected cultural and
      educational work among the masses, isolated themselves from life
      and aimed at setting up a special "proletarian
      culture". Bogdanov, the chief Proletcult ideologist, paid lip
      service to Marxism, but actually preached subjective idealism,
      Machism. Besides bourgeois intellectuals who held leading
      positions in many organisations, Proletcult also included young
      workers who sincerely wished to promote cultural development in
      the Soviet state. Proletcult organisations had their heyday in
      1919. In the early 1920s they began to decline, ceasing to exist
      in 1932.
    


Abstract of this document


Lenin Works Archive








==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at a Congress Of Leather Industry
    Workers










Speech Delivered at a Congress Of Leather Industry Workers October 2, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at a Congress
Of Leather Industry Workers
October 2, 1920[1][96]


Delivered: 30 May, 1920 
First Published: Pravda No, 225 and 226, October 9 and 10, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 300-313
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, in compliance with the wish expressed by the organisers of your congress, the political position of our Republic will be the subject of my report. In this respect, the chief thing I have to deal with is undoubtedly our war with Poland, the general course of events in connection with that war, and what has consequently become revealed concerning the domestic and international position of our Republic.
You are all, of course, aware of the present gravity of our position at the front. In this connection it will be natural if we examine the circumstances that have made the situation so acute, and given it such a turn for the worse. You will of course remember that last April, when the Polish offensive had not yet begun, the line of the front lay farther eastward, in many places very much farther eastward, than at present. As it then was, the line left Minsk in Polish hands; the Poles held the whole of Byelorussia. Not only the Council of People’s Commissars, but the Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee itself&38212;the highest body in the R.S.F.S.R.—solemnly declared in a manifesto to the Polish people that they proposed peace, and rejected the idea of deciding by force of arms the fate of Byelorussia, which had never been Polish, and whose peasant population had long suffered from the Polish land owners and did not regard themselves as Poles. Nevertheless, we declared in the most official and solemn terms that we proposed peace on the basis of the then existing line, since we set so high a value on the workers who would have to lay down their lives in case of war that we considered no concessions too important by comparison. We presumed that the question of Byelorussia would be settled, not by force of arms, but exclusively through the development of the struggle within Poland. We knew that we could contribute to the liberation of Poland’s toilers, not so much by the force of arms as through the force of our propaganda.
That was last April, and you know that at first Poland replied
 to our solemn offer of peace with a manoeuvre, a proposal that
 peace should be signed in Borisov, a highly important strategic
 point, which was in their hands. Negotiations in Polish-held
 Borisov would have meant that the Poles could advance in the
 south-west while we would have been prevented from advancing in
 the north-west. Any other city but Borisov, was our reply. The
 Poles refused. I remind you of this so that, whenever you have to
 speak on this subject, you may the more emphatically stress the
 point that at first we proposed peace on the basis of a line lying
 farther eastward than the present one, that is, we agreed to a
 peace which was most disadvantageous to ourselves.
The Poles have forced the war on us; we know that it was not
 even the Polish landowners or the Polish capitalists that have
 played the chief role here, since Poland’s position was as
 desperate then as it is now. She has embarked on this venture in
 sheer desperation. But, of course, international capital, and in
 the first place French capital, was the chief force driving the
 Poles into a war with us. It has so far been established that
 hundreds of French officers have been serving with the Polish
 army, and that all the weapons, all the financial and military
 support Poland has received, have come from France.
Such are the conditions in which this war began. It marked a
 new attempt by the Allies to destroy the Soviet Republic, an
 attempt, following the collapse of the Yudenich plan, to crush the
 Soviet Republic, this time with the help of Poland. You are
 acquainted with the main events in this war with Poland, which
 began against our wish. You know that at first the Poles were
 successful, and captured Kiev in the south-west. Then there was a
 fairly long interval in which the Red Army was able to concentrate
 its forces and to start an offensive, whereupon the Poles began to
 lose one point after another. They lost Polotsk, and so on. But it
 was not until July that the Red Army began a decisive offensive,
 which proved so successful that we effected an advance almost
 unparalleled in military history. The Red Army advanced 500, 600,
 and in many cases even 800 versts without a stop, and almost
 reached Warsaw. Warsaw was considered practically lost to
 Poland. That, at least, was the opinion of the world press. Then
 the tide turned. By the time our troops had got within reach of
 Warsaw they were too exhausted to press home the victory, whereas
 the Polish troops supported by a wave of patriotism in Warsaw, and
 with a feeling that they were now on their own soil, found
 encouragement and a fresh opportunity to advance. The war, as it
 turned out, had enabled us almost to rout Poland completely, but
 at the decisive moment our strength failed us.
I could speak of this at greater length, but, in keeping with
 the topic of my report, I must dwell on the political situation
 that had developed at the time. We have seen that when, before the
 April offensive, we proposed peace to the Polish Republic on terms
 that were most advantageous to the Poles and disadvantageous to
 us, the bourgeois press all over the world raised a hullabaloo,
 and our outspoken declaration was taken as a sign of weakness. If
 the Bolsheviks were proposing peace on the basis of the line then
 held by the Polish troops, and if the Bolsheviks were even
 surrendering Minsk, then they must surely be weak. On the outbreak
 of the war, even the British monarch sent a message of
 congratulations to the head of the Polish landowner
 government.
On July 12, as you very likely remember, we suddenly received a
 telegram from the Secretary of the League of Nations to the effect
 that the Polish Government were willing to start negotiations for
 peace on the basis of ethnographic boundaries, and provided the
 whole of Galicia were given to Poland. An unparalleled uproar was
 raised in the world press. This time they were all for peace. When
 we proposed peace in April, or even earlier, in the spring of
 1920, all these newspapers were silent, or else urged Poland to
 fight. But when we had defeated Poland and it was Poland that was
 asking for peace-to which we replied by clearly and frankly
 stating our opinion that the League of Nations did not represent
 any force and that we could not rely on any promise it made-they
 all raised a hullabaloo and demanded that w’e should call a
 halt. Now that the fortunes of war have changed, and we announced
 yesterday that we were offering Poland peace on terms more
 favourable than the League of Nations had proposed, on condition
 peace was signed before October 5, the whole bourgeois press has
 again fallen silent. They are silent about peace when the
 Bolshevik’s are attacked, but raise an outcry when it is the
 Bolsheviks who are attacking. And after all this, they want us to
 believe that the bourgeois press wants peace. At our Party’s
 conference, which ended a few days ago, we were able to hear a
 report by a Polish worker, representative of one of the largest
 trade unions in Poland,[2][97] who managed to get through from
 Warsaw. He told us of the persecution of the workers in Poland,
 how the Warsaw workers looked to the Red Army as their liberator,
 and how they were waiting for the coming of the Russian Red Army,
 which they regard, not as their enemy but, on the contrary, as
 their friend in their struggle against the landowners and the
 bourgeois oppressors of Poland. It is quite clear that Poland is
 the Entente’s cat’s-paw in a new attempt to destroy
 the Soviet Republic; however, when this attempt threatened to lead
 to a diametrically opposite result and we were on the point of
 helping the Polish workers overthrow their government, the entire
 European bourgeois press turned on us. Comrade Kamenev, who
 visited London, has told us here in the Bolshoi Theatre how he
 daily heard ultimatums and threats from the British Government,
 which was already prepared to mobilise its whole navy against
 Petrograd and concentrate it at Kronstadt, allegedly to defend
 Poland against us. Now that the fortunes of war have changed and
 we are withdrawing from our terms everything Poland has declared
 unacceptable, the bourgeois press has fallen silent. It is quite
 clear that French and British imperialism is inciting Poland to
 make a fresh attempt to overthrow the Soviets.
I think that this is a last attempt (and this is undoubtedly
 important) at an offensive against Soviet Russia. It appears that
 Poland is too closely bound up with the whole system of
 international mperialism. You know that, after defeating Germany,
 the Allied mperialists-France, Great Britain, America and
 Japan-signed the Peace of Versailles, which, to say the least, was
 far more brutal than the infamous Peace of Brest-Litovsk, over
 which such an outcry was raised. But while the French, the
 Americans and the British proclaimed from the house-tops that this
 was a war of liberation, that its purpose was to save Europe and
 the world from the barbarian Huns, as they called the Germans, to
 save the world from German militarism and the German Kaiser, we
 now find that the Peace of Versailles outdoes in atrocity anything
 the Kaiser was capable of when he was victor. The interference of
 British and French officers in economic life has proved to all the
 defeated countries, to Germany and to all the countries that made
 up the Austro-Hungarian Empire, that it is impossible to live
 under such conditions. One of the pillars of this monstrous peace
 is Poland’s cutting across Germany, since Polish territory
 stretches to the sea. Relations between Germany and Poland are at
 present strained to the utmost, In oppressing the German
 population, the Poles have the support of the Entente troops and
 officers. The Versailles Peace has turned Poland into a buffer
 state which is to guard against German contact with Soviet
 communism and is regarded by the Entente as a weapon against the
 Bolsheviks. Through Poland and with the help of Poland, the French
 are hoping to recover the tens of thousands of millions loaned to
 the tsarist government. That is why, when the war with Poland
 broke out, which we tried to avert even at the price of heavy
 concessions, it proved td be a more direct war against the Entente
 than previous wars had been. The latter, in which Koichak, Denikin
 and Yudenich attacked us, were also conducted with the aid of
 officers and hundreds of millions provided by the Allies, with the
 aid of their guns and tanks. The previous wars were also wars
 against the Entente, but they were fought on Russian territory
 against Russian whiteguard officers and the peasants they had
 mobilised and they could not become wars that could shake the
 Peace of Versailles. That is where they differed from the war
 against Poland. The war against Yudenich, Koichak and Denikin was
 also a war against the Entente, but at the same time it was a war
 of working-class Russia against the whole of bourgeois
 Russia. When it ended in victory and when we smashed Yudenich,
 Kolchak and Denikin, this was not a direct attack on the Peace of
 Versailles. The reverse is true of Poland; that is what
 distinguishes the war against Poland, and constitutes
 Poland’s international significance.
When we were victoriously pressing our offensive on Poland, the
 whole of Europe began to vociferate that they wanted peace, that
 the whole world was tired of war, and that it was time to make
 peace. But now that the Poles are advancing, there is no outcry
 that people are tired of war. Why is that? It is because, by
 defeating Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin, we could not destroy the
 Peace of Versailles; we were merely falling upon Yudenich, Kolchak
 and Deni-. kin and driving them into the sea. However, in
 attacking Poland we are thereby attacking the Entente itself; by
 destroying the Polish army we are destroying the Peace of
 Versailles, on which the whole present system of international
 relations rests.
Had Poland turned Soviet, had the Warsaw workers received from
 Soviet Russia help they awaited and welcomed, the Peace of
 Versailles would have been smashed, and the entire international
 system set up as a result of the victory over Germany would have
 collapsed. France would then not have had a buffer protecting
 Germany against Soviet Russia. She would not have had a
 batteringram against the Soviet Republic. She would have had no
 hope of recovering her tens of thousands of millions, and would be
 heading for disaster even more rapidly than she now is. France is
 up to her ears in debt. Once the wealthiest of money-lenders, she
 now owes America three times as much as other countries do. She
 is. heading for bankruptcy. Her position is hopeless. That is why
 the approach of the Red troops to Warsaw meant an international
 crisis; that is why the entire bourgeois press was so agitated by
 it. Such was the position that, had the Red Army advanced
 victoriously another few days, not only would Warsaw have been
 captured (that would not have mattered so much),. but the Peace of
 Versailles would have been destroyed.
Therein lies the international significance of this Polish
 war. You know that we harboured no plans of conquest. I said at
 the beginning of my speech that in April 1920 we stood east of
 Minsk and proposed peace on those terms, if only we could save the
 workers and peasants of Russia from a new war. But since war has
 been forced upon us, we must fight it to a victorious finish. The
 Peace of Versailles is oppressing hundreds of millions of
 people. It is robbing Germany of coal, robbing her of her much
 herds, and is reducing her to an unparalleled and unprecedented
 state of servitude. Even the most backward sections of
 Germany’s peasant population have declared that they are for
 the Bolsheviks, that they are allies of the Bolsheviks; that is
 quite natural, for, in its struggle for existence, the Soviet
 Republic is the only force in the world which is combating
 imperialism-and imperialism now means an alliance of France,
 Britain and America. We are approaching the hub of the present
 international system. When the Red troops approached the frontier
 of Poland, the Red Army’s victorious advance created an
 unprecedented political crisis. The main feature of this crisis
 was that, when the British Government threatened us with war, and
 told us that if we advanced any farther they would fight us and
 send their warships against us, the British workers declared that
 they would not permit this war. Let me tell you that Bolshevism is
 spreading among the British workers. However, the Communists there
 are just as weak today as we were in March, April and May 1917,
 when we had one-tenth of the votes at conferences and
 congresses. At the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets in June
 1917, we had no more than 13 per cent of the votes. A similar
 situation exists in Great Britain: there the Bolsheviks are in an
 insignificant minority. But the point is that the British
 Mensheviks have always been opposed to Bolshevism and direct
 revolution, and have favoured an alliance with the
 bourgeoisie. Today, however, the old leaders of the British
 workers have begun to waver and have changed their minds they were
 opposed to the dictatorship of the working class, but now they
 have come over to our side. They have set up a Council of Action
 over there in Britain. This is a radical change in British
 politics. Alongside of Parliament, which in Great Britain is now
 elected by almost universal suffrage (since 1918), there has
 arisen a self-appointed Council of Action which relies on support
 from the workers’ trade unions with a membership of over six
 million. When the government wanted to begin a war against Soviet
 Russia, the workers declared that they would not allow it, and
 said they would not let the French fight either, because the
 French depend upon British coal, and should this industry come to
 a standstill it would be a severe blow to France.
I repeat that this was a tremendous turning-point in British
 politics. Its significance to Great Britain is as great as the
 revolution of February 1917 was to us. The revolution of February
 1917 overthrew tsarism. and set up a bourgeois republic in
 Russia. There is no republic in Great Britain, but her thoroughly
 bourgeois monarchy has existed for many centuries. The workers can
 vote in the parliamentary elections, but all foreign policy is
 conducted outside Parliament, for it is the province of the
 Cabinet. We have long known that the British Government are waging
 an undercover war on Russia and are helping Yudenich, Koichak and
 Denikin. We have often met with statements in the British press to
 the effect that Great Britain has no right to send a single
 soldier to Russia.. Who, then, voted for this measure? What act of
 Parliament authorised war on Russia in aid of Yudenich and
 Kolehak? There have been no such acts, and by actions like this
 Great Britain has violated her own constitution. What then is this
 Council of Action? Independently of Parliament, this Council of
 Action has presented an ultimatum to the government on behalf of
 the workers. This is a step towards dictatorship, and there is no
 other way out of the situation. This is taking place in Great
 Britain, which is an imperialist country with 400 or 500 million
 people enslaved in her colonies. She is a most important country,
 which rules the greater part of the population of the earth. The
 advance on Poland has led to such a turn of affairs that the
 British Mensheviks have entered into an alliance with the Russian
 Bolsheviks. That is what this offensive has done.
The entire British bourgeois press declared that the Council of
 Action meant the Soviets. They were right. It did not call itself
 by that name, but actually that is what it was. It is the same
 kind of dual power as we had under Kerensky from March 1917
 onwards, a time when the Provisional Government was considered the
 only government, but actually could do nothing of significance
 without the Soviet of Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies,
 a time when we said to the Soviets: “Take over all
 power.” A similar situation has now arisen in Britain, and
 the Mensheviks on this “Council of Action” have been
 obliged to adopt an anti-constitutional course. This will give you
 some idea of what our war with Poland has meant. Though the
 international bourgeoisie are still immeasurably stronger than we
 are, and the British Government has put the whole blame on
 Kamenev, expelled him from Great Britain, and will not let him
 return, this is but an empty and ridiculous threat, for the best
 defenders of the American and British capitalists, the moderate
 British labour leaders-those Right Mensheviks and Right
 Socialist-Revolutionaries-have joined the Council of Action, and
 Great Britain is now facing a new crisis. She is now threatened
 with a coal miners’ general strike. The strikers are
 demanding, not only higher pay but a cut in coal prices. One wave
 of strikes is following another in Great Britain. The strikers are
 demanding higher wages. However, if the workers win a 10 per cent
 wage rise today, prices go up 20 per cent tomorrow. Prices are
 rising, and the workers see that their struggle gets them nowhere
 and that, despite wage increases, they are losing, because of the
 higher prices. So the workers are demanding, not only higher pay
 for the coal miners but lower coal prices as well. This has led to
 the British bourgeois press panicking in even greater horror than
 when the Red Army entered Poland.
You know how the European crisis has affected Italy. Italy is
  one of the victor powers, and when the Red Army’s successes
  led to a movement in Germany and a change in British policy, the
  struggle in Italy became so acute that the workers began to seize
  the factories, take over the factory owners’ dwellings, and
  rouse the rural population.

  The present situation in Italy is far removed from any form of
  class peace.
That was the course taken by the Polish war. That is why, while
 realising that the Polish war was closely linked up with the
 international imperialism’s entire position, we agreed to
 make the greatest concessions to save the workers and peasants
 from the hardships of war. Then we clashed with the Peace of
 Versailles, and found that the bourgeoisie was just as incensed
 against us as ever; however, we also found that the workers were
 maturing daily and hourly, and that the workers’ revolution
 was steadily approaching, although all too slowly as compared with
 the speed of developments in Russia. It was possible to accomplish
 the revolution so rapidly in Russia because it took place in
 wartime. During the war tens of millions of Russian workers and
 peasants were armed, and against such a force the bourgeoisie and
 the officers were powerless. During the October days they
 threatened to lead an army against Petrograd. We used to receive
 tens of thousands of telegrams from all the fronts saying:
 “We are marching against you to wipe you out.”
 “Well have a try,” we said to ourselves. When
 delegates arrived from each of the armies, a thirty minutes’
 talk was enough to show that the soldiers were with us, and the
 officers had to hold their tongues. The attempts at resistance,
 the plots of Yudenich, Koichak and Denikin came later, after the
 army had been demobilised. That is why the revolution could
 succeed so rapidly in Russia. The people were armed. The workers
 and peasants proved to be on our side to a man. In Europe,
 however, the war is over. The armies have been demobilised; the
 soldiers have returned to their homes; the workers and peasants
 are disarmed. Developments there are slow now, but they are on the
 move. The international bourgeoisie has only to raise a hand
 against us to have it seized by its own workers. That is the
 international significance of the war with Poland. That is the
 source of the international crisis. That, too, is the source of
 our new difficulties now. It was when, as you know, we lacked just
 a little strength to reach Warsaw, hand over power to the Warsaw
 workers, convene Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants’
 Deputies in Warsaw, and say to them “We have come to your
 aid”, when, after heroic efforts without parallel or
 precedent in the past, our army’s strength was spent, that
 the moment of our military defeat came.
We have now fallen back very far to the east. In the north we
 have even lost the town of Lida; in the south we are almost on the
 line we held in April 9919-the Pilsudski line. In the north we are
 retreating very rapidly, and in the meantime Wrangel is making
 ever new attempts to advance. He recently threatened
 Ekaterinoslav, approached Sinelnikovo and got control of it. He
 has now captured Slavgorod. In the east, he has captured Mariupol,
 is approaching Taganrog and threatening the Donets Basin. We are
 again in difficult straits, and again we see the international
 imperialists attempting to strangle the Soviet Republic with both
 hands: the Polish offensive and the Wrangel offensive. In fact,
 Poland and Wrangel are the two hands of the French imperialists,
 who are supplying the troops both of Poland and of Wrangel with
 munitions. But these three forces are not getting along very well
 together. France tells the Poles that they should not grab too
 many resources, too much territory, because a tsarist Russia will
 never let them keep it. Then she tells Wrangel that he must not
 act so as to restore the power of the old landowners, for the
 example of Denikin, Kolchak and Yudenich shows that when the old
 landowners direct the whiteguard armies, or when their officers
 command the armies, the more territory they seize, the sooner that
 leads to their ruin, because in the end the peasants rise up in
 revolt against them.
As long as Wrangel has a crack officer army he can rely on it;
 Wrangel ’s strength lies in his possessing splendid weapons
 of the most up-to-date type and a crack officer army. When he
 effected a landing in the Kuban region, his army was so selected
 that every company and regiment could be developed into an entire
 division, because it consisted entirely of officers. But as soon
 as he attempts to repeat what Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich did in
 the past, i.e., seize more territory, so as to mobilise a larger
 peasant population and create a mass army, his success will at
 once give way to defeat; just as the peasant army was opposed to
 Kolchak, Denikin and Yudenich, so it will never march with
 Wrangel’s officer army. The Warsaw worker who addressed the
 Party Conference formulated it as follows: the Polish army, which
 formerly consisted of youngsters (raw lads just called up for
 service), has been destroyed. Men up to the age of 35have now been
 mobilised; these are adults who have been through the imperialist
 war, and this army, as far as the Polish landowners and
 capitalists are concerned, is by no means as reliable as an army
 of youngsters.
That is how matters stand with regard to the international
 situation. In the war against the Entente, owing to the defeat we
 have suffered at Warsaw and the offensive now continuing on the
 Western and Wrangel fronts, our position is again highly
 critical. I must therefore conclude my brief report by appealing
 to our comrades in the leather industry and pointing out to them
 that we must once again bend every effort, for the defeat of
 Wrangel is now our principal task. This will call for tremendous
 effort and initiative on the part of the workers, the trade
 unions, the proletarian masses, and first and foremost of those
 workers who are closely associated with the branches of industry
 that are connected with defence. Our chief difficulty in the
 present war is not manpower-we have enough of that-but
 supplies. The chief difficulty on all the fronts is the shortage
 of supplies, the shortage of warm clothing and
 footwear. Greatcoats and boots-that is the main thing our soldiers
 lack, and it is on that account that quite successful advances
 have so often failed. That is the difficulty which prevents us
 from rapidly utilising for a victorious advance the new units,
 which we possess in sufficient numbers, but which, without
 sufficient supplies, cannot be formed and cannot be of any real
 combat value.
Both the leather workers’ union and this assembly, which
 represents the entire proletariat in this industry, must give
 their most serious attention to this. Comrades, it depends on you
 to make the forthcoming offensive against Wrangel, for which we
 are mustering all our forces, as rapid and successful as it can
 possibly be. It depends on you, because the measures being taken
 by the Soviet Government and the Communist Party are not
 enough. To give real help to the Red Army men, to secure a
 decisive turn for the better, and to improve supplies, the
 assistance of Soviet institutions, the decrees of the Council of
 People’s Commissars and the Council of Defence,[3][98] and
 Party decisions are not enough: what is required is help from the
 trade unions. The trade unions must realise that, despite our
 repeated offers of peace, the very existence of the workers’
 and peasants’ power is once more at stake. You know how this
 power gained in strength after the collapse of Denikin, Kolchak
 and Yudenich. You know how the grain collections improved thanks
 to the recovery of Siberia and the Kuban region; you know that the
 capture of Baku has now enabled us to secure over a hundred
 million poods of oil, and how our industry has at last begun to
 acquire the foundation on which it is possible to create stocks of
 grain and bring the workers back to the factories, accumulate raw
 material and provide fuel, so that the factories may be started
 and economic life restored at last. But for all these
 possibilities to materialise, we must at all costs put an end to
 the war, and speed up the offensive against Wrangel. The Crimea
 must be recovered before winter comes in the south and that will
 depend on the energy and initiative of the workers themselves, and
 above all, perhaps, on the energy and initiative of every Russian
 leather worker and of the Leather Workers’ Union.
I appeal to you to follow the example of our Petrograd workers,
 who recently, after a report by a representative of the Communist
 International on the situation at the fronts, once more began to
 make tremendous efforts to help the cause, again beginning with
 munitions for the Red Army men, and building up the strength of
 the Red Army. You know that each step taken in the rear to help
 the Red Army has an immediate effect on the morale of the Red Army
 men. You know that the autumn cold affects the Red Army men,
 depresses them, creates new difficulties, increases the number of
 sick men and results in great hardships. All aid given by the rear
 to the Red Army men immediately helps strengthen the Red Army,
 fortify its morale, bring down the number of sick and increase its
 offensive power. At every meeting and in every workshop, every
 worker must now make the slogan “Everything for the Red
 Army!” the chief topic of his talks, reports and
 meetings.
What we must ask ourselves is: have we done everything in our
 power to help the Red Army? On this help depends how soon we
 settle final accounts with Wrangel and fully ensure for ourselves
 peace and the possibility of constructive work in the economic
 field. (Applause.)

Endnotes
[1]

[2]

[3]



Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  To The Poor
    Peasants Of The Ukraine











To The Poor Peasants Of The Ukraine



V. I. Lenin
To The Poor Peasants Of The Ukraine


delivered: 30 May, 1920
 
First Published: Kommunist (Kiev) No. 199,October 13, 1920; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 314-315
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, the tsarist general Wrangel is building
    up his offensive against the Ukraine and Russia. With backing from
    the French capitalists, he is pushing forward, threatening the
    Donets Basin and Ekaterinoslav. The danger is grave. Once again
    the landowners are trying to reestablish their power, get their
    estates back, and re-enslave the peasants.
Comrades, the Ukrainian countryside has endured unparalleled
    sufferings under the yoke of the landowners. The latter have more
    than once been able to overthrow the Soviets, the workers' and
    peasants' power; more than once they have been helped by the
    kulaks, the rich peasants, who either went over openly to their
    side or hampered the poor and working peasants' efforts to
    introduce the new order, the new way of life, the new organisation
    in the villages. Each such attempt to restore the rule of the
    landowners has ended in a new victory for the workers and
    peasants. Today, all over the Ukraine, the poor villagers have
    begun to set up their committees so as to smash the resistance of
    the handful of the rich, and finally to establish the rule of the
    working people. Wrangel, general of the landowners, is increasing
    his pressure with the intention of routing these organisations of
    the working people.
Comrades, rise up to a man to hurl Wrangel back. Let all
    committees of poor peasants bend every effort to help the Red Army
    crush Wrangel. Not a single working peasant should stand aside in
    the struggle for the cause of the workers and peasants, or remain
    inactive or indifferent. Comrades, remember that this is a matter
    of saving the lives of your families, of defending the peasants'
    land and their rule.

      Rally for aid to the Red Army!

    

      Death to the oppressor landowners!
Lenin

    

      2.10.1920


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  On
    Proletarian Culture











On Proletarian Culture



V. I. Lenin
On Proletarian Culture[1] 


Written: October 8, 1920, 1920
 
First Published: 1926; Published according to the manuscript

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 316-317
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


We see from Izvestia of October 8 that, in
    his address to the Proletcult Congress, Comrade Lunacharsky said
    things that were diametrically opposite to what he and I
    had agreed upon yesterday.[2]
It is necessary that a draft resolution (of the Proletcult
    Congress) should be drawn up with the utmost urgency, and that it
    should be endorsed by the Central Committee, in time to have it
    put to the vote at this very session of the
    Proletcult. On behalf of the Central Committee it should be
    submitted not later than today, for endorsement both by the
    Collegium of the People’s Commissariat of Education and by
    the Proletcult Congress, because the Congress is closing
    today.
Draft Resolution
1) All educational work in the Soviet Republic of workers and
    peasants, in the field of political education in general and in
    the field of art in particular, should be imbued with the spirit
    of the class struggle being waged by the proletariat for the
    successful achievement of the aims of its dictatorship, i.e., the
    overthrow of the bourgeoisie, the abolition of classes, and the
    elimination of all forms of exploitation of man by man.
2) Hence, the proletariat, both through its vanguardthe
    Communist Party-and through the many types of proletarian
    organisations in general, should display the utmost activity and
    play the leading part in all the work of public education.

    

      3) All the experience of modern history and, particularly, the
      more than half-century-old revolutionary struggle of the
      proletariat of all countries since the appearance of the
      Communist Manifesto has unquestionably demonstrated that
      the Marxist world outlook is the only true expression of the
      interests, the viewpoint, and the culture of the revolutionary
      proletariat.
4) Marxism has won its historic significance as the ideology of
    the revolutionary proletariat because, far from rejecting the most
    valuable achievements of the bourgeois epoch, it has, on the
    contrary, assimilated and refashioned everything of value in the
    more than two thousand years of the development of human thought
    and culture. Only further work on this basis and in this
    direction, inspired by the practical experience of the proletarian
    dictatorship as the final stage in the struggle against every form
    of exploitation, can be recognised as the development of a genuine 
      proletarian culture.
5) Adhering unswervingly to this stand of principle, the
    All-Russia Proletcult Congress rejects in the most resolute
    manner, as theoretically unsound and practically harmful, all
    attempts to invent one’s own particular brand of culture, to
    remain isolated in self-contained organisations, to draw a line
    dividing the field of work of the People’s Commissariat of
    Education and the Proletcult, or to set up a Proletcult "autonomy"
    within establishments under the People’s Commissariat of
    Education and so forth. On the contrary, the Congress enjoins all
    Proletcult organisations to fully consider themselves in duty
    bound to act as auxiliary bodies of the network of establishments
    under the People’s Commissariat of Education, and to
    accomplish their tasks under the general guidance of the Soviet
    authorities (specifically, of the People’s Commissariat of
    Education) and of the Russian Communist Party, as part of the
    tasks of the proletarian dictatorship.
Comrade Lunacharsky says that his words have been distorted. In
    that case this resolution is needed all the more
    urgently.

Endnotes
[1]
    99Lenin drew up this draft resolution for the First All-Russia
    Congress of Pioletcult, which met in Moscow from October 5 to
    October 12, 1920. When the Political Bureau of the Central
    Committee of the Party discussed the question of Proletcult on
    October 9 and 11, it proceeded from Lenin's draft resolution. It
    was proposed to the Communist group of the Congress that it pass a
    resolution putting central and local Proletcult organisations
    under the control of the People's Commissariat of Education. The
    resolution was in keeping with Lenin's ideas and was unanimously
    approved by the Congress. However, after the Congress, some
    Proletcult leaders began to voice disagreement with the resolution
    and misinterpreted it to the rank and file, alleging that the
    Central Committee of the Communist Party was hamstringing the
    workers in the sphere of the arts and aiming at dissolving
    Proletcult. The Central Committee of the Party refuted these
    demagogical insinuations in its letter "On Proletcult
    Organisations" which gave a detailed analysis of Proletcult
    mistakes. The letter was published in Pravda No. 270 on December
    1, 1920. 
[2]
    On October 8, 1920, Izvestia reported Lunacharsky as saying in his
    speech at the Proletcult Congress that Proletcult must be assured
    a special status and complete autonomy. Recalling this episode,
    Lunacharsky wrote in his reminiscences: “At the time oh the
    Proletcult Congress in October 1920, Vladimir Ilyich instructed me
    to attend it and pointed out quite definitely that Proletcult
    should be subordinated to the People's Commissariat of Education,
    should regard itself as one of its institutions, and so on. In
    short, he wanted us to bring Proletcult closer to the state. At
    the same time, he took steps to bring it closer to the Party. I
    spoke at the Congress in a rather non-committal and conciliatory
    way, and the version sent to Vladimir Ilyich was even milder. He
    summoned me and gave me a good talking-to.”


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Speech Delivered
    at a Conference of Chairmen of Uyezd, Volost and Village Committees
    of Moscow Gubernia










 Speech Delivered at a Conference of Chairmen of Uyezd, Volost and Village Committees of Moscow Gubernia, October 15, 1920



V. I. Lenin
 Speech Delivered At A Conference

 Of Chairmen Of Uyezd, Volost And Village
Executive Committees Of Moscow Gubernia
October 15, 1920[1]


Delivered: 15 October, 1920
First Published: Published in 1920 in the book: Verbatim Reports of the Plenary Sessions of the Moscow Soviet of Workers, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies; Published according to the text in the book
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 318-333
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, in my report on the domestic and the
    external position of the Republic, which you wished to hear, I
    shall naturally have to devote most of my remarks to the war with
    Poland and its causes. It was this war which in the main
    determined the Republic’s domestic and external position
    during the past six months. Now that the preliminaries for a peace
    with Poland have just been signed, it is possible and necessary to
    take a general look at this war and its significance and try to
    give thought to the lessons we have all learnt from the war which
    has just ended, though nobody knows whether it has ended for
    good. I would therefore like first to remind you that it was on
    April 26 of this year that the Poles began their offensive. The
    Soviet Republic solemnly and formally proposed a peace to the
    Poles, the Polish landowners and the Polish bourgeoisie, on terms
    more favourable than those we have offered them now, despite the
    tremendous reverses our troops suffered at Warsaw, and the even
    greater reverses during the retreat from Warsaw. At the end of the
    April of this year, the Poles held a line between 50 and 150
    versts to the east of the one they now regard as the line
    of a preliminary peace; though at that time the line was
    manifestly an unfair one, we solemnly proposed peace to them on
    behalf of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, since, as
    you all of course know and remember, the Soviet government was
    mainly concerned at the time with ensuring the transition to
    peaceful construction. We had no reason for wishing to resort to
    arms in settling questions in dispute between ourselves and the
    Polish state. We were fully aware that the Polish state was, and
    still is, a state of the landowners and capitalists, and that it
    is fully dependent on the capitalists of the Entente countries, in
    particular on France. Though at the time Poland controlled, not
    only the whole of Lithuania but also Byelorussia, to say nothing
    of Eastern Galicia, we considered it our duty to do everything
    possible to avert a war, so as to give the working class and the
    peasantry of Russia at least a brief respite from imperialist and
    civil wars, and at last enable them to get down in earnest to
    peaceful work. The events that ensued have happened all too
    frequently: our straightforward and public offer of peace on the
    line the Poles actually held was taken as a sign of
    weakness. Bourgeois diplomats of all countries are unaccustomed to
    such frank statements and our readiness to accept a peace along a
    line so disadvantageous to us was taken and interpreted as proof
    of our extreme weakness. The French capitalists succeeded in
    inciting the Polish capitalists to go to war. You will remember
    how, after a brief interval following upon the Polish offensive,
    we replied by dealing a counter-blow and almost reached Warsaw,
    after which our troops suffered a heavy defeat, and were thrown
    back.
For over a month and right down to the present, our troops were
    retreating and suffered reverses, for they were utterly worn out,
    exhausted by their unparalleled advance from Polotsk to
    Warsaw. But, I repeat, despite this difficult situation, peace was
    signed on terms less advantageous to Poland than the earlier
    ones. The earlier frontier lay 50 versts to the east,
    whereas it is now 50 versts to the west. Thus, though we
    signed a peace at a time favourable only to the enemy, when our
    troops were on the retreat and Wrangel was building up his
    offensive, we signed a peace treaty on more favourable terms. This
    once again proves to you that when the Soviet Government proposes
    peace, its words and statements have to be treated seriously;
    otherwise what will happen is that we shall offer peace on terms
    less favourable to us, and get this peace on better terms. This is
    a lesson the Polish landowners and capitalists will not, of
    course, forget; they realise that they have gone too far; the
    peace terms now give them less territory than was offered
    previously. This is not the first lesson  either. You all probably
    remember that, in the spring of 1919, a representative of the
    U.S. Government came to Moscow and proposed a preliminary peace
    with us and with all the whiteguard commanders at the time:
    Kolchak, Denikin and others, a peace which would have been
    extremely unfavourable to us. When he returned and reported on our
    peace terms, they were not considered advantageous, and the war
    went on. You are aware of the outcome of the war. This is not the
    first time that the Soviet state has proved that it is
    considerably stronger than it appears, and that our diplomatic
    Notes do not contain the boasts and threats that are usual with
    all bourgeois governments; consequently, rejecting an offer of
    peace from Soviet Russia means getting that peace some time later
    on terms that are far worse. Such things are not forgotten in
    international politics; after proving to the Polish landowners
    that they have now obtained a peace worse than the one which we
    originally offered, we shall teach the Polish people, the Polish
    peasants and workers, to weigh and compare the statements of their
    government and ours.
Many of you may have read in the newspapers the American
    Government’s Note, in which it declares: “we do not
    wish to have any dealings with the Soviet Government because it
    does not honour its obligations.[2] “ This does not
    surprise us, because it has been said for many years, the only
    outcome being that all their attempts to invade Soviet Russia have
    ended in disaster. The Polish newspapers, nearly all of which are
    in the pay of the landowners and the capitalists-there this is
    called freedom of the press-assert that the Soviet government
    cannot be trusted, since it is a government of tyrants and
    frauds. All Polish newspapers say the same thing, but the Polish
    workers and peasants compare these words with the facts, and the
    facts show that we demonstrated our attachment to peace the very
    first time we made our peace offer; by concluding peace in October
    we proved this again. You will not find proof of this kind in the
    history of any bourgeois government, a fact that cannot but leave
    its impress on the minds of the Polish workers and peasants. The
    Soviet Government signed a peace when it was not to its advantage
    to do so. It is only in this way that we shall teach the
    governments that are controlled by the landowners and capitalists
    to stop lying; only in this way shall we destroy the faith the
    workers and peasants have in them. We must give more thought to
    this than to anything else. Soviet power in Russia is surrounded
    by countless enemies, and yet these enemies are impotent. Think of
    the course and outcome of the Polish war. We now know that the
    French capitalists stood behind Poland, that they supplied Poland
    with money and munitions, and sent them French officers. We quite
    recently received information that African troops, namely French
    colonial troops, had appeared on the Polish front. This means that
    the war was waged by France with aid from Britain and America. At
    the same time, France recognised the lawful government of Russia
    in the person of Wrangel-so Wrangel too was hacked by France, who
    provided him with the means to equip and maintain an army. Britain
    and America are also aiding Wrangel’s army. Consequently,
    three allies stood against us: France, supported by the
    world’s wealthy countries, Poland, and Wrangel-yet we have
    emerged from this war by concluding a favourable peace. In other
    words, we have won. Anyone who examines the map will see that we
    have won, that we have emerged from this war with more territory
    than we had before it started. But is the enemy weaker than we
    are? Is he weaker in the military sense? Has he got fewer men and
    munitions? No, he has more of everything. This enemy is stronger
    than we are, and yet he has been beaten. This is what we must give
    thought to in order to understand Soviet Russia’s position
    with respect to all other countries.
When we Bolsheviks started the revolution, we said that it
    could and should be started, but at the same time we did not
    forget that it could be successfully ended and brought to an
    absolutely victorious conclusion, without confining ourselves to
    Russia alone, but, in alliance with a number of countries, after
    defeating international capital. Russian capital is linked up with
    international capital. When our enemies say to us: even if you
    were to win in Russia, your cause will nevertheless perish because
    the other capitalist states will crush you, we now have an
    answer-the highly important experience of the war-with Poland,
    which shows how things have actually turned out. Indeed, why did
    it happen that, within six months and even less, if we take April
    as the beginning of the offensive, France, Poland and Wrangel, who
    were stronger than we are, were full of hatred of Bolshevism, and
    were determined to overthrow Soviet power, have been defeated, and
    the war has ended in our favour? How could it have happened that
    Soviet Russia, exhausted by the imperialist and civil wars,
    surrounded by enemies, and cut off from every source of supplies
    and equipmentthis Soviet Russia has proved the victor? We must
    reflect on this because, if we go deeper into this question, we
    begin to understand the mechanism, not only of the Russian but of
    the world revolution as well. We see confirmation of the fact that
    the Russian revolution is but a single link in the chain of the
    world revolution, and that our cause is strong and invincible
    because the cause of revolution is developing throughout the
    world; economic conditions are evolving in a way that is making
    our enemies weaker and us stronger with every day. The Polish war
    has again proved that this is neither exaggeration, boasting nor
    overenthusiasm. Three allies were fighting against us. One might
    have thought that uniting these three allies should present no
    difficulty but it appeared that, taught by the great experience of
    Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin campaigns, they were unable to unite
    against us and squabbled at every step. In this connection, the
    history of the Polish war, which has only just ended, is
    particularly instructive. Our march on Warsaw-the Red Army’s
    march, in which weary, exhausted and poorly-clad soldiers covered
    over 600 versts, inflicting one defeat after another on
    the Polish troops, who were excellently trained, with hundreds of
    the best French officer instructors-showed us the kind of
    relations that existed among our enemies. On July 12, when the Red
    Army troops were approaching the Polish frontier, we received a
    telegram from Britain’s Foreign Secretary, Curzon, on behalf
    of the League of Nations, that notorious League of Nations, an
    alliance which professes to unite Britain, France, America, Italy
    and Japan, countries with a tremendous military potential and
    possessing all the navies of the world, and against whom military
    resistance might seem perfectly impossible and absurd. On behalf
    of this League of Nations, Curzon proposed that we stop the war
    and enter into negotiations with the Poles in London. According to
    this telegram, the boundary should pass near Grodno, Byelostok,
    Brest-Litovsk and along the River San in Eastern Galicia. To this
    proposal we replied that we recognised no League of Nations, since
    we had seen its insignificance and the disregard that even its
    members had for its decisions. The French Government considered
    our reply insolent, and one would have thought that this League of
    Nations would come out against us. But what happened? The League
    of Nations fell apart at our very first declaration, and Britain
    and France fell on each other.
For several years Britain’s Secretary for War Churchill
    has been employing every means, both lawful and more often
    unlawful from the viewpoint of British law, to help the
    whiteguards against Russia, so as to supply them with military
    equipment. He hates Soviet Russia bitterly, yet immediately after
    our declaration Britain fell out with France, because France needs
    the forces of a whiteguard Russia to protect her against Germany,
    while Britain needs no such protection. Britain, a naval power,
    fears no such action because she has a most powerful navy. Thus,
    the League of Nations, which has sent such unprecedented threats
    to Russia, was itself helpless from the very outset. At every step
    the interests of the League’s member states are patently in
    conflict. France desires the defeat of Britain, and vice
    versa. When Comrade Kamenev was negotiating with the British
    Government in London and asked the British Prime Minister,
    “Let us suppose that you will really do what you say, what
    about France?”, the British Prime Minister had to reply that
    France would go her own way. He said that Britain could not take
    the same road as France. It became plain that the League of
    Nations was non-existent, that the alliance of the capitalist
    powers is sheer fraud, and that in actual fact it is an alliance
    of robbers, each trying to snatch something from the others. When
    at the conclusion of peace in Riga, we discovered what divided
    Poland, Britain, France and Wrangel, and why they could not act in
    unison, we learnt that their interests differed: Britain wanted to
    have the small succession states-Finland, Estonia, Latvia and
    Lithuania-in her sphere of influence and was not interested in the
    restoration of tsarist or whiteguard or even bourgeois Russia; she
    even stood to lose from it. That was why Britain was acting
    counter to France and could not unite with Poland and
    Wrangel. France’s concern was to fight to the last Polish
    soldier for her interests and the debts owed to her. She hoped we
    would pay her the 20-thousand-million debt incurred by the former
    tsar and recognised by the Keren-. sky government. Any sensible
    person will realise that the French capitalists will never see the
    colour of their money; the French capitalists realise that the
    French workers and peasants cannot be made to fight, while Polish
    soldiers are plentiful and can be driven into battle-so let them
    die that the French capitalists may get their millions
    back. However, the Polish workers too can see that the French,
    British and other officers behave in Poland just as if they were
    in a conquered country. That was why, during the Riga
    negotiations, we saw that the party of the Polish workers and
    peasants which is undoubtedly patriotic and undoubtedly hostile to
    Bolshevism, just like our Rightwing Mensheviks and the
    Socialist-Revolutionary Party, stood for peace and was opposed to
    the government of the Polish landowners and capitalists, who up to
    the last moment tried to wreck the peace treaty, and even now want
    to do so and will go on doing so for a long time to come. I shall
    have to speak on this point when I come to the question of whether
    the preliminary peace we have just concluded will last.
The third ally, Wrangel, who fought for the return of the whole
    of Russia to the landowners and the capitalists, regards Poland as
    part of Russia. All the Russian tsars, landowners and capitalists
    were accustomed to regarding Poland as their prey; they never
    forgot that Poland had long ago been crushed by the Russian serf
    army led to war by the tsar. That meant that, had Wrangel been
    victorious, he would have used his victory in order to restore
    full power, both in Russia and in Poland, to the landowners. What
    happened, however, was that, when the three allies stood ready to
    attack us, they began by falling out among
    themselves. France’s aims are alien to both the Polish
    peasant and the Polish worker, while Wrangel ’s aims are
    alien even to any Polish landowner. And now, ---when we hear
    Wrangel’s radio or the French Government radio from Paris,
    we learn that France and Wrangel are gnashing their teeth because
    they realise the implication of this peace which we have concluded
    with Poland, though they assert that this is no peace, and that
    Poland cannot sign it. We shall see what we shall see, but
    meanwhile a peace has been signed. Actually, neither Wrangel nor
    France understands how it could have come about. They cannot
    stomach the miracle of a devastated Soviet Russia defeating
    civilised countries far stronger than she is. They do not
    understand that these victories stem from the fundamental doctrine
    of the Communists, which says that property divides whereas labour
    unites. Private property is robbery, and a state based on private
    property is a state of robbers, who are fighting for a share of
    the spoils. Though they have not yet finished this war, they are
    already fighting among themselves. A year ago fourteen states were
    threatening us, yet the alliance of these fourteen states at once
    fell apart. Why did it fall apart? Simply because the agreement
    between these states only existed on paper, and not one of them
    went to war. When a war started and France, Poland and Wrangel
    joined forces, their alliance too fell apart, because they were
    trying to trip one another up. As the Russian proverb says, they
    were trying to share out the skin of a bear they had not yet
    killed. They were, in fact, squabbling over a bear they would
    never kill.
The experience of world politics has shown that the alliance
    against Soviet Russia is irretrievably doomed to failure, because
    it is an imperialist alliance, an alliance of plunderers who are
    not united, and are bound by no genuine or permanent
    interests. They lack that which unites the working class; they
    have no common interests, which was again revealed during the
    Polish war. When our Red Army crushed the resistance of the Poles,
    captured Byelostok and Brest-Litovsk and approached the Polish
    frontier, this signified the collapse of the entire established
    system of international politics, for it is based on the Treaty of
    Versailles, which is a treaty of robbers and plunderers. When the
    Peace of Brest-Litovsk was imposed on us, a burden we bore so
    long, there was a world-wide outcry that it was a robber s
    peace. After Germany’s defeat, the League of Nations which
    had declared, during the war against Germany, that it was being
    fought for liberation and democracy, imposed a peace on the
    vanquished country, but it was a usurer’s peace, an
    oppressor’s peace, a butcher’s peace, because Germany
    and Austria were looted and carved up. They deprived them of all
    means of subsistence, and left the children hungry and starving;
    this was a predatory peace, without any parallel. What then is the
    Treaty of Versailles? It is an unparalleled and predatory peace,
    which has made slaves of tens of millions of people, including the
    most civilised. This is no peace, but terms dictated to a
    defenceless victim by armed robbers. Through the Treaty of
    Versailles, Germany’s enemies have deprived her of all her
    colonies. Turkey, Persia and China have been enslaved. A situation
    has arisen wherein seven-tenths of the world’s population
    are in a condition of servitude. These slaves are to be found
    throughout the world and are at the mercy of a handful of
    countries-Britain, France and Japan. That is why this
    international system in its entirety, the order based on the
    Treaty of Versailles, stands on the brink of a volcano, for the
    enslaved seven-tenths of the world’s population are waiting
    impatiently for someone to give them a lead in a struggle which
    will shake all these countries. France hopes that her loans will
    be repaid to her, but is herself in debt to America whom she
    cannot repay because she has not the wherewithal, and private
    property is sacred over there. What is the essence of this
    sacrosanct private property? It is that the tsars and capitalists
    borrow money, while the workers and the peasants have to repay the
    debt for them. They are on the verge of bankruptcy. They cannot
    meet their debts. At that very moment, the Red Army broke through
    the Polish frontier and approached the German borders. At the time
    it was common talk in Germany, even among the reactionaries and
    the monarchists, that the Bolsheviks would save them, it being
    evident that the Versailles peace was falling apart, that there
    existed a Red Army which had declared war on all capitalists. What
    has come to pass? It has come to pass that the Peace of Versailles
    now hinges on Poland. True, we lacked the strength to bring the
    war to an end. It should, however, be remembered that our workers
    and peasants were ill-clad and practically barefooted, yet they
    marched on and overcame all difficulties, fighting in conditions
    never before experienced by any other army in the world. We lacked
    the strength to take Warsaw and finish off the Polish landowners,
    whiteguards and capitalists, but our army showed the whole world
    that the Treaty of Versailles is not the force it is made out to
    be, that hundreds of millions of people are condemned to repay
    loans for many years to come and have their grandchildren and
    great-grandchildren do the same in order that the French, British
    and other imperialists may be enriched. The Red Army proved that
    the Treaty of Versailles is not so very stable. After the Treaty
    of Versailles our army showed that in the summer of 1920, the
    Soviet land, devastated as it was, was on the eve of complete
    victory thanks to that Red Army. The world saw that a force exists
    to which the Treaty of Versailles holds no terror, and that no
    Versailles treaties will subdue the power of the workers and
    peasants once they have learnt to deal with the landowners and
    capitalists.
Thus, the campaign against the Peace of Versailles, the
    campaign against all the capitalists and landowners of every
    country and against their oppression of other countries, has not
    been in vain. Millions upon millions of workers and peasants in
    all lands have been watching this and giving it thought, and they
    now look upon the Soviet Republic as their deliverer. They say:
    the Red Army has shown that it can give blow for blow, though it
    was not strong enough for victory in the first year or, you might
    oven say, in the first month of its peaceful construction. That
    first month of peaceful construction, however, will be followed by
    many years, and with each passing year its strength will multiply
    tenfold. It was thought that the Peace of Versailles was one of
    the all-powerful imperialists, but after the summer of 1920 it
    became clear that they were weaker than the workers and peasants
    of even a weak country who know how to unite their forces and
    repulse the capitalists. In the summer of 1920 Soviet Russia
    showed herself as a force that not only defended herself against
    attack, against the onslaught of the Polish whiteguards, but
    showed herself in fact as a world force capable of smashing the
    Treaty of Versailles and freeing hundreds of millions of  people
    in most countries of the world. That is the significance of the
    Red Army’s campaign of this summer. That is why events took
    place in Britain during this war, which marked a turning-point in
    the whole of British policy. When we refused to halt our troops
    Britain replied by threatening to send her fleet against
    Petrograd. The order was given to attack Petrograd. That is what
    the British Prime Minister announced to Comrade Kamenev, and all
    countries were notified. But on the day following the dispatch of
    this telegram, mass meetings were held throughout Britain, and
    Councils of Action sprang up. The workers united. All the British
    Mensheviks, who are even viler than the Russian brand, and fawn
    upon the capitalists far more assiduously-even they had to join
    in, because the workers were demanding it, because the British
    workers said they would not tolerate a war against Russia. All
    over Britain Councils of Action were formed, the British
    imperialists’ war plans were frustrated, and it once more
    turned out that, in her war against the imperialists of all lands,
    Soviet Russia has allies in each of them. When we Bolsheviks said:
    “We are not alone in our revolt against the landowners and
    capitalists of Russia, because in every country we have allies the
    worker and peasant; moreover, those allies are to be found in most
    countries”, we were ridiculed and were asked: “Where
    are these working people?” Yes, it is true that in Western
    Europe, where the capitalists are far stronger and live by
    fleecing hundreds of millions in the colonies, it is far more
    difficult to rise up in revolt. There the working-class revolution
    is developing incomparably more slowly. Nevertheless, it is
    developing. When, in July 1920, Britain threatened Russia with
    war, the British workers prevented that war from taking place. The
    British Mensheviks followed the lead of the British
    Bolsheviks. They had to do so and come out against the
    Constitution, against the law declaring they would not tolerate
    the war. If the latter was declared on the morrow, they would call
    a strike and give no coal to Britain and to France as well. The
    British workers declared that they wanted to determine foreign
    policy; they are directing it in the same way as the Bolsheviks in
    Russia, and not like the capitalists in other countries.
That is an example of what the Polish war has brought to
    light. That is why we have emerged victorious withir six
    months. That is why devastated, weak and backward Soviet Russia is
    defeating an alliance of states infinitely more powerful than she
    is. That is because they lack strength at home, and the workers,
    the working people in general, are against them. This is apparent
    at every crisis. This is apparent because they are robbers who
    attack each other and cannot unite against us; because, in the
    final analysis, private property divides people and brutalises
    them, whereas labour unites them. Labour has not only united the
    workers and peasants of Russia, it has united them with the
    workers and peasants of all lands. Consequently, in all these
    countries the people can now see that Soviet Russia is a force
    that is smashing the Peace of Versailles. Soviet Russia will
    become stronger, and the Treaty of Versailles will collapse just
    as it all but collapsed at the first blow by the Red Army in July
    1920. That is why the Polish war has ended in a manner no
    imperialist state had bargained for. This is a lesson of the
    utmost importance to us, for it shows by the example and behaviour
    of all countries taking part in international politics that our
    cause is strong; that no matter what attempts are made to invade
    Russia and no matter what military moves are made against us-and
    in all probability many more will be made-all these attempts will
    go up in smoke as we know from our actual experience, which has
    steeled us. After every such attempt by our enemies, we shall
    emerge stronger than ever.
I shall now turn from international politics, where the clash
    with the Peace of Versailles demonstrated our strength, to
    problems that are more immediate and practical, to the situation
    which has arisen in connection with the Treaty of Versailles. I
    shall not dwell on the significance of the Second Congress of the
    Communist International, which took place in Moscow in July, a
    congress of the Communists of the whole world, and also of the
    Congress of the Peoples of the East, which took place afterwards
    in Baku.[3] These were international congresses
    which united the Communists and showed that in all civilised
    countries and in all the backward countries of the East, the
    banner of Bolshevism, the programme of Bolshevism, the line of
    Bolshevik action are an emblem of salvation, an emblem of struggle
    to the workers of all civilised countries and the peasants of all
    the backward colonial countries. They showed that, during the past
    three years, Soviet Russia not only beat off those who fell upon
    her in order to throttle her, but won the sympathy of the working
    people of the whole world; that we not only defeated our enemies,
    but acquired and are still acquiring new allies daily and by the
    hour. That which was achieved by the congress of Communists in
    Moscow and by the Baku congress of Communist representatives of
    the peoples of the East cannot be immediately assessed or directly
    calculated, but it has been an achievement of greater significance
    than some military victories are, because it proves to us that the
    Bolsheviks’ experience, their activities and programme, and
    their call for a revolutionary struggle against the capitalists
    and imperialists have won world-wide recognition; that which was
    achieved in Moscow in July and in Baku in September will for many
    months to come provide food for thought and assimilation by the
    workers and peasants of the world. This is a force which, in any
    conflict or crisis, will come out for Soviet Russia, as we have
    seen on more than one occasion. Such is the fundamental lesson of
    the Polish war, from the angle of the alignment of world
    forces.
In dealing with events at home, I must say that Wrangel is the
    chief force in the field against us. France, Poland and Wrangel
    joined forces against us. While our forces were wholly engaged in
    the war on the Western front, Wrangel mustered his forces, aided
    by the French and British navies. When Wrangel was approaching the
    Kuban, he was counting on support from the rich Cossack
    kulaks. Who helped Wrangel at the time? Who supplied him with fuel
    and a fleet to enable him to hold on to the Donets Basin? It was
    the British and the American navies. We know, however, that this
    landing operation failed, because the Kuban Cossack, though he was
    rich in grain, saw perfectly through those promises of a
    constituent assembly, rule by the people and the other fine things
    that the Mensheviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc., try to
    fool simpletons with. Perhaps the Kuban peasants believed them
    while they were holding forth so eloquently, but in the long run
    they put their faith in action not words, and saw that though the
    Bolsheviks were severe people to deal with, they were to be
    preferred. As a result, Wrangel fled from the Kuban, and many
    hundreds and thousands of his troops were shot. Despite this,
    Wrangel assembled more and more of his forces in the Crimea, his
    troops consisting in the main of officers. He hoped that, at the
    first favourable moment, it would be possible to build up these
    forces, provided they had the backing of the peasants.
Wrangel’s troops are better equipped with guns, tanks,
    and aircraft than all the other armies that fought in
    Russia. Wrangel was assembling his forces when we were fighting
    the Poles; that is why I say that the peace with Poland is
    unstable. According to the preliminary peace signed on the 12th,
    the armistice will come into force only on the 18th, and the Poles
    still have two days in which they can repudiate it. ’Â°4 The
    entire French press and the capitalists there are striving to get
    Poland to start a new war against Soviet Russia; Wrangel is
    hastening to use all his connections in order to wreck this peace,
    because he can see that when the war with Poland is ended the
    Bolsheviks will turn against him. The only practical conclusion
    for us, therefore, is to direct all our forces against Wrangel. In
    April this year we proposed peace on terms ’which were
    unfavourable to us, only in order to spare tens of thousands of
    workers and peasants the carnage of a new war. To us frontiers do
    not matter so much; we do not mind losing some territory in the
    frontier regions. To us it is more important to preserve the lives
    of tens of thousands of workers and peasants and to retain the
    possibility of peaceful construction, than to keep a small piece
    of territory. That is why we submitted this peace proposal and now
    repeat that Wrangel is the main threat, that his troops, which
    have meanwhile grown enormously in strength, are fighting
    desperately, at points have crossed the Dnieper and have assumed
    the offensive. The Wrangel front and the Polish front are one and
    the same thing, and the question of the war against Wrangel is a
    question of the war against Poland; to convert the preliminary
    peace with Poland into a permanent peace we must crush Wrangel in
    the shortest possible space of time. If that is not done, we
    cannot be certain that the Polish  landowners and capitalists,
    under pressure from the French landowners and capitalists and with
    their help, will net once again try to embroil us in war. That is
    why I am taking advantage of this broadly representative meeting
    to draw your attention to this fundamental question and to ask you
    to make use of your position and authority in order to influence
    the masses of workers and peasants and ensure that the greatest
    possible efforts are made towards the full accomplishment of our
    immediate task-at all costs to crush Wrangel in the shortest space
    of time, because the possibility of our engaging in the work of
    peaceful construction depends only on this.
We know that in our devastated country the peasant economy has
    been destroyed, and that the peasant needs goods, and not the
    paper money which is being showered on him in such
    profusion. However, to supply him with goods such as paraffin oil,
    salt, clothing, etc., industry must be restored. We are
    approaching a position in which that can be done. We know that we
    now have more grain than last year; we now have fuel for industry:
    over 100 million poods of oil from Baku; the Donets
    Basin, which provides an enormous quantity of fuel, has been
    rehabilitated, though some industrial enterprises had to be
    evacuated during Wrangel’s advance to the south of the
    Donets Basin. Donots industry can be considered completely
    restored. Supplies of firewood are growing. Last year they
    totalled seven million cubic metres; we now have considerably
    more. Our industry is reviving. In Ivanovo-Voznesensk Gubernia,
    where for a number of years the mills were at a standstill,
    putting all the workers in low spirits, the mills are now being
    supplied with fuel and are beginning to operate. Thanks to the
    victories in Turkestan, they have received Turkestan cotton, and
    are starting to work. We are now confronted with a vast field of
    productive work, and we must do everything possible to
    rehabilitate industry, and supply the peasant with clothing,
    footwear and food and thus commence a fair exchange of the
    peasants’ grain for urban products. We must begin to give
    aid to agriculture. Yesterday, in the Council of People’s
    Commissars, we decided to encourage with extra rations the workers
    of the factory that will manufacture the first plough that proves
    best suited to our Russian conditions, so that we may restore our
    agriculture and raise it to a higher level, despite the shortage
    of cattle.
The workers and peasants are working together, without the
    landowners and the capitalists, and are achieving
    successes. However, the main thing in tackling this problem in
    earnest is the need to remember firmly that tens of thousands of
    workers and peasants are giving up their lives on the Wrangel
    front, that the enemy is better armed than we are, and that it is
    there, on the Wrangel front, that the last desperate battle is
    being fought out; it is there that the matter is being decided
    whether Soviet Russia will be able to strengthen herself for
    peaceful labour, so that no imperialist world-wide alliance, and
    not only the Polish whiteguards, will be able to threaten her. It
    is up to you, comrades. You must bend every effort, and remember
    that Soviet Russia has been able to solve all the problems in her
    struggle, not because decrees have been issued from the centre,
    but because these decrees have met with the enthusiastic and
    ardent sympathy of the workers and peasants throughout the
    country. Only when the workers and peasants saw that they were
    fighting against Kolchak, Denikin and Wrangel for their own land,
    their own factories and workshops, for their own interests and
    against the landowners and capitalists-only then did every one of
    them give the Red Army every possible support and assistance. When
    the Red Army men saw that the people in the rear were doing all
    they could for them, they were filled with the spirit which led
    them to victory. Everything depends on our defeating Wrangel, and
    I call on you to do everything possible in your organisations and
    factories, and in your villages, voluntarily and in accordance
    with the interests of the workers and peasants of the whole of
    Russia to come to the aid of the Wrangel front, and then we shall
    be victorious, both on the Wrangel and on the international
    fronts. (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    The conference was held between October 15 and 17, 1920, and  was
    attended by some 3,000 delegates. Following Lenin's report a
    resolution was passed expressing satisfaction with the signing of
    a peace with Finland and a preliminary truce with Poland. It also
    recognised as correct the peaceful policy of the Soviet government
    which "has set out to save the lives of hundreds of  thousands of
    Russian and Polish workers and peasants and to  spare the Russian
    and Polish working people the hardships and privations of a winter
    campaign". The conference went on record that "the immediate task
    in winning a lasting peace is the complete rout of surviving bands
    in the South" and urged the working people of Russia "to give all
    possible help to the fronts and to bend every effort to wipe out
    Wrangel" (Pravda No. 231, October 16, 1920). The conference also
    discussed the organisation of aid for the Western front, the food
    situation, labour and cart service, and education. 
    
[2]
      Lenin is referring to a Note from the U.S. Secretary of State
      B. Colby to the Italian Government, on the attitude of the
      U.S. Administration towards Soviet Russia. The Note was published
      in Izvestia No. 198 of September 8, 1920.
    
[3]
      Lenin is referring to the First Congress of the Peoples of the
      East,
      which was held in Baku between September 1. and 7, 1920, and
      attended by 1,891 delegates representing 37 nationalities (1,273
      delegates were Communists). On the national and the colonial
      questions the Congress expressed solidarity with the relevant
      resolution of the Second Congress of the Communist International. 
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## 
    Concluding Remarks At A Conference Of Chairmen Of Uyezd, Volost And Village Executive Committees Of Moscow GuberniaOctober 15, 1920










Concluding Remarks at a Conference of Chairmen of Uyezd, Volost and Village Executive Committees Of Moscow Gubernia



V. I. Lenin
Concluding Remarks at a Conference of Chairmen of
 Uyezd, Volost and Village Executive Committees Of Moscow Gubernia
October 15, 1920


Delivered: December 2, 1920
      
First Published: Published in 1920 In the book: Verbatim Reports of the Plenary Sessions of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies; Published according to the text in the book 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 334-338
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I shall have to confine myself to some brief
    concluding remarks, because from the very beginning of the meeting
    it has been clear that there is quite a strong desire, in fact a
    very strong desire, to upbraid the central government. That would,
    of course, have been useful, and I have considered it my duty to
    listen to everything said in criticism of the government and its
    policy. I think that the discussion should not have been wound
    up. (Hear, hear!) However, while listening to your
    remarks, I have been surprised to see how few precise and specific
    proposals you have put forward. Of the two questions-the foreign
    affairs and the home affairs of our Republic—I think that
    home affairs interest you more. That is how it should be. But,
    comrades, you forget that home affairs depend on foreign affairs,
    and I therefore have thought it my duty to tell you how and why
    the Polish war brought us up against the international
    imperialists and then led to peace; how and why this peace is
    precarious, and what has to be done to consolidate it. I hope
    that, in this matter, after you have discussed all the other
    questions and set forth all the problems in a calm fashion, you
    will not behave like certain personages in the fable mentioned by
    one of the speakers, about the lynx which waits for the goat and
    the ram to fall out, so as to devour them both. You will not give
    that satisfaction to the lynx-of that I am sure. However furiously
    the goat and the ram may clash, we shall give no satisfaction to
    the lynx. (Applause and cheers.) Comrades, if extreme
    dissatisfaction and impatience have been expressed here so often,
    we all know that freedom of speech is the primary rule of
    procedure at meetings. At this meeting you have broken this
    rule-it is because the majority of the peasants are experiencing
    all too severely the effects of the very grave situation that has
    arisen in the localities. Most of the peasants are feeling all too
    severely the effects of famine, cold and excessive
    taxation. ("Hear, Hear!" and applause.) It was, in the
    main, for this that most of the speakers upbraided the central
    government, directly and indirectly. One got a feeling that the
    comrades did not even want to give a full hearing to speakers in
    whose speeches they heard no replies to this acute problem. One of
    the speakers, I do not remember which, said that in his opinion I
    had evaded this issue. I consider this assertion groundless.
The position of the Soviet Republic is most grave, which made
    us hurry to conclude peace before the winter campaign set in. That
    haste stemmed from a desire to avoid a winter campaign, a
    realisation that it is better to have a worse frontier, that is to
    say, to get less Byelorussian territory and be in a position to
    wrest fewer Byelorussian peasants from the yoke of the
    bourgeoisie, than to impose fresh hardships and another
    ’winter campaign on the peasants of Russia. Such were our
    reasons. You know that the poor harvest of this year has
    aggravated the peasants’ need. However, the measure in which
    this ties us in our home policy is not generally realised. I think
    that you will all be fully informed on the subject of
    taxation. You will also hear what the speaker on the food policy
    will have to say. And all I want is to draw your attention to the
    close connection between the internal situation and the
    external. Let us take, for example, the sittings of our Council of
    Defence and the Council of People’s Commissars. At these
    meetings we even have to deal with the question of the running of
    each train, the grain-requisitioning quotas imposed upon the Great
    Russia gubernias—quotas that are often extremely
    rigorous. Two or three weeks ago the Council of People’s
    Commissars considered the question of the excessively rigorous
    quotas, established by the central authorities; it decided that
    they should be reduced. At whose expense is this to be done? There
    can be only one reply .to this question: only at the expense of
    outlying regions that are richer in grain, namely, Siberia and the
    Kuban, and by making it possible to obtain grain from the
    Ukraine. We are getting grain from Siberia and from the Kuban, but
    we cannot get grain from the Ukraine because warfare is raging
    there, and the Rod Army has to fight the hands that infest that
    area. We have to settle the problem of almost every train. We have
    seen what this meeting has turned into, the dissatisfaction
    expressed here, and the voices raised in loud protest. We know the
    reason for all this. We know that all those who have revealed such
    emotion here are sick at heart because there i3 no fodder,
    livestock is perishing, and taxation is so heavy. The comrade who
    said that these cries of protest were something new to us was
    wrong. Both from telegrams and reports from the provinces we know
    of the heavy loss of cattle as a result of the grave fodder
    situation, and we all realise the difficulties. But we also know
    the solution. There is only one solution—Siberia, the Kuban
    and the Ukraine.
From Siberia we had to bring up troops to the Wrangel front,
    and in the Council of Defence there were two or three very painful
    meetings when comrades came with the demand that we should cancel
    the special food trains. After the most bitter wrangling and
    bargaining, we ended by deciding to somewhat curtail the number of
    food trains. However, we would like to hear more weighty and,
    serious criticism. We know all about the outcries and lamentations
    that the farms are being ruined. That is why even the truce that
    comes into force on the 18th, even though the Poles are entitled
    to cancel it at forty-eight hours’ notice, will give us some
    respite and relief; in any case there will be more trainloads of
    grain from Siberia and the Kuban in the next few weeks. Of course,
    the need is so acute and the crop shortage so severe that the
    relief this will provide will not be very great. We should not, of
    course, deceive ourselves and say that it will remove all our
    difficulties and enable us to discontinue the grain requisitioning
    quotas.
That is something I cannot and will not say. State your views
    precisely, let us have your definite suggestions for relieving the
    heavy taxation, and the representatives of the workers’ and
    peasants’ government will examine them with the closest
    attention, because we must find a way of easing this exceedingly
    painful situation. There is no less grain in the Ukraine than in
    the Kuban; there is perhaps even more, but so far we have been
    able to get hardly anything from the Ukraine under the grain
    quotas, which have been fixed at 600,000,000 poods, and
    which could meet all the needs of our industries and help restore
    them. We have struck the Ukraine off our accounts: not a single
    pood can be expected from the Ukraine, because of the
    bandits there, and because the war with Wrangel compels us to say
    that we cannot be sure of getting a single pood from the
    Ukraine. Such is the situation, which, notwithstanding your
    legitimate impatience and quite justified indignation, makes us
    divert all our attention to the Polish and the Wrangel
    fronts. That is why when comrades say that they are not against
    giving help, but they want that help to be given freely, we say:
    "Go and help the front!"
I shall conclude my brief remarks by reminding you of what I
    said at the end of my report, namely, that every time the Soviets
    have had to get out of a difficult situationwhen Denikin was in
    Ore!, or when Yudenich was within five versts of
    Petrograd-when the situation seemed not only difficult, but
    desperate, a hundred times as difficult as it is now, the Soviet
    government got out of that situation by calling together meetings
    of workers and peasants like the present one and telling them the
    unvarnished truth. That is why I say that whether or not Wrangel
    will soon be crushed depends, not on a decision of the central
    government but on the way in which the representatives from the
    localities, after giving vent to their dissatisfaction, after
    finishing the struggle which the above-mentioned comrade has
    called a clash between the goats and the rams-an indispensable
    thing-and after voicing their complaints, accusations and
    recriminations-the way in which local representatives reply to the
    question whether they themselves want freedom, quite apart from
    any decision by the central government. Here we cannot give
    orders; it will depend on your own decisions, when you come to
    discuss the state of affairs, the grain-requisitioning quotas,
    taxation, Wrangel, etc.-it will depend on you. Let each man have
    his say; give vent to all your reproaches; censure us ten times
    more severely-that is your right and your duty. You have come here
    to express your opinion plainly and bluntly. But when you have
    done all that, just reflect calmly what you want to contribute and
    do so as to finish with Wrangel as quickly as possible. I think
    that we shall reach such thorough agreement on this question that
    I repeat in conclusion-never will the lynx benefit from our
    arguments, recriminations and
    accusations. (Applause.)


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive








==========

## 
    Telegram to the Soviet Government of the Ukraine and the General Headquarters
    of the Southern Front










Telegram to The Soviet Government Of The Ukraine And the General Headquarters of the Southern Front



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to
 The Soviet Government Of The Ukraine
And the General Headquarters of the Southern Front


Delivered: 16 October, 1920
  
First Published: First published in 1942; Published according to the carbon copy 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 339
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In reply to your telegram concerning the poor
    peasants I am informing you of my personal opinion. If
    their temper is really revolutionary, the following should be
    regarded as a programme: 1) collective cultivation; 2) hiring
    stations; 3) confiscation of the kulaks’ land over and above
    the labour norm; 4) grain surpluses to be collected in full, part
    of the grain to be turned over to the poor peasants; 5) the
    kulaks’ agricultural implements to be handed over to the
    hiring stations; 6) these measures to be applied only given
    successful collective cultivation of the soil, and effective
    control. The question of communes should be posed last, since
    nothing is more dangerous than the formation of pseudo-communes,
    with the participation of individual militants who thus become
    detached from the main body of the peasantry. The greatest
    prudence should be exercised in introducing innovations, and the
    possibility of achieving what is being undertaken should be
    triple-checked.
Lenin

    

      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

##  A
    Contribution To The History Of The Question of The
    Dictatorship











 A Contribution To The History Of The Question Of The Dictatorship



V. I. Lenin
A Contribution To The History Of
 The Question Of The Dictatorship[1]
 A Note


Written: 20 October, 1920
 
First Published: 1920; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages  340-361
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


  The question of the dictatorship of the proletariat is the
    fundamental question of the modern working-class movement in all
    capitalist countries without exception. To elucidate this question
    fully, a knowledge of its history is required. On an international
    scale, the history of the doctrine of revolutionary dictatorship
    in general, and of the dictatorship of the proletariat in
    particular, coincides with the history of revolutionary socialism,
    and especially with the history of Marxism. Moreover—and
    this, of course, is the most important thing of all—the
    history of all revolutions by the oppressed and exploited classes,
    against the exploiters, provides the basic material and source of
    our knowledge on the question of dictatorship. Whoever has failed
    to understand that dictatorship is essential to the victory of any
    revolutionary class has no understanding of the history of
    revolutions, or else does not want to know anything in this
    field.
 With reference to Russia, special importance attaches, as far
    as theory is concerned, to the Programme of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour Party as drafted in 1902-03 by the
    editorial board of Zarya and Iskra, or, more
    exactly, drafted by G. Plekhanov, and edited, amended and endorsed
    by that editorial board. In this Programme, the question of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat is stated in clear and defnite
    terms, and, moreover, is linked up with the struggle against
    Bernstein, against opportunism. Most important of all, however, is
    of couse the experience of revolution, i.e., in the case of
    Russia, the experience of the year 1905.
The last three months of that year—October, November and
    December—were a period of a remarkably vigorous and broad
    mass revolutionary struggle, a period that saw a combination of
    the two most powerful methods of that struggle: the mass political
    strike and an armed uprising. (Let us note parenthetically that as
    far back as May 1905 the Bolshevik congress, the “Third
    Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party”,
    declared that “the task of organising the proletariat for
    direct struggle against the autocracy by means of the armed
    uprising” was “one of the major and most urgent tasks
    of the Party”, and instructedall Party organisations to
    “explain the role of mass political strikes, which may be of
    great importance at the beginning and during the progress of the
    uprising’’.[2])
For the first time in world history, the revolutionary struggle
    attained such a high stage of development and such an impetus that
    an armed uprising was combined with that specifically proletarian
    weapon—the mass strike. This experience is clearly of world
    significance to all proletarian revolutions. It was studied by the
    Bolsheviks with the greatest attention and diligence in both its
    political and its economic aspects. I shall mention an analysis of
    the month-by-month statistics of economic and political strikes in
    1905, of the relations between them, and the level of development
    achieved by the strike struggle for the first time in world
    history. This analysis was published by me in 1910 and 1911 in the
    Prosveshcheniye journal, a summary of it being given in
    Bolshevik periodicals brought out abroad at the time.[3]

The mass strikes and the armed uprisings raised, as a matter of
    course, the question of the revolutionary power and dictatorship,
    for these forms of struggle inevitably led—initially on a
    local scale—to the ejection of the old ruling authorities,
    to the seizure of power by the proletariat and the other
    revolutionary classes, to the expulsion of the landowners,
    sometimes to the seizure of factories, and so on and so forth. The
    revolutionary mass struggle of the time gave rise to organisations
    previously unknown in world history, such as the Soviets of
    Workers’ Deputies, followed by the Soviets of
    Soldiers’ Deputies, Peasants’ Committees, and the
    like. Thus the fundamental questions (Soviet power and the
    dictatorship of the proletariat) that are now engaging the minds
    of class-conscious workers all over the world were posed in a
    practical form at the end of 1905. While such outstanding
    representatives of the revolutionary proletariat and of
    unfalsified Marxism as Rosa Luxemburg, immediately realised the
    significance of this practical experience and made a critical
    analysis of it at meetings and in the press, the vast majority of
    the official representatives of the official Social-Democratic and
    socialist parties including both the reformists and people of the
    type of the future “Kautskyites”,
    “Longuetists”, the followers of Hillquit in America,
    etc.—proved absolutely incapable of grasping the
    significance of this experience and of performing their duty as
    revolutionaries, i.e., of setting to work to study and
    propagate the lessons of this experience.
In Russia, immediately after the defeat of the armed uprising
    of December 1905, both the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks set to
    work to sum up this experience. This work was especially expedited
    by what was called the Unity Congress of the Russian
    Social-Democratic Labour Party, held in Stockholm in April 1906,
    where both Mensheviks and Bolsheviks were represented, and
    formally united. The most energetic preparations for this Congress
    were made by both these groups. Early in 1906, prior to the
    Congress, both groups published drafts of their resolutions on all
    the most important questions. These draft
    resolutions—reprinted in my pamphlet, Report on the
    Unity Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (A Letter to the
    St. Petersburg Workers ), Moscow, 1906 (110 pages, nearly
    half of which are taken up with the draft resolutions of both
    groups and with the resolutions finally adopted by the
    Congress)—provide the most important material for a study of
    the question as it stood at the time.
By that time, the disputes as to the significance of the
    Soviets were already linked up with the question of
    dictatorship. The Bolsheviks had raised the question of the
    dictatorship even prior to the revolution of October 1905 (see my
    pamphlet Two Tactics
    of Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, Geneva,
    July 1905; reprinted in a volume of collected articles entitled
    Twelve Years ). The Mensheviks took a negative stand with
    regard to the “dicta-
 
      torship” slogan; the Bolsheviks emphasised that the
      Soviets of Workers’ Deputies were “actually an
      embryo of a new revolutionary power ”, as was
      literally said in the draft of the Bolshevik resolution (p. 92
      of my Report ). The Mensheviks acknowledged the
      importance of the Soviets; they were in favour of “helping
      to organise” them, etc., but they did not regard them as
      embryos of revolutionary power, did not in general say anything
      about a “new revolutionary power” of this or some
      similar type, and flatly rejected the slogan of dictatorship. It
      will easily be seen that this attitude to the question already
      contained the seeds of all the present disagreements with the
      Mensheviks. It will also be easily seen that, in their attitude
      to this question, the Mensheviks (both Russian and non-Russian,
      such as the Kautskyites, Longuetists and the like) have been
      behaving like reformists or opportunists, who recognise the
      proletarian revolution in word, but in deed reject what is
      most essential and fundamental in the concept of
      “revolution ”.
Even before the revolution of 1905, I analysed, in the
    afore-mentioned pamphlet, Two Tactics, the arguments of
    the Mensheviks, who accused me of having “imperceptibly
    substituted ‘dictatorship’ for
    ‘revolution’ (Twelve Years, p. 459). I showed
    in detail that, by this very accusation, the Mensheviks revealed
    their opportunism, their true political nature, as toadies to the
    liberal bourgeoisie and conductors of its influence in the ranks
    of the proletariat. When the revolution becomes an unquestioned
    force, I said, even its opponents begin to “recognise the
    revolution"; and I pointed (in the summer of 1905) to the example
    of the Russian liberals, who remained constitutional
    monarchists. At present, in 1920, one might add that in Germany
    and Italy the liberal bourgeois—or at least the most
    educated and adroit of them—are ready to “recognise
    the revolution”. But by “recognising” the
    revolution, and at the same time refusing to recognise the
    dictatorship of a definite class (or of definite
    classes), the Russian liberals and the Mensheviks of that time,
    and the present-day German and Italian liberals, Turatists and
    Kautskyites, have revealed their reformism, their
    absolute unfitness to be revolutionaries.
  Indeed, when the revolution has already become an
    unquestioned force, when even the liberals “recognise”
    it, and when the ruling classes not only see but also feel the
    invincible might of the oppressed masses, then the entire
    question—both to the theoreticians and the leaders of
    practical policy—reduces itself to an exact class
    definition of the revolution. However, without the concept of
    “dictatorship”, this precise class definition cannot
    be given. One cannot be a revolutionary in fact unless
    one prepares for dictatorship. This truth was not understood in
    1905 by the Mensheviks, and it is not understood in 1920 by the
    Italian, German, French and other socialists, who are afraid of
    the severe “conditions” of the Communist
    International; this truth is feared by people who are capable of
    recognising the dictatorship in word, but are incapable
    of preparing for it in deed. It will therefore not be
    irrelevant to quote at length the explanation of Marx’s
    views, which I published in July 1905 in opposition to the Russian
    Mensheviks, but is equally applicable to the West-European
    Mensheviks of 1920. (Instead of giving titles of newspapers, etc.,
    I shall merely indicate whether Mensheviks or Bolsheviks are
    referred to.)
“In his notes to Marx’s articles in Die Neue
    Rheinische Zeitung of 1848, Mehring tells us that one of the
    reproaches levelled at this newspaper by bourgeois publications
    was that it had allegedly demanded ‘the immediate
    introduction of a dictatorship as the sole means of achieving
    democracy’ (Marx, Nachlass, Vol. III, p. 53). From
    the vulgar bourgeois standpoint the terms of dictatoship and
    democracy are mutually exclusive. Failing to understand the theory
    of class struggle and accustomed to seeing in the political arena
    the petty squabbling of the various bourgeois circles and
    coteries, the bourgeois understands by dictatorship the annulment
    of all liberties and guarantees of democracy, arbitrariness of
    every kind, and every sort of abuse of power, in a
    dictator’s personal interests. In fact, it is precisely this
    vulgar bourgeois view that is to be observed among our Mensheviks,
    who attribute the partiality of the Bolsheviks for the slogan of
    ‘dictatorship’ to Lenin’s passionate desire to
    try his luck’ (Iskra No. 103, p. 3, column 2). In
    order to explain to the Mensheviks the mean-
 
      ing of the term class dictatorship as distinct from a personal
      dictatorship, and the tasks of ademocratic dictatorship as
      distinct from a socialist dictatorship, it would not be amiss to
      dwell on the views of Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung.[4]

“’After a revolution,’ Die Neue
    Rheinische Zeitung wrote on September 14, 1848, ‘every
    provisional organisation of the state requires a dictatorship, and
    an energetic dictatorship at that. From the very beginning we have
    reproached Camphausen [the head of the Ministry after March 18,
    1848] for not acting dictatorially, for not having immediately
    smashed up and eliminated the remnants of the old
    institutions. And while Herr Camphausen was lulling himself with
    constitutional illusions, the defeated party [i.e., the party of
    reaction] strengthened its positions in the bureaucracy and in the
    army, and here and there even began to venture upon open
    struggle.’[5]

“These words, Mehring justly remarks, sum up in a few
    propositions all that was propounded in detail in Die Neue
    Rheinische Zeitung in long articles on the Camphausen
    Ministry. What do these words of Marx tell us? That a provisional
    revolutionary government must act dictatorially (a proposition
    which the Mensheviks were totally unable to grasp since they were
    fighting shy of the slogan of dictatorship), and that the task of
    such a dictatorship is to destroy the remnants of the old
    institutions (which is precisely what was clearly stated in the
    resolution of the Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic
    Labour Party [Bolsheviks] on the struggle against
    counter-revolution, and was omitted in the Mensheviks’
    resolution as shown above). Third, and last, it follows from these
    words that Marx castigated the bourgeois democrats for
    entertainrng ‘constitutional illusions’ in a period of
    revolution and open civil war. The meaning of these words becomes
    particularly obvious from the article in Die Neue Rheinische
    Zeitung of June 6, 1848. 
“’A Constituent National Assembly’, Marx
    wrote, ‘must first of all be an active, revolutionary active
    assembly. The Frankfurt Assembly[6] however, is busying
    itself with school exercises in parliamentarianism while allowing
    the government to act. Let us assume that this learned assembly
    succeeds, after mature consideration, in evolving the best
    possible agenda and the best constitution, but what is the use of
    the best possible agenda and of thebest possible constitution, if
    the German governments have in the meantime placed the bayonet on
    the agenda?’[7]

 “That is the meaning of the slogan: dictatorship. . . .
“Major questions in the life of nations are settled only
    by force. The reactionary classes themselves are usually the first
    to resort to violence, to civil war; they are the first to
    ‘place the bayonet on the agenda’, as the Russian
    autocracy has systematically and unswervingly been doing
    everywhere ever since January 9.[8] And since such a
    situation has arisen, since the bayonet has really become the main
    point on the political agenda, since insurrection has proved
    imperative and urgent—the constitutional illusions and
    school exercises in parliamentarianism become merely a screen for
    the bourgeois betrayal of the revolution, a screen to conceal the
    fact that the bourgeoisie is ‘recoiling’ from the
    revolution.  It is precisely the slogan of dictatorship that the
    genuinely revolutionary class must advance, in that case.”
    [9]

That was how the Bolsheviks reasoned on the dictatorship before
    the revolution of October 1905.
After the experience of this revolution, I made a detailed
    study of the question of dictatorship in the pamphlet, The
    Victory of the Cadets and the Tasks of the Workers’
    Party, St. Petersburg, 1906 (the pamphlet is dated March
    28,1906). I shall quote the most important arguments from this
    pamphlet, only substituting for a number of proper names a simple
    indication as to whether the reference is to the Cadets or to the
    Mensheviks. Generally speaking, this pamphlet was directed against
    the Cadets, and partly also against the non-party liberals, the
    semi-Cadets, and the semi-Mensheviks. But, actually speaking,
    everything said therein about dictatorship applies in fact to the
    Mensheviks, who were constantly sliding to the Cadets’
    position on this question.
“At the moment when the firing in Moscow was subsiding,
    and when the military and police dictatorship was indulging in its
    savage orgies, when repressions and mass torture were raging all
    over Russia, voices were raised in the Cadet press against the use
    of force by the Left, and against the strike committees organised
    by the revolutionary parties. The Cadet professors on the
    Dubasovs’ payroll, who are peddling their science, went to
    the length of translating the word ‘dictatorship’ by
    the words ‘reinforced security’. These ‘men of
    science’ even distorted their high-school Latin in order to
    discredit the revolutionary struggle. Please note once and for
    all, you Cadet gentlemen, that dictatorship means unlimited power,
    based on force, and not on law. In civil war, any victorious power
    can only be a dictatorship. The point is, however, that there is
    the dictatorship of a minority over the majority, the dictatorship
    of a handful of police officials over the people; and there is the
    dictatorship of the overwhelming majority of the people over a
    handful of tyrants, robbers and usurpers of the people’s
    power. By their vulgar distortion of the scientific concept
    ‘dictatorship’, by their outcries against the violence
    of the Left at a time when the Right are resorting to the most
    lawless and outrageous violence the Cadet gentlemen have given
    striking evidence of the position the ‘compromisers’
    take in the intense revolutionary struggle. When the struggle
    flares up, the ‘compromiser’ cravenly runs for
    cover. When the revolutionary people are victorious (October 17),
    the ‘compromiser’ creeps out of his hiding place,
    boastfully preens himself, shouting and raving until he is hoarse:
    ‘That was a “glorious” political strike!’
    But when victory goes to the counter-revolution, the
    ‘compromiser’ begins to heap hypocritical admonitions
    and edifying counsel on the vanquished. The successful strike was
    ‘glorious’. The defeated strikes were criminal, mad,
    senseless, and anarchistic. The defeated insurrection was folly, a
    riot of surging elements, barbarity and stupidity. In short, his
    political conscience and political wisdom prompt the
    ‘compromiser’ to cringe before the side that for the
    moment is the strongest, to get in the way of the combatants,
    hindering first one side and then the other, to tone down the
    struggleand to blunt the revolutionary consciousness of the people
    who are waging a desperate struggle for freedom.’’[10]

 To proceed. It would be highly opportune at this point to
    quote the explanations on the question of dictatorship, directed
    against Mr. R. Blank. In 1906, this R. Blank, in a newspaper
    actually Menshevik though formally non-partisan,[11]
      set forth the Mensheviks’ views and extolled their efforts
      “to direct the Russian Social-Democratic movement along
      the path that is being followed by the whole of the
      international Social-Democratic movement, led by the great
      Social-Democratic Party of Germany”.
In other words, like the Cadets, R. Blank contraposed the
    Bolsheviks, as unreasonable, non-Marxist, rebel, etc.,
    revolutionaries, to the “reasonable” Mensheviks, and
    presented the German Social-Democratic Party as a Menshevik party
    as well. This is the usual method of the international trend of
    social-liberals, pacifists, etc., who in all countries extol the
    reformists and opportunists, the Kautskyites and the Longuetists,
    as “reasonable” socialists in contrast with the
    “madness” of the Bolsheviks.
This is how I answered Mr. R. Blank in the above mentioned
    pamphlet of 1906:
“Mr. Blank compares two periods of the Russian
    revolution. The first period covers approximately October-December
    1905. This is the period of the revolutionary whirlwind. The
    second is the present period, which, of course, we have a right to
    call the period of Cadet victories in the Duma elections, or,
    perhaps, if we take the risk of running ahead somewhat, the period
    of a Cadet Duma.
“Regarding this period, Mr. Blank says that the turn of
    intellect and reason has come again, and it is possible to resume
    deliberate, methodical and systematic activities. On the other
    hand, Mr. Blank describes the first period as a period in which
    theory diverged from practice. All Social-Democratic principles
    and ideas vanished; the tactics that had always been advocated by
    the founders af Russian Social-Democracy were forgotten, and even
    the very pillars of the Social-Democratic world outlook were
    uprooted.
“Mr. Blank ‘s main assertion is merely a statement
    of fact: the whole theory of Marxism diverged from
    ‘practice’ in the period of the revolutionary
    whirlwind.
“Is that true? What is the first and main
    ‘pillar’ of Marxist theory? It is that the only
    thoroughly revolutionary class in modern society, and therefore,
    the advanced class in every revolution, is the proletariat. The
    question is then: has the revolutionary whirlwind uprooted this
    ‘pillar’ of the Social-Democratic world outlook? On
    the contrary, the whirlwind has vindicated it in the most
    brilliant fashion.

    It was the proletariat that was the main and, at first, almost
    the only fighter in this period. For the first time in
    history, perhaps, a bourgeois revolution was marked by the
    employment of a purely proletarian weapon, i.e., the mass
    political strike, on a scale unprecedented even in the most
    developed capitalist countries. The proletariat marched into
    battle that was definitely revolutionary, at a time when the
    Struves and the Blanks were calling for participation in the
    Bulygin Duma and when the Cadet professors were exhorting the
    students to keep to their studies. With its proletarian weapon,
    the proletariat won for Russia the whole of that so-called
    ‘constitution’, which since then has only been
    mutilated, chopped about and curtailed. The proletariat in October
    1905 employed those tactics of struggle that six months
    before had been laid down in the resolution of the
    Bolshevik Third Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic
    Labour Party, which had strongly emphasised the necessity of
    combining the mass political strike with insurrection; and it is
    this combination that characterises the whole period of the
    ‘revolutionary whirl wind’, the whole of the last
    quarter of 1905. Thus our ideologist of  petty bourgeoisie has
    distorted reality in the most brazen and glaring manner. He has
    not cited a single fact to prove that Marxist theory diverged from
    practical experience in the period of the ‘revolutionary
    whirlwind’; he has tried to obscure the main feature of this
    whirlwind, which most brilliantly confirmed the correctness of
    ‘all Social-Democratic principles and ideas’, of
    ‘all the pillars of the Social-Democratic world
    outlook’.
“But what was the real reason that induced Mr. Blank to
    come to the monstrously wrong conclusion that all Marxist
    principles and ideas vanished in the period of the
    ‘whirlwind’? It is very interesting to examine this
    circumstance; it still further exposes the real nature of
    philistinism in politics.
“What is it that mainly distinguished the period of the
    ‘revolutionary whirlwind’ from the present
    ‘Cadet’ period, as regards the various forms of
    political activity and the various methods by which the people
    make history? First and mainly it is that during the period of the
    ‘whirlwind’ certain special method~ of making history
    were employed which are foreign to other periods of political
    life. The following were the most important of these methods: 1)
    the ’seizure’ by the people of political
    liberty—its exercise without any rights and laws, and
    without any limitations (freedom of assembly, even if only in the
    universities, freedom of the press, freedom of association, the
    holding of congresses, etc.); 2) the creation of new organs of
    revolutionary authority—Soviets of Workers’,
    Soldiers’, Railwaymen’s and Peasants’ Deputies,
    new rural and urban authorities, and so on, and so forth. These
    bodies were set up exclusively by the revolutionary
    sections of the people, they were formed irrespective of all laws
    and regulations, entirely in a revolutionary way , as a product of
    the native genius of the people, as a manifestation of the
    independent activity of the people which had rid itself, or was
    ridding itself, of its old police fetters. Lastly, they were
    indeed organs of authority, for all their rudimentary,
    spontaneous, amorphous and diffuse character, in composition and
    in activity. They acted as a government, when, for example, they
    seized printing plants (in St. Petersburg), and arrested police
    officials who were preventing the revolutionary people from
    exercising their rights (such cases also occurred in
    St. Petersburg, where the new organ of authority concerned was
    weakest, and where the old government was strongest). They acted
    as a government when they appealed to the whole people to withhold
    money from the old government. They confiscated the old
    government’s funds (the railway strike committees in the
    South) and used them for the needs of the new, the people’s
    government. Yes, these were undoubtedly the embryos of a new,
    people’s, or, if you will, revolutionary government. In
    their social and political character, they were the rudiments of
    the dictatorship of the revolutionary elements of the people. This
    surprises you, Mr. Blank and Mr. Kiesewetter! You do not see here
    the ‘reinforced security’, which for the bourgeois is
    tantamount to dictatorship? We have already told you that you have
    not the faintest notion of the scientific concept
    ‘dictatorship’. We will expIain it to you in a moment;
    but first we will deal with the third ‘method’ of
    activity in the period of the ‘revolutionary
    whirlwind’: the use by the people of force against those
    who used force against the people. 
 “The organs of authority that we have described
    represented a dictatorship in embryo, for they recognised
    no other authority, no law and no
    standards, no matter by whom
    established. Authority—unlimited, outside the law, and based
    on force in the most direct sense of the word—is
    dictatorship. But the force on which this new authority was based,
    and sought to base itself, was not the force of bayonets usurped
    by a handful of militarists, not the power of the ‘police
    force’, not the power of money, nor the power of any
    previously established institutions. It was nothing of the
    kind. The new organs of authority possessed neither arms, nor
    money, nor old institutions. Their power—can you imagine it,
    Mr. Blank and Mr. Kiesewetter?—had nothing in common with
    the old instruments of power, nothing in common with
    ‘reinforced security’, if we do not have in mind the
    reinforced security established to protect the people from the
    tyranny of the police and of the other organs of the old
    regime.
“What was the power based on, then? It was based on the
    mass of the people. That is the main feature that
    distinguished this new authority from all preceding organs of the
    old regime. The latter were the instruments of the rule of the
    minority over the people, over the masses of workers and
    peasants. The former was an instrument of the rule of the people,
    of the workers and peasants, over the minority, over a handful of
    police bullies, over a handful of privileged nobles and government
    officials. That is the difference between dictatorship
    over the people and dictatorship of the revolutionary
    people: mark this well, Mr. Blank and Mr. Kiesewetter! As the
    dictatorship of a minority, the old regime was able to
    maintain itself solely with the aid of police devices, solely by
    preventing the masses of the people from taking part in the
    government, and from supervising the government. The old authority
    persistently distrusted the masses, feared the light, maintained
    itself by deception. As the dictatorship of the overwhelming
    majority, the new authority maintained itself and could maintain
    itself solely because it enjoyed the confidence of the vast
    masses, solely because it, in the freest, widest, and most
    resolute manner, enlisted all the masses in the task of
    government. It concealed nothing, it had no secrets, no
    regulations, no formalities. It said, in effect: are you a working
    man? Do you want to fight to rid Russia of the gang of police
    bullies? You are our comrade. Elect your deputy. Elect him at
    once, immediately, whichever way you think best. We will willingly
    and gladly accept him as a full member of our Soviet of
    Workers’ Deputies, Peasant Committee, Soviet of
    Soldiers’ Deputies, and so forth. It was an authority open
    to all, it carried out. all its functions before the eyes of the
    masses, was accessible to the masses, sprang directly from the
    masses; and was a direct and immediate instrument of the popular
    masses, of their will. Such was the new authority, or, to be
    exact, its embryo, for the victory of the old authority trampled
    down the shoots of this young plant very soon.
“Perhaps, Mr. Blank or Mr. Kiesewetter, you will ask: why
    ‘dictatorship’, why ‘force’? Is it
    necessary for a vast mass to use force against a handful? Can tens
    and hundreds of millions be dictators over a thousand or ten
    thousand?
“That question is usually put by people who for the first
    time hear the term ‘dictatorship’ used in what to them
    is a new connotation. People are accustomed to see only a police
    authority and only a police dictatorship. The idea that there can
    be government without any police, or that dictatorship need not be
    a police dictatorship, seems strange to them. You say that
    millions need not resort to force against thousands? You are
    mistaken; and your mistake arises from the fact that you do not
    regard a phenomenon in its process of development. You forget that
    the new authority does not drop from the skies, but grows up,
    arises parallel with, and in opposition to the old authority, in
    struggle against it. Unless force is used against tyrants armed
    with the weapons and instruments of power, the people cannot be
    liberated from tyrants.
“Here is a very simple analogy, Mr. Blank and
    Mr. Kiesewetter, which will help you to grasp this idea, which
    seems so remote and ‘fantastic’ to the Cadet mind. Let
    us suppose that Avramov is injuring and torturing Spiridonova. On
    Spiridonova’s side, let us say, are tens and hundreds of
    unarmed people. On Avramov’s side there is a handful of
    Cossacks. What would the people do if Spiridonova were being
    tortured, not in a dungeon but in public? They would resort to
    force against Avramov and his body-guard. Perhaps they would
    sacrifice a few of their comrades, shot down by Avramov; but in
    the long run they would forcibly disarm Avramov and his Cossacks,
    and in all probability would kill on the spot some of these brutes
    in human form; they would clap the rest into some gaol to prevent
    them from committing any more outrages and to bring them to
    judgement before the people.
“So you see, Mr. Blank and Mr. Kiesewetter, when Avramov
    and his Cossacks torture Spiridonova, that is military and police
    dictatorship over the people. When a revolutionary people (that is
    to say, a people capable of fighting the tyrants, and not only of
    exhorting, admonishing, regretting, condemning, whining and
    whimpering; not a philistine narrow-minded, but a revolutionary
    people) resorts to force against Avramov and the Avramovs, that is
    a dictatorship of the revolutionary people. It is a
    dictatorship, because it is the authority of the people
    over Avramov, an authority unrestricted by any laws (the
    philistines, perhaps, would be opposed to rescuing Spiridonova
    from Avramov by force, thinking it to be against the
    ‘law’. They would no doubt ask: Is there a
    ‘law’ that permits the killing of Avramov? Have not
    some philistine ideologists built up the ‘resist not
    evil’ theory?). The scientific term
    ‘dictatorship’ means nothing more nor less than
    authority untrammeled by any laws, absolutely unrestricted by any
    rules whatever, and based directly on force. The term
    ‘dictatorship’ has no other meaning but
    this—mark this well, Cadet gentlemen. Again, in the
    analogy we have drawn, we see the dictatorship of the
    people, because the people, the mass of the population,
    unorganised, ‘casually’ assembled at the given spot,
    itself appears on the scene, exercises justice and metes out
    punishment, exercises power and creates a new, revolutionary
    law. Lastly, it is the dictatorship of the revolutionary
    people. Why only of the revolutionary, and not of the
    whole people? Because among the whole people, constantly
    suffering, and most cruelly, from the brutalities of the Avramovs,
    there are some who are physically cowed and terrified; there are
    some who are morally degraded by the ‘resist not evil’
    theory, for example, or simply degraded not by theory, but by
    prejudice, habit, routine; and there are indifferent people, whom
    we call philistines, petty-bourgeois people who are more inclined
    to hold aloof from intense struggle, to pass by or even to hide
    themselves (for fear of getting mixed up in the fight and getting
    hurt). That is why the dictatorship is exercised, not by the whole
    people, but by the revolutionary people who, however, do not shun
    the whole people, who explain to all the people the motives of
    their actions in all their details, and who willingly enlist the
    whole people not only in ‘administering’ the
    state, but in governing it too, and indeed in organising the
    state.
“Thus our simple analogy contains all the
    elements of the scientific concept ‘dictatorship of the
    revolutionary people’, and also of the concept
    ‘military and police dictatorship’. We can now pass
    from this simple analogy, which even a learned Cadet professor can
    grasp, to the more complex developments of social life.
“Revolution, in the strict and direct sense of the word,
    is a period in the life of a people when the anger accumulated
    during centuries of Avramov brutalities breaks forth into
    actions, not merely into words; and into the actions of
    millions of the people, not merely of individuals. The
    people awaken and rise up to rid themselves of the Avramovs. The
    people rescue the countless numbers of Spiridonovas in Russian
    life from the Avramovs, use force against the Avramovs, and
    establish their authority over the Avramovs. Of course, this does
    not take place so easily, and not ‘all at once’, as it
    did in our analogy, simplified for Professor Kiesewetter. This
    struggle of the people against the Avramovs, a struggle in the
    strict and direct sense of the word, this act of the people in
    throwing the Avramovs off their backs, stretches over months and
    years of ‘revolutionary whirlwind’. This act of the
    people in throwing the Avramovs off their backs is the real
    content of what is called the great Russian revolution. This act,
    regarded from the standpoint of the methods of making history,
    takes place in the forms we have just described in discussing the
    revolutionary whirlwind, namely: the people seize political
    freedom, that is, the freedom which the Avramovs had prevented
    them from exercising; the people create a new, revolutionary
    authority, authority over the Avrarmovs, over the tyrants of the
    old police regime; the people use force against the Avramovs in
    order to remove, disarm and make harmless these wild dogs, all the
    Avramovs, Durnovos, Dubasovs, Mins, etc., etc.
“Is it good that the people should apply such unlawful,
    irregular, unmethodical and unsystematic methods of struggle as
    seizing their liberty and creating a new, formally unrecognised
    and revolutionary authority, that it should use force against the
    oppressors of the people? Yes, it is very good. It is the supreme
    manifestation of the people’s struggle for liberty. It marks
    that great period when the dreams of liberty cherished by the best
    men and women of Russia come true, when liberty becomes
    the cause of the masses of the people, and not merely of
    individual heroes. It is as good as the rescue by the crowd (in
    our analogy) of Spiridonova from Avramov, and the forcible
    disarming of Avramov and making him harmless.
“But this brings us to the very pivot of the
    Cadets’ hidden thoughts and apprehensions. A Cadet is the
    ideologist of the philistines precisely because he looks at
    politics, at the liberation of the whole people, at revolution,
    through the spectacles of that same philistine who, in our analogy
    of the torture of Spiridonova by Avramov, would try to restrain
    the crowd, advise it not to break the law, not to hasten to rescue
    the victim from the hands of the torturer, since he is acting in
    the name of the law. In our analogy, of course, that philistine
    would be morally a monster; but in social life as a whole, we
    repeat, the philistine monster is not an individual, but a social
    phenomenon, conditioned, perhaps, by the deep-rooted prejudices of
    the bourgeois philistine theory of law.

      “Why does Mr. Blank hold it as self-evident that all
      Marxist principles were forgotten during the period of
      ‘whirlwind’? Because he distorts Marxism into
      Brentanoism,[12]
      and thinks that such ‘principles’ as the seizure of
      liberty, the establishment of revolutionary authority and the
      use of force by the people are not Marxist. This idea runs
      through the whole of Mr. Blank’s article; and not only
      Mr. Blank’s, but the articles of all the Cadets, and of
      all the writers in the liberal and radical camp who, today, are
      praising Plekhanov for his love of the Cadets; all of 

      them, right up to the Bernsteinians of Bez Zaglaviya,[13]
      the Prokopoviches, Kuskovas and tutti quanti.
“Let us see how this opinion arose and why it was bound
    to arise.
“It arose directly out of the Bernsteinian or, to put it
    more broadly, the opportunist concepts of the West-European
    Social-Democrats. The fallacies of these concepts, which the
    ‘orthodox’ Marxists in Western Europe have been
    systematically exposing all along the line, are now being smuggled
    into Russia ‘on the sly’, in a different dressing and
    on a different occasion. The Bernsteinians accepted and accept
    Marxism minus its directly revolutionary aspect. They do
    not regard the parliamentary struggle as one of the weapons
    particularly suitable for definite historical periods, but as the
    main and almost the sole form of struggle making
    ‘force’, ‘seizure’,
    ‘dictatorship’ unnecessary. It is this vulgar
    philistine distortion of Marxism that the Blanks and other liberal
    eulogisers of Plekhanov are now smuggling into Russia. They have
    become so accustomed to this distortion that they do not even
    think it necessary to prove that Marxist principles and ideas were
    forgotten in the period of the revolutionary whirlwind.
“Why was such an opinion bound to arise? Because it
    accords very well with the class standing and interests of the
    petty bourgeoisie. The ideologists of ‘purified’
    bourgeois society agree with all the methods used by the Social
    Democrats in their struggle except those to which the
    revolutionary people resort in the period of a
    ‘whirlwind’, and which revolutionary
    Social-Democrats approve of and help in using. The interests of
    the bourgeoisie demand that the proletariat should take part in
    the struggle against the autocracy, but only in a way that does
    not lead to the supremacy of the proletariat and the peasantry,
    and does not completely eliminate the old, feudal-autocratic and
    police organs of state power. The bourgeoisie wants to preserve
    these organs, only establishing its direct control over them. It
    needs them against the proletariat, whose struggle would
    be too greatly facilitated if they were completely abolished. That
    is why the interests of the bourgeoisie as a class require both a
    monarchy and an Upper Chamber, and the prevention of the
    dictatorship of the revolutionary people.

    Fight the autocracy, the bourgeoisie says to the proletariat,
    but do not touch the old organs of state power, for I need
    them. Fight in a ‘parliamentary’ way, that is, within
    the limits that we will prescribe by agreement with the
    monarchy. Fight with the aid of organisations, only not
    organisations like general strike committees, Soviets of
    Workers’, Soldiers ‘ Deputies, etc., but organisations
    that are recognised, restricted and made safe for capital by a law
    that we shall pass by agreement with the monarchy.
“It is clear, therefore, why the bourgeoisie speaks with
    disdain, contempt, anger and hatred about the period of the
    ‘whirlwind’, and with rapture, ecstasy and boundless
    philistine infatuation for . . . reaction, about the period of
    constitutionalism as protected by Dubasov. It is once again that
    constant, invariable quality of the Cadets: seeking to lean on the
    people and at the same time dreading their revolutionary
    initiative.
“It is also clear why the bourgeoisie is in such mortal
    fear of a repetition of the ‘whirlwind’, why it
    ignores and obscures the elements of the new revolutionary crisis,
    why it fosters constitutional illusions and spreads them among the
    people.
“Now we have fully explained why Mr. Blank and his like
    declare that in the period of the ‘whirlwind’ all
    Marxist principles and ideas were forgotten. Like all philistines,
    Mr. Blank accepts Marxism minus its revolutionary aspect;
    he accepts Social-Democratic methods of struggle minus
    the most revolutionary and directly revolutionary methods.
“Mr. Blank’s attitude towards the period of
    ‘whirlwind’ is extremely characteristic as an
    illustration of bourgeois failure to understand proletarian
    movements, bourgeois horror of acute and resolute struggle,
    bourgeois hatred for every manifestation of a radical and directly
    revolutionary method of solving social historical problems, a
    method that breaks up old institutions. Mr. Blank has betrayed
    himself and all his bourgeois narrow-mindedness. Somewhere he
    heard and read that during the period of whirlwind the
    Social-Democrats made ‘mistakes’—and he had
    hastened to conclude, and to declare with self-assurance, in tones
    that brook no contradiction and require no proof, that all the
    ‘principles’ of Marxism (of which he has not the least
    notion!) were forgotten. As for these ‘mistakes’, we
    will remark: Has there been a period in the development of the
    working-class movement, in the development of Social- Democracy,
    when no mistakes were made, when there was no deviation to the
    right or the left? Is not the history of the parliamentary period
    of the struggle waged by the German Social-Democratic
    Party—the period which all narrow-minded bourgeois all over
    the world regard as the utmost limit—filled with such
    mistakes? If Mr. Blank were not an utter ignoramus on problems of
    socialism,he would easily call to mind Mulberger, Dühring, the
    Dampfersubvention[14] question, the
    ‘Youth’,[15] and Bernsteiniad and many, many
    more. But Mr. Blank is not interested in studying the actual
    course of development of the Social-Democratic movement; all he
    wants is to minimise the scope of the proletarian struggle in
    order to exalt the bourgeois paltriness of his Cadet Party.
“Indeed, if we examine the question in the light of the
    deviations that the Social-Democratic movement has made from its
    ordinary, ‘normal’ course, we shall see that even in
    this respect there was more and not less solidarity and
    ideological integrity among the Social-Democrats in the period of
    ‘revolutionary whirlwind’ than there was before
    it. The tactics adopted in the period of ‘whirlwind’
    did not further estrange the two wings of the Social-Democratic
    Party, but brought them closer together. Former disagreements gave
    way to unity of opinion on the question of armed
    uprising. Social-Democrats of both factions were active in the
    Soviets of Workers’ Deputies, these peculiar instruments of
    embryonic revolutionary authority; they drew the soldiers and
    peasants into these Soviets, they issued revolutionary manifestos
    jointly with the petty-bourgeois revolutionary parties. Old
    controversies of the pre-revolutionary period gave way to
    unanimity on practical questions. The upsurge of the revolutionary
    tide pushed aside disagreements, compelling Social-Democrats to
    adopt militant tactics; it swept the question of the Duma into the
    background and put the question of insurrection on  the order of
    the day; and it brought closer together the Social-Democrats and
    revolutionary bourgeois democrats in carrying out immediate
    tasks. In Severny Golos,[16] the Mensheviks,
    jointly with the Bolsheviks, called for a general strike and
    insurrection; and they called upon the workers to continue this
    struggle until they had captured power. The revolutionary
    situation itself suggested practical slogans. There were arguments
    only over matters of detail in theappraisal of events: for
    example, Nachalo[17]
      regarded the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies as organs of
      revolutionary local self-government, while Novaya Zhizn
      [18] regarded them as embryonic organs
      of revolutionary state power that united the proletariat with
      the revolutionary democrats. Nachalo inclined towards
      the dictatorship of the proletariat. Novaya Zhizn
      advocated the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      peasantry. But have not disagreements of this kind been observed
      at every stage of development of every socialist party in
      Europe?
“Mr. Blank’s misrepresentation of the facts and his
    gross distortion of recent history are nothing more nor less than
    a sample of the smug bourgeois banality, for which periods of
    revolutionary whirlwind seem folly (’all principles are
    forgotten’, ‘even intellect and reason almost
    vanish’), while periods of suppression of revolution and
    philistine ‘progress’ (protected by the Dubasovs) seem
    to be periods of reasonable, deliberate and methodical
    activity. This comparative appraisal of two periods (the period of
    ‘whirlwind’ and the Cadet period) runs through the
    whole of Mr. Blank’s article. When human history rushes
    forward with the speed of a locomotive, he calls it a
    ‘whirlwind’, a ‘torrent’, the
    ‘vanishing’ of all ‘principles and
    ideas’. When history plods along at dray-horse pace, it
    becomes the very symbol of reason and method. When the masses of
    the people themselves, with all their virgin primitiveness and
    simple, rough determination begin to make history, begin to put
    ‘principles and theories’ immediately and directly
    into practice, the bourgeois is terrified and howls that
    ‘intellect is retreating into the background’ (is not
    the contrary the case, heroes of philistinism? Is it not the
    intellect of the masses, and not of individuals, that invades the
    sphere of history at such moments? Does not mass intellect at such
    a time become a verile, effective, and not an armchair
    force?). When the direct movement of the masses has been crushed
    by shootings, repressive measures, floggings, unemployment and
    starvation, when all the parasites of professorial science
    financed by Dubasov come crawling out of their crevices and begin
    to administer affairs on behalf of the people, in the
    name of the masses, selling and betraying their interests to
    a privileged few—then the knights of philistinism think that
    an era of calm and peaceful progress has set in and that
    ‘the turn of intellect and reason has come’.The
    bourgeois always and everywhere remains true to himself: whether
    you take Polyarnaya Zvezda or Nasha Zhizn,[19]
      whether you read Struve or Blank, you will always find this same
      narrow-minded, professorially pedantic and bureaucratically
      lifeless appraisal of periods of revolution and periods of
      reform. The former are periods of madness, tolle Jahre,
      the disappearance of intellect and reason. The latter are
      periods of ‘deliberate and systematic’
      activities.
“Do not misinterpret what I am saying. I am not arguing
    that the Blanks prefer some periods to others. It is not a matter
    of preference; our subjective preferences do not determine the
    changes in historical periods. The thing is that in analysing
    the characteristics of this or that period (quite apart from
    our preferences or sympathies), the Blanks shamelessly distort
    the truth. The thing is that it is just the revolutionary
    periods which are distinguished by wider, richer, more deliberate,
    more methodical, more systematic, more courageous and more vivid
    making of history than periods of philistine, Cadet, reformist
    progress. But the Blanks turn the truth inside out! They palm off
    paltriness as magnificent making of history. They regard the
    inactivity of the oppressed or downtrodden masses as the triumph
    of ‘system’ in the work of bureaucrats and
    bourgeois. They shout about the disappearance of intellect and
    reason when, instead of the picking of draft laws to pieces by
    petty bureaucrats and liberal penny-a-liner [In the original these words are in
    English.—Editor.] journalists, there begins
    a period of direct political activity of the ‘common
    people’, who simply set to work without more ado to smash
    all the instruments for oppressing the people, seize power and
    take what was regarded as belonging to all kinds of robbers of the
    people—in short, when the intellect and reason of millions
    of downtrodden people awaken not only to read books, but for
    action, vital human action, to make history.” [20]

  Such was the controversy that was waged in Russia in the
    years 1905 and 1906 on the question of the dictatorship.
Actually, the Dittmanns, Kautskys, Crispiens, and Hilferdings
    in Germany, Longuet and Co. in France, Turati and his friends in
    Italy, the MacDonalds and Snowdens in Britain, etc., argue about
    the dictatorship exactly as Mr. R. Blank and the Cadets did in
    Russia in 1905. They do not understand what dictatorship means, do
    not know how to prepare for it, and are incapable of understanding
    it and implementing it.
  20.10.1920

Endnotes
[1]
    Lenin sent the manuscript of this article to the editors of the
    journal The Communist International in Petrograd. On the
    next day he informed the editors that he had sent the article, and
    requested them to register, check up and set the material
    (everything to be returned to me)” (Central Party Archives
    at the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C. C.P.S.U.). He
    himself read and made a number of corrections in the proofs, which
    he had received from Petrograd. 
      A large part of the article was taken by Lenin from his pamphlet
    The Victory of the Cadets and the Tasks of the Workers’
    Party which he wrote in 1906 (see present edition, Vol. 10,
    pp. 199-276). He used Chapter V of the pamphlet entitled “A
    Sample of Cadet Smugness”.
[2]
    See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 373-74. 
[3]See present edition, Vol. 16, pp. 374-92 and
    393-421. 
[4]
Die Neue Rheinische Zeitung was a daily published in
    Cologne under the editorship of Marx, from June 1, 1848 to May 19,
    1849.  The editorial board consisted of Frederick Engels, Wilhelm
    Wolff, Georg Weerth, Ferdinand Wolff, Ernst Dronke, Ferdinand
    Freiligrath and Heinrich Burgers. This militant organ of the
    proletarian wing of democracy did much to educate the masses and
    rouse them for struggle against the counter-revolution. Most of
    the leading articles defining the newspaper’s stand on the
    key problems of the German and European revolution were written by
    Marx and Engels.  
Despite police persecution, the newspaper
    boldly championed the interests of revolutionary democracy and the
    proletariat. Publication of the newspaper was discontinued
    following Marx’s deportation from Prussia in May 1849 and
    reprisals against other editors. 
[5]
    Karl Marx, “Die Krisis und die Konterrevolution” (see
    Marx/Engels, Werke, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1959, Bd. 5,
    S. 402). 
[6]
    This refers to the All-Germany National Agsembly convened after
    the March 1848 revolution in Germany in Frankfort-on-the-Main in
    May of the same year. The Assembly faced the task of putting an
    end to the political fragmentation of Germany and of drawing up a
    constitution for all Germany. Due to the cowardice and the
    vacillation of its Liberal majority, and the irresoluteness and
    inconsistency of the petty-bourgeois Left wing, the Assembly did
    not dare to assume supreme power in the country and failed to take
    a resolute stand on the major questions of the German revolution
    of 1848-49. It did nothing to alleviate the position of the
    workers and peasants and did not support the national liberation
    movement in Poland and Bohemia, but approved the policy of
    oppression of subject peoples pursued by Austria and Prussia. The
    deputies did not have the courage to mobilise the people for the
    defeat of the counter-revolutionary offensive and the defence of
    the Imperial Constitution which they had framed in March
    1849. 
Shortly afterwards the Austrian and then the
    Prussian governments recalled their deputies, and the Liberal
    deputies of other German states followed suit. The remaining
    deputies,who belonged to the petty-bourgeois Left wing, had the
    Assembly moved to Stuttgart. In June 1849 the Assembly was
    disbanded by the troops of the Württemberg Government. 
[7]
    See Marx/Engels, Werke, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1959,
    Bd. 5, S 40. 
[8]On
    January 9, 1905, over 140,000 St. Petersburg workers carrying
    gonfalons and icons, marched to the Winter Palace to submit a
    petition to the tsar. The march was staged by the priest Gapon, an
    agent of the secret police, at a time when the strike of the
    Putilov workers, which began on January 3 (16), had already spread
    to the other factories in the city. The Bolsheviks exposed
    Gapon’s venture, warning the workers that the tsar might
    unieash a massacre. The Bolsheviks were right. On orders from the
    tsar, the troops met the demonstrating workers, their wives and
    children with rifle shots, sabres and Cossack whips. More than a
    thousand workers were killed and five thousand wounded. January 9,
    or Bloody Sunday as it came to be known, sparked off the 1905
    Revolution. 
[9]
    See present edition, Vol. 9, pp. 131-32.
[10]
    See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 216-17. 
[11]
    Lenin is referring to the daily newspaper Nasha Zhizn
    (Our Life ) which was published at intervals in
    St. Petersburg, from November 6 (19), 1904 to July 11 (24),
    1906. 
[12]
Brentanoism—a political trend originated by the
    German bourgeois economist Lujo Brentano (1844-1931), who preached
    “class peace” in capitalist society and maintained
    that it was possible to eliminate social contradictions without
    the class struggle and that the labour question could be settled
    and the interests of the workers and the capitalists reconciled
    through the establishment of reformist trade unions, and factory
    legislation.
[13]
Bez Zaglaviya (Without a Title )—political
    weekly published in St. Petersburg from January 24 (February 6) to
    May 14 (27), 1906. It was edited by Prokopovich, who worked in
    close co-operation with Kuskova, Bogucharsky, Khizhnyakov and
    others. Bez Zaglaviya supporters formed a semi-Cadet,
    semi-Menshevik group of Russian bourgeois intellectuals who, under
    the guise of non-partisanship, propagated the ideas of bourgeois
    liberalism and opportunism, and supported revisionists in tho
    Russian and international Social-Democratic movement. 
[14]Lenin is referring to the disagreements in the
    Social-Democrat group of the German Reichstag over the shipping
    subsidies (Dampfersubvention ). Late in 1884 Bismarck, in
    pursuance of the expansionist colonial policy, demanded from the
    Reichstag that it approve subsidies to shipping companies for
    establishing regular shipping routes to East Asia, Australia and
    Africa. The Left wing of the Social-Democratic group led by Bebel
    and Liebknecht rejected the subsidies, but the Right wing, under
    Auer, Dietz and others, which constituted the majority, declared
    themselves in favour of granting subsidies, even before the
    official debate on the question. During the Reichstag debate in
    March 1885, the Social-Democratic Right wing voted for subsidies
    for shipping lines to East Asia and Australia, making a number of
    reservations, in particular that the ships for the new lines
    should be built at German shipyards. Only after the Reichstag
    declined this demand did the whole group unanimously come out
    against the government bill. The behaviour of the majority of the
    group came in for criticism from the newspaper Sozialdemokrat
     and Social-Democratic organisations. At one time the
    disagreements within the group were so acute that they threatened
    to lead to a split in the Party. Engels sharply criticised the
    opportunist stand taken by the group’s Right wing (see
    Marx/Engels, Werke, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, Bd. 36).
[15]
    The "Youth ” group in the German Social-Democratic
    Party, a petty-bourgeois, semi-anarchist opposition which took
    shape in 1890. The nucleus of the opposition was made up of young
    writers and students, who posed as Party theoreticians and
    leaders. Blind to the changes brought about by the abrogation of
    the Anti-Socialist Law in 1878, they denied the need for the Party
    to make use of legal forms of struggle, opposed the participation
    of Social-Democrats in parliament, and accused the Party of
    opportunism and defending the interests of the petty
    bourgeoisie. Engels wrote that the theoretical views and tactics
    of the opposition were “’Marxism’ distorted
    beyond recognition”. Their unrealistic and adventurist
    tactics, he said, might “ruin even the strongest party
    numbering millions of members” (see Marx/Engels,
    Werke, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1963, Bd. 22, S. 69). Some
    leaders of the “Left” opposition were expelled from
    the Party at the Erfurt Congress in October 1891.  
[16]
Severny Golos (Voice of the North )—a
    legal daily newspaper, organ of the R.S.D.L.P., which appeared in
    St. Petersburg from December 6 (19), 1905 and was edited jointly
    by the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. It was closed down after its
    third issue had appeared, on December 8 (21), 1905. 
[17]
Nachalo (The Beginning )—a legal daily
    Menshevik newspaper, published in St. Petersburg from November to
    December 1905. 
[18]
Novaya Zhizn (New Life )—the first legal
    Bolshevik newspaper published daily in St. Petersburg from October
    27 (November 9) to December 3 (16), 1905. From the beginning of
    November, after Lenin’s return to St. Petersburg from
    abroad, it was published under his direct guidance. The paper was
    actually the Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P.
[19]
Polyarnaya Zvezda (The Pole Star )—a
    weekly journal, mouthpiece of the Right wing of the
    Constitutional-Democratic Party. It was edited by P. B. Struve and
    appeared in St. Petersburg in 1905-06.
Nasha Zhizn (Our Life
    )—a daily newspaper that was close to the Left wing of
    the Constitutional-Democratic Party; appeared in St. Petersburg at
    intervals, from 1904 to 1906. 
[20]
    See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 241-54. 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Greetings to the All-Russia Conference of Gubernia Soviet
    Women’s Departments











Message Of Greetings To The All-Russia Conference Of Gubernia Departments
For Work Among Women



V. I. Lenin
Message Of Greetings To The All-Russia
Conference Of
Gubernia Departments
For Work Among Women[1] 
Telephone Message


Delivered: December 6, 1920 
First Published: Pravda No. 286, December 19, 1920; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 460
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
     Sally Ryan
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I very much regret that I have not been
    able to attend your conference. Please convey to the delegates,
    both men and women, my sincere greetings and wishes for every
    success.
The participation of women in Party and Soviet activities has
    acquired a gigantic significance today, when the war has ended,
    and the peaceful work of organisation has-for a long time to come,
    as I hope-advanced into the fore-ground. In this work the women
    must play a leading part, and will of course do so.
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

    

      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
December 6, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    The Conference met in Moscow from December 1 to 6, 1920, with over
    200 women delegates participating, representing 5 republics, 05
    gubernias and 5 administrative regions. The Conference discussed a
    report on the foreign and domestic situation of the country, a
    report of the CC. ’s Department on -wdrk among women, the
    immediate tasks of departments for work among women, and the
    question of mother and child protection. The Conference emphasised
    the need to boost production and extend production propaganda and
    the enrolment of working women in the trade unions and the
    Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection.
Lenin’s message of greetings, conveyed by
    telephone, was read at a sitting of the Conference on December
    6.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram to J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to J. V. Stalin


Written: 29 October, 1920
 
First Published: 1942 Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 362
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Stalin, Member of the Revolutionary Military
      Council of the Republic, Baku (wherever he may be)
29.10
I consider it beyond doubt that Georgia will hand
      Batum over to the Entente, probably secretly, and that the Entente
      will march on Baku. Study the matter and take urgent steps to
      fortify the land and sea approaches to Baku, and to bring up heavy
      artillery, etc. Communicate your decisions.
      
    
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at an All-Russia Conference Of
    Political Education Workers Of Gubernia and Uyezd
    Education Departments











Speech Delivered At An All-Russia Conference Political Education
 Workers Of Gubernia and Uyezd Education Departments



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At An All-Russia Conference
Of 
Political Education
 Workers Of Gubernia and Uyezd
 Education Departments
November 3, 1920[1]


Delivered: 3 November, 1920
 
First Published: Bulletin of the All-Russia Conference of Political Education Workers (November 1-8, 1920), Moscow; Published according to the text of the Bulletin
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages  340-361
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, allow me to speak on several ideas, some
    of which were dealt with by the Central Committee of the Communist
    Party and by the Council of People’s Commissars in
    connection with the formation of the Chief Committee for Political
    Education, while others came to me in connection with the draft
    submitted to the Council of People’s Commissars. This draft
    was adopted yesterday as a basis; its details have still to be
    discussed.
I shall permit myself only to say, for my part, that at first I
      was highly averse to any change in the name of your
      institution. In my opinion, the function of the People’s
      Commissariat of Education is to help people learn and 
      teach others. My Soviet experience has taught me to regard
      titles as childish jokes; after all, any title is a joke in its
      way. Another name has now been endorsed: the Chief Committee for
      Political Education.
As this matter has already been decided, you moist take this as
    nothing more than a personal remark. If the matter is not limited
    merely to a change of label, it is only to be welcomed.
If we succeed in drawing new people into cultural and
    educational work, it will not be just a change of title, and then
    we can reconcile ourselves to the “Soviet” weakness of
    sticking a label on every new undertaking and every new
    institution. If we succeed, we shall have achieved something more
    than ever before.
 The link between education and our policy should be the chief
    inducement in making people join us in our cultural and
    educational work. A title may express something if there is a need
    for it, for along the whole line of our educational work we have
    to abandon the old standpoint that education should be
    non-political; we cannot conduct educational work in isolation
    from politics.
That idea has always predominated in bourgeois society. The
    very term “apolitical” or “non-political”
    education is a piece of bourgeois hypocrisy, nothing but
    humbuggery practised on the masses, 99 per cent of whom are
    humiliated and degraded by the rule of the church, private
    property and the like. That, in fact, is the way the bourgeoisie,
    still in the saddle in all bourgeois countries, is deceiving the
    masses.
The greater the importance of a political apparatus in such
    countries, the less its independence of capital and its
    policy.
In all bourgeois states the connection between the political
    apparatus and education is very strong, although bourgeois society
    cannot frankly acknowledge it. Nevertheless, this society
    indoctrinates the masses through the church and the institution of
    private property.
It is one of our basic tasks to contrapose our own truth to
    bourgeois “truth”, and win its recognition.
The transition from bourgeois society to the policy of the
    proletariat is a very difficult one, all the more so for the
    bourgeoisie incessantly slandering us through its entire apparatus
    of propaganda and agitation. It bends every effort to play down an
    even more important mission of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, its educational mission, which is particularly
    important in Russia, where the proletariat constitutes a minority
    of the population. Yet in Russia this mission must be given
    priority, for we must prepare the masses to build up
    socialism. The dictatorship of the proletariat would have been out
    of the question if, in the struggle against the bourgeoisie, the
    proletariat had not developed a keen class-consciousness, strict
    discipline and profound devotion, in other words, all the
    qualities required to assure the proletariat’s complete
    victory over its old enemy.
We do not hold the utopian view that the working masses are
    ready for a socialist society. From precise facts provided by the
    entire history of working-class socialism we know that this is not
    the case, and that preparedness for socialism is created only by
    large-scale industry, by the, strike struggle and by political
    organisation. To win the victory and accomplish the socialist
    revolution, the proletariat must be capable of concerted action,
    of overthrowing the exploiters. We now see that it has acquired
    all the necessary qualities, and that it translated them into
    action when it won power.
Education workers, and the Communist Party as the vanguard in
    the struggle, should consider it their fundamental task to help
    enlighten and instruct the working masses, in order to cast off
    the old ways and habituated routine we have inherited from the old
    system, the private property habits the masses are thoroughly
    imbued with. This fundamental task of the entire socialist
    revolution should never be neglected during consideration of the
    particular problems that have demanded so much attention from the
    Party’s Central Committee and the Council of People’s
    Commissars. What kind of structure should the Chief Committee for
    Political Education have? How should it be linked up with other
    institutions? How should it be linked up, not only with the centre
    but with local bodies? These questions will be answered by
    comrades who are more competent in the matter, have already gained
    considerable experience, and have made a special study of the
    matter. I would like merely to stress the main principles
    involved. We must put the matter frankly and openly affirm,
    despite all the old untruths, that education cannot but be linked
    up with politics.
We are living in an historic period of struggle against the
    world bourgeoisie, which is far stronger than we are. At this
    stage of the struggle, we have to safeguard the development of the
    revolution and combat the bourgeoisie in the military sense and
    still more by means of our ideology through education, so that the
    habits, usages and convictions acquired by the working class in
    the course of many decades of struggle for political liberty-the
    sum total of these habits, usages and ideasshould serve as an
    instrument for the education of all working people. It is for the
    proletariat to decide how the latter are to be educated. We must
    inculcate in the working people the realisation that it is
    impossible and inexcusable to stand aside in the
    proletariat’s struggle, which is now spreading more and more
    to all capitalist countries in the world, and to stand aside in
    international politics. An alliance of all the world’s
    powerful capitalist countries against Soviet Russia-such is the
    real basis of international politics today. And it must, after
    all, be realised that on this will depend the fate of hundreds of
    millions of working people in the capitalist countries. We know
    that, at the present moment, there is not a corner of the earth
    which is not under the control of a small group of capitalist
    countries. Thus the situation is shaping in such a way that one is
    faced with the alternative of standing aloof from the present
    struggle and thereby proving one’s utter lack of political
    consciousness, just like those benighted people who have held
    aloof from the revolution and, the war and do not see the
    bourgeoisie’s gross deception of the masses, the deliberate
    way in which the bourgeoisie is keeping the masses in ignorance;
    or else of joining the struggle for the dictatorship of the
    proletariat.
It is with absolute frankness that we speak of this struggle of
    the proletariat; each man must choose between joining our side or
    the other side. Any attempt to avoid taking sides in this issue
    must end in fiasco.
Observation of the many remnants of the Kerensky gang, the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Social-Democrats, as represented
    by the Yudeniches, Kolchaks, Petlyuras, Makhnos and others, has
    shown us such a variety of forms and shades of counter-revolution
    in various parts of Russia that we have every reason to consider
    ourselves far more steeled in the struggle than anybody else is. A
    glance at Western Europe shows the same thing happening there as
    in our country-a repetition of our own history. Almost everywhere
    elements similar to the Kerensky gang are to be met alongside the
    bourgeoisie. They predominate in a number of countries, especially
    Germany. One can see the same thing everywhere-the impossibility
    of taking an intermediate position, and a clear realisation that
    there must be either a whiteguard dictatorship (for which -the
    bourgeoisie of all the countries of Western Europe are preparing
    by arming against us), or the dictatorship of the proletariat. We
    have experienced this so acutely and profoundly that there is no
    need for me to talk at length about the Russian Communists. Hence
    there can be only a single conclusion, one that should be the
    corner-stone of all arguments and theories about the Chief
    Committee for Political Education: the primacy of the Communist
    Party’s policy must be frankly recognised in the work of
    that body. We know of no other form of guidance; and no other has
    been evolved in any country. Parties may represent the interests
    of their class in one degree or another; they may undergo changes
    or modifications, but we do not yet know of any better form. The
    entire course of the struggle waged by Soviet Russia, which for
    three years has withstood the onslaught of world imperialism, is
    bound up with the fact that the Party has consciously set out to
    help the proletariat perform its function of educator, organiser
    and leader, without which the collapse of capitalism is
    impossible. The working masses, the masses of peasants and
    workers, must oust the old intellectualist habits and re-educate
    themselves for the work of building communism. Otherwise the work
    of construction cannot be undertaken. Our entire experience shows
    that this is a very serious matter, and we must therefore give
    prominence to Party primacy and never lose sight of it when
    discussing our activities and our organisational development. How
    this is to be done will still have to be discussed at length; it
    will have to be discussed in the Party’s Central Committee
    and in the Council of People’s Commissars. The decree which
    was endorsed yesterday laid down the fundamentals in respect of
    the Chief Committee for Political Education, but it has not yet
    gone through all the stages in the Council of People’s
    Commissars. The decree will be published within the next few days,
    and you will see that its final form makes no direct mention of
    relations with the Party.
We must, however, know and remember that, in law and in
    practice, the Constitution of the Soviet Republic is based on the
    tenet that the Party rectifies, prescribes and builds according to
    a single principle-to enable the communist elements linked with
    the proletariat to imbue the proletariat with their own spirit,
    win its adherence, and open its eyes to the bourgeois deceit which
    we have been trying so long to eliminate. The People’s
    Commissariat of Education has gone through a long struggle; for a
    long time the teachers’ organisation resisted the socialist
    revolution. Bourgeois prejudices have struck very deep root among
    the teachers. There has been a long struggle in the form of direct
    sabotage and of tenacious bourgeois prejudices, and we have to
    fight for the communist positions slowly, step by step and win
    them. The Chief Committee for Political Education, which is
    concerned with extra-mural education, the work of educating and
    enlightening the masses, is faced with the clear task of combining
    Party leadership with the effort to gain the adherence of, to
    imbue with its spirit and to animate with its initiative, this
    half-million strong army of teachers, this vast institution which
    is now in the service of the workers. Education workers-the
    teachers-were trained in the spirit of bourgeois prejudices and
    habits, in a spirit hostile to the proletariat, with which they
    have had no ties whatever. We must now train a new army of
    teachers and instructors who must be in close touch with the Party
    and its ideas, be imbued with its spirit, and attract the masses
    of workers, instilling the spirit of communism into them and
    arousing their interest in what is being done by the
    Communists.
Since the old customs, habits and ideas must be discarded, the
    Chief Committee for Political Education and its personnel are
    faced with a most important task, which they must keep uppermost
    in their minds. Here we indeed have a dilemma: how can we
    establish a link between the teachers, most of whom are of the old
    school, with Party members, with the Communists? That is an
    extremely difficult problem, one that will require a considerable
    amount of thought.
Let us consider the means of establishing organisational links
    between people who are so different. In principle, we cannot for a
    moment doubt the need of the Communist Party’s
    primacy. Consequently, the purpose of political culture, of
    political instruction, is to train genuine Communists capable of
    stamping out falsehood and prejudices and helping the working
    masses to vanquish the old system and build up a state without
    capitalists, without exploiters, and without landowners. How can
    that be done? Only by acquiring the sum total of knowledge that
    the teachers have inherited from the bourgeoisie. Without this the
    technical achievements of communism will be impossible, and all
    hopes for those achievements would be pipe dreams. So the question
    arises: how are we to organise these people, who are not used to
    bringing politics into their work, especially the politics that is
    to our advantage, i.e., politics essential to communism? That, as
    I have said, is a very difficult problem. We have discussed the
    matter in the Central Committee, and in discussing it have tried
    to take into account the lessons of experience. We think that a
    congress like the one I am addressing today, a conference like
    yours, will be of great value in this respect. Every Party
    Committee now has to look from a new angle upon every
    propagandist, who used to be regarded merely as a man belonging to
    a definite circle, a definite organisation. Each of them belongs
    to a ruling party which directs the whole state, and the Soviet
    Russia’s world struggle against the bourgeois system. He is
    a representative of a fighting class and of a party which runs,
    and must run, an enormous machine of state. Many a Communist who
    has been through the splendid school of underground work and has
    been tested and steeled in the struggle is unwilling or unable to
    understand the full significance of this change, of this
    transition, which turns the agitator and propagandist into a
    leader of agitators, a leader in a huge political
    organisation. The kind of title he is given, even if it is an
    embarrassing one-such as superintendent of general schools-does
    not matter much; what is important is that he should be capable of
    directing the mass of teachers.
It should be said that the hundreds of thousands of teachers
    constitute a body that must get the work moving, stimulate
    thought, and combat the prejudices that to this day still persist
    among the masses. The heritage of capitalist culture, the fact
    that the mass of the teachers are imbued with its defects, which
    prevent them from being Communists, should not deter us from
    admitting these teachers into the ranks of the political education
    workers, for these teachers possess the knowledge without which we
    cannot achieve our aim.
 We must put hundreds of thousands of useful people to work in
    the service of communist education. That is a task that was
    accomplished at the front, in our Red Army, into which tens of
    thousands of representatives of the old army were incorporated. In
    the lengthy process of re-education, they became welded with the
    Red Army, as they ultimately proved by their victories. This is an
    example that we must follow in our cultural and educational
    work. True, this work is not so spectacular, but it is even more
    important. We need every agitator and propagandist; he will be
    doing his job if he works in a strictly Party spirit but at the
    same time does not limit himself to Party work, and remembers that
    it is his duty to direct hundreds of thousands of teachers, whet
    their interest, overcome their old bourgeois prejudices, enlist
    them in the work we are doing, and make them realise the immensity
    of our work. It is only by tackling that job that we can lead this
    mass of people, whom capitalism suppressed and drew away from us,
    along the right path.
Such are the aims that every agitator and propagandist working
    in the sphere of extra-mural education must pursue and constantly
    keep in sight. A host of practical difficulties will be
    encountered in the process, and you must help the cause of
    communism by becoming representatives and leaders, not only of
    Party study-circles, but of the entire state administration, which
    is now in the hands of the working class.
We must overcome resistance from the capitalists in all its
    forms, not only in the military and the political spheres, but
    also ideological resistance, which is the most deep-seated and the
    strongest. It is the duty of our educational workers to accomplish
    the re-education of the masses. The interest, the thirst for
    education and knowledge of communism which are to be seen among
    them are a guarantee of our victory in this field too, although,
    perhaps, not as rapid as at the front and only after great
    difficulties and at times even reverses. However, we shall
    ultimately win.
Last, I should like to dwell on one more point. Perhaps the
    title of Chief Committee for Political Education is not properly
    understood. Inasmuch as it makes mention of the political concept,
    politics is the main thing here.
But how is politics to be understood? If politics is understood
    in the old sense, one may fall into a grave and profound
    error. Politics means a struggle between classes; means the
    relations of the proletariat in its struggle for its emancipation,
    against the world bourgeoisie. However, in our struggle two
    aspects of the matter stand out: on the one hand, there is the
    task of destroying the heritage of the bourgeois system, of
    foiling the repeated attempts of the whole bourgeoisie to crush
    the Soviet state. This task has absorbed most of our attention
    hitherto and has prevented us from proceeding to the other task,
    that of construction. According to the bourgeois world outlook,
    politics was divorced, as it were, from economics. The bourgeoisie
    said: peasants, you must work for your livelihood; workers, you
    must work to secure your means of subsistence on the market; as
    for economic policy, that is the business of your masters. That,
    however, is not so; politics should be the business of the people,
    the business of the proletariat. Here we must emphasise the fact
    that nine-tenths of our time and our work is devoted to the
    struggle against the bourgeoisie. The victories over Wrangel, of
    which we read yesterday, and of which you will read today and
    probably tomorrow, show that one stage of the struggle is coming
    to an end and that we have secured peace with a number of Western
    countries; every victory on the war front leaves our hands freer
    for the internal struggle, for the politics of state
    organisation. Every step that brings us closer to victory over
    the whiteguards gradually shifts the focus of the struggle to
    economic policy. Propaganda of the old type describes and
    illustrates what communism is. This kind of propaganda is now
    useless, for we have to show in practice how socialism is to be
    built. All our propaganda must be based on the political
    experience of economic development. That is our principal task;
    whoever interprets it in the old sense will show himself to be a
    retrograde, one who is incapable of conducting propaganda work
    among the masses of the peasants and workers. Our main policy must
    now be to develop the state economically, so as to gather in more
    poods of grain and mine more poods of coal, to decide how best to
    utilise these poods of grain and coal and preclude starvation-that
    is our policy. All our agitation and propaganda must be focussed
    on this aim. There must be less fine talk, for you cannot satisfy
    the working people with fine words. As soon as the war enables us
    to shift the focus from the struggle against the bourgeoisie, from
    the struggle against Wrangel and the whiteguards, we shall turn to
    economic policy. And then agitation and propaganda will play a
    role of tremendous and ever growing importance.
Every agitator must be a state leader, a leader of all the
    peasants and workers in the work of economic development. He must
    tell them what one should know, what pamphlets and books one
    should read to become a Communist.
That is the way to improve our economic life and make it more
    secure, more social; that is the way to increase production,
    improve the food situation and distribution of the goods produced,
    increase coal output, and restore industry without capitalism and
    without the capitalist spirit.
What does communism consist in? All propaganda for communism
    must be conducted in a way that will amount to practical guidance
    of the state’s development. Communism must be made
    comprehensible to the masses of the workers so that they will
    regard it as their own cause. That task is being poorly
    accomplished, and thousands of mistakes are being made. We make no
    secret of the fact. However, the workers and the peasants must
    themselves build up and improve our apparatus, with our
    assistance, feeble and inadequate as it is. To us, that is no
    longer a programme, a theory, or a task to be accomplished; it has
    become a matter of actual and practical development. Although we
    suffered some cruel reverses in our war, we have at least learnt
    from these reverses and won complete victory. Now, too, we must
    learn a lesson from every defeat and must remember that the
    workers and peasants have to be instructed by taking the work
    already performed as an example. We must point out what is bad, so
    as to avoid it in future.
By taking constructive work as an example, by repeating it time
    and again, we shall succeed in turning inefficient communist
    managers into genuine builders, and, in the first place, into
    builders of our economic life. We shall achieve our targets and
    overcome all the obstacles which we have inherited from the old
    system and cannot be eliminated at a single stroke. We must
    re-educate the masses; they can be re-educated only by agitation
    and propaganda. The masses must be brought, in the first place,
    into the work of building the entire economic life. That must be
    the principal and basic object in the work of each agitator and
    propagandist, and when he realises this, the success of his work
    will be assured. (Loud applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    The Conference met in Moscow from November 2 to 8, 1920, with  283
    delegates attending. The main question discussed was the
    establishment of the Chief Committee for Political Education.
    A. V. Lunacharsky delivered the opening address, in which he
    dealt with the work done in the sphere of political education.
    The Conference also heard a report by N. K. Krupskaya on the
    current plan of work of the Chief Committee for Political
    Education, and Y. A. Litkens’s report on the organisation of
    local political education departments. Other items on the agenda
    concerned  the food campaign and political education, production
    propaganda  in the light of the rehabilitation of economic
    activity, and the  elimination of illiteracy. Lenin spoke after
    Krupskaya at the  third session of the Conference, on the second
    day of the proceedings. 
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

## 
    Draft Resolution on “The Tasks of the Trade Unions, And The Methods of Their Accomplishment”











 Draft Resolution On “The Tasks Of The Trade Unions, 
 And The Methods Of Their Accomplishment”



V. I. Lenin
Draft Resolution
On “The Tasks of the Trade Unions,
And The Methods of Their Accomplishment”[1]


Written: Early November 1920
 
First Published: The 
Fourth (Russian) edition of the Collected Works; Published according to 
the manuscript  pp. 374-75.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages  374-375
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In accordance with the decisions of the Ninth Congress of the
    Communist Party of Russia, the Conference once again draws the
    attention of the trade unions to the necessity of these decisions
    being scrupulously fulfilled, and points out in particular that
    the imperative need of a single economic plan establishing the
    order of priority of objectives in the general scheme of economic
    construction is indisputable. At the same time, as was recognised
    by the Party Conference of September 1920, a gradual but steady
    transition must be effected from urgency procedures to a more even
    distribution of forces, particularly in the secondment of the
    individual unions’ best organisers to the All-Russia Central
    Council of Trade Unions with a view to consolidating that body as
    a whole, improving the functioning of its apparatus, achieving
    greater system in the work of all trade unions, and thereby
    strengthening the entire trade union movement. 
 This measure should be applied in particular to the Central
    Committee of the General Transport Workers’ Union
    (Tsektran ); an end must be put to its
    disproportionate growth as compared with the other unions, and the
    best elements thus released should extend to the entire trade
    union movement those methods of the broader application of
    democracy, the promotion of initiative, participation in the
    management of industry, the development of emulation, and so
    forth, which have yielded the best practical results. 
 In conformity with the decisions of the Ninth Congress of the
    Communist Party of Russia, and recognising as absolutely
    indispensable the development, extension and consolidation of
    trade union participation in production management, the Conference
    instructs the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions to sum up
    immediately the practical experience gained in this respect by the
    leading unions and enterprises, and to draw up detailed
    instructions, which will help all trade unions make use of that
    practical experience and will enjoin them to utilise the latter in
    a more energetic and systematic fashion. 

      This refers especially to the utilisation of specialists. 

Endnotes
[1]
    This document formed the basis of the resolution on the tasks of
    the trade union movement, which was passed by the R.C.P.(B.) group
    of the Fifth All-Russia Conference of Trade Unions on November 8,
    1920, and published in Pravda on November 13. 200 delegates
    supported the resolution, with 12 delegates abstaining.
      At the Conference, which took place in Moscow between November 2
    and 6, the Party raised the question of reorganising the work of
    the trade unions in keeping with the tasks of peaceful socialist
    construction, extending democracy and abandoning purely
    administrative methods. Trotsky came out against the proposed
    reorganisation. At a sitting of the Communist group on November 3,
    he spoke “fine words”, as Lenin said, about
    “shaking up” the trade unions, “tightening the
    screws” and immediate “governmentalisation of trade
    unions”. Trotsky’s speech, which sparked off a
    discussion in the Party, was opposed by a slight majority of
    Communist delegates. Disagreement with Trotsky over trade unions
    concerned the methods over the role of unions in a workers state
    where socialism was not yet constructed and which was in a state
    of civil war.  On November 8 Lenin read his theses at a plenary
    meeting of the Central Committee, in which he opposed
    Trotsky’s views. Trotsky’s theses won 7 votes, and
    Lenin's, 8 votes.
Lenin's theses formed the basis of his draft
    resolution on "The Tasks of the Trade Unions, end the Methods of
    Their Accomplish-ment ", which was passed by 10 votes against 4,
    with I abstention.
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    On the Struggle of the Italian Socialist Party











On the Struggle of the Italian Socialist Party



V. I. Lenin
On the Struggle of the Italian Socialist Party[1] 


Written: 4 & 12 of November, 1920 
      
First Published: 1920; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 377-396
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Pravda No. 213 of September 25, 1920,
      published a short letter of mine entitled: “Letter to the
      German and the French Workers Regarding the Discussion on the
      Second Congress of the Communist International.”[2] In its
      issue of October 5,   Avanti!, the central organ of the
      Italian
Socialist Party, carried a reprint of this letter with
      comments of its own, which are worth examining since they
      strikingly reveal the fallacy of the stand taken by Comrade
      Serrati, editor of Avanti!


      “Lenin’s
      explanation,” we read, “to some extent mitigates the
      draconic conditions dictated by comrades who are not quite in a
      position to correctly appraise men and circumstances at such a
      distance and in such a different situation...,”
“... Lenin spared one of his victims: Modigliani
      ....”
“... Lenin now says-whether on his own behalf or on
      behalf of the Executive Committee of the Communist International,
      we do not know-that ’exceptions’ [to the general rule]
      are permissible [with the consent of the Executive
      Committee].”
The ironical remark about the “victim”, which
      Modigliani, one of the reformists, is supposed to be, is
      pointless. Despite Serrati’s opinion, my failure to mention
      the name of Modigliani (and of Longuet) was unintentional. I took
      one name or another as an example, in order to characterise a
      trend, leaving aside, as I still do, the question of
      individuals; I did not undertake to decide this question,
      considering it of secondary importance, and spoke of the
      possibility of exceptions. Notwithstanding his statement, Serrati
      is fully aware (for he makes precise reference to my article in
      Pravda) that I speak, and can do so, only on my
      own behalf, and in no way on behalf of the Executive
      Committee.
 By his remarks, Serrati distracts Avanti! readers
      from the principal, basic and vital question of whether reformists
      can now be tolerated in the ranks of the Italian party of the
      revolutionary proletariat. Serrati covers up the falseness of his
      stand by trying to divert attention from the essential to the
      secondary and insignificant.
That must be combated. The essentials must be elucidated.
Both in the comment we are dealing with and in other articles,
      Serrati says that the Moscow Congress (the Second Congress of the
      Communist International) was not adequately informed about Italian
      affairs. One might think that the gist of the matter did not lie
      in the struggle between two fundamental trends, or in the answer
      to the fundamental question of whether “unity” with
      the reformists is permissible, but in differences over points that
      “Moscow” is not precisely informed about!
The glaring fallacy of this view-and of this attempt to
      distract attention from the main point-is best of all exposed in
      the official report of the discussion in the Central
Committee of the Italian Socialist Party. This discussion
      took place in Milan on September 28, 29 and 30 and October 1, only
      a few days prior to the publication of the issue of
      Avantil referred to above.
The discussion closed with a vote on two resolutions, one of
      which may be called a communist, and the other a
      “Centrist” or evasive resolution, which in a masked
      form advocated an alliance (“unity”!) with the
      reformists. The first resolution was carried, seven voting for it
      (Terracini, Gennari, Regent.. Tuntar, Casucci, Marziali, and
      Bellone); the second resolution was rejected (five in favour:
      Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, Giacomini and Serrati).
The first resolution is of a remarkable clarity and
      precision. It opens with a reference to the “present
      conditions” of the revolutionary struggle in Italy calling
      for “greater homogeneity” in the party. It goes on to
      say that the right to remain in the party was extended to all, on
      condition of submission to party discipline; however, this
      condition has not been observed. It would be erroneous, it goes on
      to say, to expect submission to discipline from those whose
      convictions are opposed to the principles and tactics of the Third
      International; consequently, since the twenty-one points of the Moscow
conditions have been accepted, a “radical purge”
      of the party is necessary so as to eliminate all
      reformist and opportunist elements.
Here no reference is made to names or particular instances. A
      clear political line is laid down. The grounds for the decision
      are precisely stated, viz., concrete facts from the history of the
      party in Italy, and concrete features in the revolutionary
      situation there.
The second resolution is a model of evasiveness and poor
      diplomacy: we accept the twenty-one points, but consider that
      “these conditions leave a loop-hole for dubious
      interpretations”, and that “the political criterion of
      each section of the Third, Communist International should be
      adapted to the historical conditions and the actual specific
      features of its country, and submitted for approval to this
      International”. The resolution emphasises “the need to
      preserve the unity of the Italian Socialist Party on the basis of
      the twenty-one points”; individual breaches of discipline
      are to be sternly punished by the Central Committee of the
      Party.
The communist resolution says that the revolutionary situation
      calls for greater homogeneity in the party. That is
      undeniable. The resolution of those who advocate
      “unity” with the reformists attempts to evade
      this undeniable truth, without daring to dispute it.
The Communist resolution says that it is a feature of the
      situation in Italy that the condition demanding submission to
      party decisions by the reformists has not been observed.
      That is the gist of the matter. That being so, it is not merely a
      mistake but a crime to allow the reformists to remain in
      the party at a time when the general revolutionary situation is
      becoming acute, and the country may even be on the eve of
      decisive revolutionary battles.
Is this true or not? Have the reformists carried out party
      decisions? Have they in fact submitted to the party? Have they
      pursued its policy? The resolution of the defenders of the
      reformists cannot give an affirmative answer; it cannot challenge
      the Communists’ negative answer, and avoids a reply. It
      twists and turns, makes general references to the different
      specific features in the various countries, and does so in
order to evade and to present in a false light the most
      important “specific feature” of Italy herself at the
      moment. What constitutes this specific feature of Italy is the
      fact that the reformists have already proved incapable in practice
      of carrying out party decisions and pursuing party policy. By
      evading this fundamental issue, the resolution of the advocates of
      unity with the reformists utterly defeats itself.
By this fact alone, Serrati, Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, and
      Giacomini have already shown quite clearly and
      irrefutably that they are fundamentally wrong, that their
      political line is fundamentally false.


      The discussion in
      the Italian party’s Central Committee has ever more
      forcefully revealed the total falsity of Serrati’s line. The
      Communists were right in saying that as long as the reformists
      remained what they were they could not but sabotage the
      revolution, as they had already sabotaged it during the recent
      revolutionary movement of the Italian workers who were taking over
      the factories.
That is the pith and marrow of the matter! How is it possible
      to prepare for revolution and advance towards decisive battles,
      when there are people in the party who sabotage the revolution?
      That is not merely a mistake but a crime.
If, as he frankly declared in his letter to
      l’HumanitÂ’s[3] of October 14,
      Serrati counted on the expulsion of Turati alone,[4] this
      mistake of his has also already been revealed by the
      facts. The Italian reformists not only held a factional
      congress of their own (in Reggio Emilia on October 11, 1920); at
      this congress they not only reiterated the essence of their
      reformist views; not only did they give a triumphant reception to
      Filippo Turati at the congress, but they also declared, through
      TrÂves: “We shall either remain in the party, or to a man
      leave it.” Let us note in this connection that the bourgeois
      press and the reformists themselves did their utmost to play up
      the importance of their factional congress. But in A
vantil of October 13 (the Milan edition) we find it frankly
      stated that the reformists were able to get representatives from
      only two hundred branches of a party with thousands of
      branches.
But let us dwell in greater detail on Serrati ’s main
      argument on the essence of the question. Serrati fears a split
      that may weaken the party and especially the trade unions, the
      co-operative societies and the municipalities. These institutions,
      which are essential to the construction of socialism, must not be
      destroyed-that is Serrati’s main idea. He asks
      (Avanti!, October 2, 1920, the Milan edition):
      “Where shall we find enough ’Communists’, even
      if only the most ardent new-fledged Communists, to fill the public
      posts from which we shall drive their holders, as Terracini
      proposes?” The same idea is expressed by Serrati in an
      article on the Second Congress of the Third international, in the
      journal Co,nunismo (No. 24, p. 1627), which he edits:
      “Picture to yourselves the Milan commune [i.e., the Milan
      municipality] administered, not by competent people but by novices
      who only yesterday declared themselves ardent
      Communists.”
Serrati fears the destruction of the trade unions, the
      co-operative societies and municipalities, and the inefficiency
      and mistakes of the novices.
What the Communists fear is the reformists’ sabotage of
      the revolution.
This difference reveals Serrati’s error of principle. He
      keeps reiterating a simple idea: the need for flexible
      tactics. This idea is incontestable. The trouble is that Serrati
      leans to the right when, in the present-day conditions in
      Italy one should lean to the left. To successfully
      accomplish the revolution and safeguard it, the Italian party must
      take a definite step to the left (without in any way
      keeping its hands tied or forgetting that subsequent events may
      well call for definite steps to the right).
Victory in the proletarian revolution cannot be
      achieved, and that revolution cannot be safeguarded,
      while there are reformists and Mensheviks in one’s
      ranks. That is obvious  in principle, and has been strikingly
      confirmed by the experience both of Russia and of Hungary. This is
      a decisive consideration. It is simply ridiculous to compare with
      this danger the danger of “losing” the trade unions,
      cooperative societies, municipalities, etc., or of their failures,
      mistakes, or collapse. It is not only ridiculous, but
      criminal. Anyone who would subject the entire revolution to risk
      for fear of injuring the municipal affairs of Milan and so forth,
      has completely lost his head, has no idea of the fundamental task
      of the revolution, and is totally incapable of preparing its
      victory.
We in Russia made thousands of mistakes and suffered thousands
      of reverses, losses, etc., owing to the inefficiency of novices
      and incompetent people in the co-operative societies,
      municipalities, trade unions, etc. We have no doubt that other and
      more civilised nations will make fewer mistakes of this
      kind. Notwithstanding these mistakes, we have achieved what is
      most important, viz., the conquest of power by the
      proletariat. Moreover, we have maintained that power for three
      years.
The mistakes mentioned by Comrade Serrati are minor ones and
      are infinitely easier to rectify than the “mistake” of
      allowing the sabotage of the revolution by the Mensheviks and the
      wrecking of the revolution itself. That is selfevident. It has
      been strikingly demonstrated in the case of Hungary. It has also
      been confirmed by our experience; during the three years of
      proletarian government in Russia difficult situations have arisen
      many times, when the Soviet regime would most
certainly have been overthrown if Mensheviks, reformists,
      petty-bourgeois democrats had remained in our Party, or even if
      they had remained in any considerable numbers in the central
      Soviet bodies, such as the Central Executive Committee.
Serrati has failed to understand the specific features of the
      transitional situation that exists in Italy, where, as is
      generally admitted, decisive battles are in store between the
      proletariat and the bourgeoisie for possession of state power. At
      such a moment, it is not only absolutely essential to remove the
      Mensheviks, reformists, Turatists from the party, but it may even
      be useful to remove some very good Communists too, to remove them
      from all responsible posts, if they are inclined to waver, and
      reveal a tendency to drift towards “unity” with the
      reformists.
Let me give a practical illustration. On the eve of the October
      Revolution in Russia, and immediately after it, a number of very
      good Communists in Russia committed an error, one which our people
      are now loth to recall. Why are they loth to recall it? Because,
      unless there is particular reason for it, it is wrong to recall
      mistakes which have been completely set right. But it will be
      useful to recall this mistake for the benefit of the Italian
      workers. At the time mentioned, prominent Bolsheviks and
      Communists, such as Zinoviev, Kamenev, Rykov, Nogin and Milyutin,
      wavered and expressed the fear that the Bolsheviks were isolating
      themselves excessively, were taking too much risk in heading for
      an uprising, and were too unyielding in their attitude towards a
      certain section of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The conflict became so acute that these
      comrades demonstratively resigned from all responsible posts in
      Party and government, to the great glee of the enemies of the
      Soviet revolution. It developed so far that the Central Committee
      of our Party conducted a very heated controversy in the press with
      the comrades who had resigned. But a few weeks later-at most a few
      months-all these comrades realised their mistake and returned to
      their posts, some of the most responsible in the Party and the
      Soviets.
Why this happened can readily be understood. On the eve of
      revolution or at the height of the struggle for its victory, the
      slightest wavering in the ranks of the Party may wreck
everything, frustrate the revolution, and wrest power from
      the hands of the proletariat, for that power has not yet been
      consolidated, and the onslaught against it is still very
      strong. If wavering leaders resign at such a time, that does not
      weaken the party, the working-class movement and the revolution,
      but strengthens them.
Italy is going through a similar period. It is
      generally seen and admitted that a nation-wide revolutionary
      crisis is maturing The proletariat has proved in deed that it is
      capable of rising spontaneously, and of rousing the masses for a
      mighty revolutionary movement. The poor peasants, or
      semi-proletarians (it is a pity that Comrade Serrati has acquired
      the bad habit of putting a question mark after this word whenever
      he uses it; it is a correct Marxist term and expresses a correct
      idea, which has been confirmed by facts both in Russia and in
      Italy, viz., that the poor peasants are half property-owners and
      half proletarians)the poor peasants in Italy have shown in deed
      that they are capable of rising for a revolutionary struggle, in
      the wake of the proletariat. What is most essential now, in fact
      absolutely essential for the victory of the revolution in Italy,
      is that the Italian revolutionary proletariat should have a real
      vanguard in the shape of a truly Communist Party, one that is
      incapable of wavering and flinching at the decisive
      moment, a party that will concentrate within itself the utmost
      fervour, devotion to the revolution, energy and boundless courage
      and determination. Victory has to be achieved in a very hard and
      painful struggle that will entail great sacrifice; when captured,
      power will have to be upheld in the face of incredibly fierce
      attacks, intrigues, slander, calumny, intimidation and violence on
      the part of the bourgeoisie of the whole world, in the
      face of the most dangerous waverings on the part of every
      petty-bourgeois democrat, every Turati supporter, every
      “Centrist”, every SocialDemocrat, socialist and
      anarchist. At such a time and in such surroundings, the Party must
      be a hundred times firmer, bolder, more determined, devoted and
      ruthless than in ordinary or in less difficult times. At such a
      time and in such surroundings, the Party will become a hundred
      times stronger, not weaker, if Mensheviks, like those who
      foregathered in Reggio Emilia on October II, 1920, withdraw from
      it altogether, and even if some excellent Communists-such as
      Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, Giacomini and Serrati, members of the
      present Central Committee of the party, probably are-withdraw from
      its leadership.
Even if the people of the latter category resigned now, most of
      them would undoubtedly very soon see their mistake and return
      after the victory of the proletariat, after its victory had been
      consolidated. In all probability, even a section of the Italian
      Menshoviks, of the Turati supporters, would return, too, and be
      received into the party when the period of greatest difficulties
      had passed, just as a section of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were on the other side of the
      barricades in 1917-18, have come over to us now (after we have
      been through three difficult years since the revolution).
The Italian revolutionary proletariat is about to face a period
      of battles that will be not merely extremely difficult, as I have
      said, but truly the most difficult of all. The greatest trials lie
      ahead. I would consider it frivolous and criminal to shrug off
      these difficulties. It surprises me how Comrade Serrati could have
      published in his journal Comunismo (No. 24, September
      15-30, 1920), without any comment, such a superficial article as
      that by G. C. entitled “Will We Be Blockaded?” Despite
      what the author of this article says, I personally think that in
      the event of the proletariat’s victory in Italy, the
      blockade of that country by Great Britain, France and America is
      possible and probable. In my opinion, Comrade Graziadei was much
      closer to the truth in his speech at the meeting of the Italian
      party’s Central Committee (Avanti!, October 1,
      1920, the Milan edition), when he admitted that the problem of a
      possible blockade was “very grave”
      (“problema gravissima”). He said that Russia
      had held out despite the blockade, partly because of the
      sparseness of her population and her enormous territory, but the
      revolution in Italy “could not resist (resistere)
      for long if it were not co-ordinated with a revolution in some
      other country in Central Europe”, and that “such
      co-ordination is difficult but not impossible”, because the
      whole of continental Europe is passing through a revolutionary
      period.
Though put very cautiously, this is true. I would merely add
      that Italy is assured of  acertain amount of
      co-ordination—although that may as yet be inadequate and
      incomplete—and that complete co-ordination will
      have to be /ought for. When the reformists speak of the
      possibility of a blockade they do so in order to sabotage the
      revolution, instil apprehension of the revolution, and imbue the
      masses with their own panic, fear, indecision and
      vacillation. Revolutionaries and Communists must not deny the
      dangers and difficulties of the struggle in order to put
      greater firmness into the masses, purge the party of
      those that are weak, wavering and unstable, and inspire the entire
      movement with greater enthusiasm, a higher spirit of
      internationalism, and a greater preparedness to make sacrifices
      for the sake of a great aim, namely, hastening the revolution in
      Great Britain, France and America should these countries
      dare to blockade the proletarian and Soviet Italian republic.
The question of replacing experienced reformist or
      “Centrist” leaders by novices is not a particular
      question, of concern to a single country in special
      circumstances. It is a general question which arises in every
      proletarian revolution, and as such it is formulated and quite
      specifically answered in the resolution of the Second Congress of
      the Communist international on “The Fundamental Tasks of the
      Communist International”. In point 8 we read:
      “Preparation for the dictatorship of the proletariat, not
      only entails explaining the bourgeois character of all reformism;
      ... it also entails replacing the old leaders by Communists in
      proletarian organisations of absolutely every type-not only
      political, but also trade union, cooperative, educational, etc
      . ...These representatives of the labour aristocracy, or the
      hourgeoisified workers, should be eliminated from all their posts
      a hundred times more boldly than hitherto, and replaced by
      workers, even if wholly inexperienced, as long as they are
      connected with the exploited masses and enjoy the latter’s
      confidence in the struggle against the exploiters. The
      dictatorship of the proletariat will require the appointment of
      such inexperienced workers to the most responsible posts in the
      state; otherwise the workers’ government will be impotent,
      and will not have the support of the masses.”[5]
Serrati is therefore wrong in saying that “all” in
      the Italian party agree to accept the decisions of the Communist
      Congress. In fact the reverse is to be seen.
In the above-mentioned letter to l’HumanitÂ
      Serrati says among other things:
As for the recent events, one should know that the leaders of
      the General Confederation of Labour (the Italian variant of the
      T.U.C.) proposed that the leadership of the movement should be
      turned over to those who wanted to expand it to a revolution. Our
      comrades of the General Confederation of Labour declared that they
      were willing to remain disciplined soldiers if the extremists
      assumed leadership of the insurrection. But the latter did not
      assume leadership of the movement ....”
It would be highly naÂve on Serrati’s part to take at
      its face value this statement from the reformists in the General
      Confederation of Labour. In fact, threatening to resign at crucial
      moments is a variety of sabotage of the revolution. This is in no
      way a question of loyalty, but simply of the victory of the
      revolution being impossible if at every difficult turn
      the leaders are faced with hesitation, vacillation and
      resignations on the part of their “own” colleagues,
      those at the top, the “leaders”. It may be useful to
      Comrade Serrati to know that at the end of September 1917, when
      the coalition of Russian Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
      with the bourgeoisie had obviously fallen through politically,
      none other than our Socialist-Revolutionaries, Chernov’s
      party, wrote in their newspaper: “The Bolsheviks will be
      obliged to form a cabinet .... Let them not make futile attempts
      to hide behind a hastily concocted theory that it is impossible
      for them to take power. The democracy will not accept these
      theories. At the same time, the advocates of coalition must
      guarantee them full support” (the Socialist-Revolutionary
      newspaper, the newspaper of their party, Chernov’s newspaper
      Dyelo Naroda, September 21, 1917, quoted in my pamphlet
      Can the Bolsheviks Retain
  State Power?, Petrograd, 1917, p. 4).[6]
It would be just as fatal a mistake for the revolutionary
      workers to believe in the loyalty of such statements as it was to
      believe the Hungarian Turatists, who promised Bela Kun their help
      and joined the Communist Party, but, nevertheless, proved to be
      saboteurs of the revolution and wrecked it by their
      vacillation.
*    *    *
To sum up:
1) The party of the revolutionary proletariat in Italy should
      display the utmost self-restraint, circumspection and coolness for
      a correct appraisal of the conditions in general, and the
      appropriate moment in particular, in the impending decisive
      battles for political power between the Italian working class and
      the bourgeoisie.
      
    

      2) At the same time, all propaganda and agitation conducted by
      that party should be imbued with the firmest determination to
      wage that struggle to a victorious conclusion, come what may,
      in a united and centralised manner, and with supreme heroism,
      ruthlessly eliminating the vacillation, indecision and
      wavering with which the Turati supporters are so thoroughly
      imbued.
3) The propaganda conducted by the Milan edition of
      Avanti!, which is edited by Serrati, does not prepare the
      proletariat for the struggle, but brings disintegration into its
      ranks. At a moment like the present, the party’s Central
      Committee should give the workers leadership, prepare them for the
      revolution, and challenge wrong views. This can (and should) be
      done, while allowing all trends to express themselves. Serrati is
      giving leadership, but doing so in the wrong direction.
 4) The expulsion from the party of all who attended the Reggio
      Emilia Congress on October ill, 1920, will not weaken the party
      but strengthen it; such “leaders” are capable only of
      wrecking the revolution in the “Hungarian style”, even
      if they do remain loyal. The whiteguards and the bourgeoisie will
      be able to utilise the hesitation, vacillation, doubts,
      uncertainty, etc., of even quite “loyal” socialists,
      Social-Democrats, etc.
5) If people such as Baratono, Zannerini, Bacci, Giacomini and
      Serrati display vacillation and resign, they should not be asked
      to remain; their resignations should be immediately accepted. They
      will return after the period of decisive battles and will then be
      of greater use to the proletariat.
6) Comrades, workers of Italy, do not forget the lessons of the
      history of all revolutions, the lessons of Russia and Hungary in
      1917-20. Great battles, great difficulties and great sacrifices
      await the proletariat in Italy. Victory over the bourgeoisie, the
      assumption of power by the proletariat and the consolidation of
      the Soviet Republic in Italy all depend on the outcome of these
      battles, and. on the solidarity, discipline and devotion of the
      masses of the workers. The bourgeoisie of Italy and of all
      countries of the ’world will do their utmost and resort to
      any crime and atrocity to prevent the proletariat from taking
      power, and to overthrow its power. The hesitation, vacillation and
      irresolution of the reformists and of all who attended the Reggio
      Emilia Congress on October 11, 1920, are inevitable, because, even
      though many of them are quite honest, such people have always and
      in all countries, wrecked the cause of revolution by their
      vacillation. It was such as these who wrecked the revolution (the
      first revolution; it will be followed by another ...) in Hungary,
      and would have wrecked the revolution in Russia had they not been
      removed from all responsible posts and surrounded by a wall of
      proletarian distrust, vigilance and surveillance.
The toiling and exploited masses of Italy will follow the
      revolutionary proletariat. It will prove victorious in the end,
      for its cause is that of the workers of the whole world, and there
      is no way to avoid the continuation of the present imperialist
      wars, the advent of the new imperialist wars that are being
      prepared, and the horrors of capitalist slavery and oppression,
      otherwise than in a Soviet Workers’ Republic.

      4.11. 1920
False Talk On Freedom
      
      (Instead Of An Epilogue)

      Comrade Nobs, editor of Volksrecht, the Swiss
      LeftSocialist newspaper in Zurich, recently published a letter
      by Zinoviev on the need to break with the opportunists, together
      with his own lengthy reply to this letter. Nobs ’s reply
      amounts to an emphatic rejection of the twenty-one conditions
      and of affiliation to the Communist International, this, of
      course, being done in the name of “freedom”the
      freedom to criticise, freedom from excessive demands or the
      dictatorship of Moscow (I have not kept Nobs ’s article
      and am therefore obliged to quote from memory; I can vouch for
      the idea, but not for the exact wording).
Incidentally, Comrade Nobs has enrolled Comrade Serrati as an
      ally, who is also known to be displeased with
      “Moscow”, i.e., particularly with the Russian members
      of the Communist International’s Executive Committee and who
      also complains that Moscow violates the “freedom” of
      the constituent sections, the individual parties and individual
      members of the Communist International. It will not be
      superfluous, therefore, to say a few words about freedom.
After three years of the dictatorship of the proletariat, we
      may safely say that the most common and popular objection to it
      all over the world is its alleged violation of freedom and
      equality. The entire bourgeois press in all countries, including
      the press of the petty-bourgeois democrats, i.e., of the
      Social-Democrats and socialists, among them Kautsky, Hilferding,
      Martov, Chernov, Longuet, etc., etc., rail against the Bolsheviks
      for the latter’s violation of freedom and equality. From the
      standpoint of theory, this can be readily understood. The reader
      will recall Marx’s celebrated and sarcastic words in
      Capital:


      “This sphere [of the circulation or
      exchange of commodities], within whose boundaries the sale and
      purchase of labour power goes on, is in fact a very Eden of the
      innate rights of man. There alone rule Freedom, Equality, Property
      and Bentham.” (Capital, Vol. I, Part II, end of
      Chapter 4, Russian language edition, 1920, p. 152[7]

This sarcastic remark has a profound historical and
      philosophical meaning. It should be compared with the popular
      explanation of the same question given by Engels in
      Anti-Duhring, particularly with what Engels said about
      the idea of equality being a prejudice or an absurdity, if it does
      not mean the abolition of classes.[8]
The abolition of feudalism and of its vestiges, and the
      establishment of the foundations of the bourgeois order (one may
      quite correctly say: the bourgeois-democratic order) occupied an
      entire epoch of world history. It was inevitable for freedom,
      equality, property and Bentham to become the slogans of this epoch
      of world history. The abolition of capitalism and its vestiges,
      and the establishment of the fundamentals of the communist order
      comprise the content of the new era of world history that has set
      in. It is inevitable that the slogans of our era are and must be:
      the abolition of classes; the dictatorship of the proletariat for
      the purpose of achieving that aim; the ruthless exposure of
      petty-bourgeois democratic prejudices concerning freedom and
      equality and ruthless war on these prejudices. Whoever does not
      understand this has no understanding of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat, Soviet government, and the fundamental principles of
      the Communist International.
Until classes are abolished, all talk about freedom and
      equality in general is self-deception, or else deception of the
      workers and of all who toil and are exploited by capital; in any
      case, it is a defence of the interests of the bourgeoisie. Until
      classes are abolished, all arguments about freedom and equality
      should be accompanied by the questions: freedom for which class,
      and for what purpose; equality between which classes, and in what
      respect? Any direct or indirect, witting or unwitting evasion of
      these questions inevitably turns into a defence of the interests
      of the bourgeoisie, the interests of capital, the interests of the
      exploiters. If these questions are glossed over, and nothing is
      said about the private ownership of the means of production, then
      the slogan of freedom and equality is merely the lies and humbug
      of bourgeois society, whose formal recognition of freedom and
      equality conceals actual economic servitude and inequality for the
      workers, for all who toil and are exploited by capital, i.e., for
      the overwhelming majority of the population in all capitalist
      countries.
Thanks to the fact that, in present-day Russia, the
      dictatorship of the proletariat has posed in a practical manner
      the fundamental and final problems of capitalism, one can
      see with particular clarity whose interests are served (cui
prodest?-“who benefits?”) by talk about freedom
      and equality in general. When the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      the Mensheviks. the Chernovs and the Martovs, favour us with
      arguments about freedom and equality within the limits of
labour democracy (for, you see, they are never guilty of
      reasoning about freedom and equality in general! They never forget
      Marx!) we ask them: what about the distinction between the class
      of wage-workers and the class of small property-owners in the
      period of the dictatorship of the proletariat?
Freedom and equality within the limits of labour
democracy mean freedom for the small peasant owner (even if
      he farms on nationalised land) to sell his surplus grain at
      profiteering prices, i.e., to exploit the workers. Anyone
      who talks about freedom and equality within the limits of  labour
      democracy when the capitalists have been overthrown but private
      property and freedom to trade still survive is a champion of the
      exploiters. In exercising its dictatorship, the proletariat must
      treat these champions as it does the exploiters, even though they
      say they are SocialDemocrats or socialists, or admit that the
      Second International is putrid, and so on and so forth.
As long as private ownership of the means of production (e.g.,
      of agricultural implements and livestock, even if private
      ownership of land has been abolished) and freedom to trade remain,
      so does the economic basis of capitalism. The dictatorship of the
      proletariat is the only means of successfully fighting for the
      demolition of that basis, the only way to abolish classes (without
      which abolition there can be no question of genuine freedom for
      the individualand not for the property-owner-of real equality, in
      the social and political sense, between man and man-and not
the humbug of equality between those who possess property and
those who do not, between the well-fed and the hungry,
      between the exploiters and the exploited). The dictatorship of the
      proletariat leads to the abolition of classes; it leads to that
      end, on the one hand, by the overthrow of the exploiters and the
      suppression of their resistance, and on the other hand by
      neutralising and rendering harmless the small
      property-owner’s vacillation between the bourgeoisie and the
      proletariat.
The falsity of Comrade Nobs’s and Comrade Serrati’s
      statements does not, of course, consist in their being falsely or
      insincerely meant. Nothing of the kind. They are quite sincere,
      and there is nothing subjectively false in what they have
      said. However, their statements are false objectively, in content,
      for they are a defence of the prejudices of petty-bourgeois
      democracy; they amount to a defence of the bourgeoisie.
The Communist International cannot under any circumstances
      recognise freedom and equality for all who wish to subscribe to
      certain statements, irrespective of their political conduct. To
      Communists this would be no less suicidal both as regards theory
      and practical politics than the recognition of freedom and
      equality “within the limits of labour democracy”,
      etc. To anyone able to read and willing to understand what he
      reads, it must be quite clear that none of the decisions,
      theses, resolutions and conditions of the Communist International
      recognise the absolute “freedom and equality” of
those who desire to affiliate to the Communist International.


      What is our stipulation for recognising “freedom and
      equality”, the freedom and equality of members of the
      Communist International?
It is that no opportunists and “Centrists”, such as
      the well-known representatives of the Right wing of the Swiss and
      Italian socialist parties, shall he able to become members. No
      matter how these opportunists and “Centrists” may
      claim that they recognise the dictatorship of the proletariat,
      they actually remain advocates and defenders of the prejudices,
      weaknesses and vacillations of the pettybourgeois democrats.
You must first break with those prejudices, weaknesses and
      vacillations, with those who preach, defend and give practical
      expression to those views and qualities. Then, and only on this
      condition, can you be “free” to join the Communist
      International; only then can the genuine Communist, a Communist in
      deed and not merely in word, be the “equal” of any
      other Communist, of any other member of the Communist
      International.
Comrade Nobs, you are “free” to defend the views
      you hold. But we, too, are “free” to declare that
      these views are petty-bourgeois prejudices, which are injurious to
      the proletarian cause and of use to capitalism; we, too, are
      “free” to refuse to join in an alliance or league with
      people who defend those views or a policy that corresponds to
      them. We have already condemned that policy and those
      views on behalf of the Second Congress of the Communist
      International as a whole. We have already said that we absolutely
      demand a rupture with the opportunists as a first and preliminary
      step.
Do not talk of freedom and equality in general, Comrade Nobs
      and Comrade Serrati! Talk of freedom not to carry outthe
      decisions of the Communist International on the absolute duty of
      breaking with the opportunists and the “Centrists”
      (who cannot but undermine, cannot but sabotage the dictatorship of
      the proletariat). Talk of the equality of the opportunists and
      “Centrists” with the Communists. Such freedom and such
      equality cannot be recognised by us for the Communist
      International; as for any other kind of freedom and equality-you
      may enjoy them to your heart’s content!
On the eve of the proletarian revolution, the liberation, the
      freedom, of the parties of the revolutionary proletariat from
      opportunists and “Centrists”, from their influence,
      their prejudices, their weaknesses and vacillations, is the main
      and essential condition of success.

      11.12.1920

Endnotes
[1]
      This work consists of two articles on a single subject. The first
      article, whose title covers the two articles in the present
      edition, was written on November 4, 1920, and first published in
      Pra ucla No. 250 on November 7, 1920. In the note to the article,
      the editors wrote: “Comrade Lenin wrote the article before
      he received the news of the despicable behaviour of D
      ’Aragona and the opportunist trade unionists, Party members,
      who insisted on their policy in opposition to the Central
      Committee of their own Party and, acting in collusion with
      Minister Giolitti, frustrated an immense movement of the working
      class. These facts, of which we shall speak in greater detail in
      one of our next issues, confirm still more strikingly that Lenin
      is right.” The second article, which Lenin entitled
      “False Talk on Freedom (Instead of an Epilogue)” was
      written on December 11, 1920. The following note is to be found in
      the MS: NB:“if you are going to publish it at all, then
      publish it as an epilogue to the article on the struggle in the
      Italian Socialist Party.” (Central Party Archives at the
      Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the C.C. C.P.S.U.). Both articles
      were published in issue No. 15 of the journal The Communist
      International in December 1920 under a common title “False
      Talk on Freedom”.
[2]
      See pages 280-82 in this volume.
[3]
      l’Humanité—French daily founded by Jean
      Jaurès in 1904 as organ of the French
Socialist Party. During the First World War it was the
      mouthpiece of the extreme flight wing of the Party and took a
      social-chauvinist stand. Shortly after the split in the Party at
      the congress in December 1920 and the formation of the Communist
      Party, it became the organ of the latter and has since then been
      published as such.
[4]
      Here is the principal passage in this letter: “We all stand
      for the Moscow conditions. The question is how they are to be
applied. I assert that the party must be purged of
      harmful elements, and I proposed that Turati be expelled; but we
      must not lose the masses belonging to the syndicates [trade
      unions] and co-operative societies. Others want a radical
      split.That is where we differ.” (l’Humanité,
October 14, Serrati’s
      italics.)—Lenin.
[5]
      See p. 191 of this
      volume.
[6]
      See present edition, Volume 26,
pp. 91-92.
[7]
      See Karl Marx, Capital,
Vol. 1, Marx-Engels Internet Archive
[8]
      See Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring,
      on the Marx-Engels Inernet Archive

 Collected Works
Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Joint Plenum Of The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’, Peasants’ And Red Army Deputies, The Moscow Committee Of The R.C.P.(B.)
    And The Moscow City Trade Union Council, Dedicated To The Third Anniversary
    Of The October Revolution











Speech At A Joint Plenum Of The Moscow Soviet Of Workers’, Peasants’ And Red Army Deputies, The Moscow Committee Of The R.C.P.(B.)
And The Moscow City Trade Union Council, Dedicated To The Third Anniversary
Of The October Revolution November 6, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Joint Plenum
 Of The Moscow Soviet
Of Workers’, Peasants’ And Red Army
Deputies,
The Moscow Committee Of The R.C.P.(B.)
And The Moscow City Trade Union Council,
Dedicated To 
The Third Anniversary
Of The October Revolution
November 6, 1920


Delivered: 6 of November, 1920 
 
First Published: in Verbatim Reports of the Plenums of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies; Published according to the text in the book
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 397-402
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Prolonged applause.) Comrades, we have gathered here today to commemorate our proletariat’s days of struggle and our revolutionary achievements. Today we can celebrate our victory. Despite the unparalleled difficulties of life and the unparalleled efforts of our enemies, we have won. We have been winning for three years. This is a gigantic victory, one that previously none of us would have believed possible. Three years ago, when we were at Smolny, the Petrograd workers’ uprising showed us that it was more unanimous than we could have expected, but had we been told that night that, three years later, we would have what now exists, that we would have this victory of ours, nobody, not even the most incurable optimist, would have believed it. We knew at that time that our victory would be a lasting one only when our cause had triumphed the world over, and so when we began working for our cause we counted exclusively on the world revolution. The imperialist war changed all the forms of life we had lived in till then, and we had no way of knowing what forms would be assumed by the struggle, which had dragged on much longer than could have been expected. Now, after three years, it turns out that we are immeasurably stronger than we were before, but the world bourgeoisie are still very strong, too; yet, despite the fact that they are far stronger than we are, we can say that we have won. We have directed all our energies to disintegrating this bourgeoisie, and in this respect our work has not been without success. The reason for this is that we staked our chances on world revolution, and were undoubtedly right in doing so. We knew that the whole world was heading for destruction; we knew that, after the imperialist war, things could not go on in the old way because the imperialist war had thoroughly destroyed all the old economic and legal relations, all the conditions of existence on which the old order had till then been based. And if, at a time when the imperialist war had done a thousand times more than our propaganda did to pave the way for a débâcle, the proletariat in even a single country took action ending in victory, this would be sufficient to undermine the forces of the world bourgeoisie.
If we now cast a glance at the international situationand we have always stressed that we regard things from the international standpoint-and examine the history of the wars that have been waged against Soviet Russia, we shall see that we are at peace with almost all the little bourgeois states bordering on us, states in winch Bolsheviks are persecuted and executed. These states are servants and slaves to the Entente, and they want to ruin and destroy Soviet Russia, yet we have concluded peace with them-against the Entente’s wishes. Three such mighty powers as Britain, France and America could not unite against us, and were defeated in a war they had begun against us with their joint forces. Why has that been? It has been because their economies and life in their countries have been undermined, because they are moribund, because they cannot go on living in the old way, and because the class at whose will they exist-the bourgeois class-has gone rotten. That class drove over 10 million people into the imperialist war and to destruction. For what purpose? For the purpose of partitioning the world among a handful of capitalists. In doing so, however, it has come to the end of its strength, and has undermined the foundations of its own existence; however strong it may seem militarily, it is internally impotent. This is no longer a proclamation in the Bolshevik spirit, but a fact that has been proved with fire and sword. However rich and strong that class may be, it is doomed, whereas we are a class that is advancing towards victory. Even though we are weaker than our enemies, we have been winning for three years, and we have the right to say, without the least boasting, that we have won.
In saying that, we should not forget another aspect of the matter. We should not forget that we have won no more than half of the victory. We have won because we have been able to hold out against states that are stronger than we are, and moreover have joined forces with our émigré exploiters-the landowners and capitalists. We have always known and shall never forget that ours is an international cause, and until the revolution takes place in all lands, including the richest and most highly civilised ones, our victory will be only a half-victory, perhaps still less. At present we are gaining the upper hand in the fighting against Wrangel; we are expecting news that will bear out our expectations.[1] We are confident that if we do not succeed in capturing the Crimea within the next few days, we shall do so several days later, but we have no guarantee that this is the last effort against us on the part of the world bourgeoisie. On the contrary, facts in our possession show that this effort will be repeated in the spring. We know that their chances of success will be negligible, and we know too that our military forces will be more powerful than those of any other country. For all that, however, the danger is not yet over; it still exists and will continue to do so until the revolution is victorious in one or in several advanced countries.
We know that things are moving in that direction; we know that the Second Congress of the Third International, wlieli was held in Moscow during the summer, did an immense job, one that has no precedent. Some of you may have been present when Comrade Zinoviev delivered his report, in which he dealt in detail with the congress of German Independents at Halle.[2] Many of you may have heard his graphic description of developments in a country in which the chances of a revolution are the greatest. Similar things are taking place in all countries. Communism has developed, grown strong, and created parties in all the leading countries. During this period, the cause of the international revolution has suffered a number of reverses in some small countries, where assistance in crushing the movement has come from such huge predators as Germany, which helped to crush the Finnish revolution, or those giants of capitalism, Britain, France and Austria, which crushed the revolution in Hungary. By doing so, however, they have multiplied a thousandfold the elements of revolution in their own countries. Today the main reason why they have been weakened by the struggle is that their rear lines are not assured, because in all countries the workers and peasants do not want to light against us, and heroic sailors have come to the fore, not only in our country, in Kronstadt, but also in their countries. Throughout France the names of the sailors who served in our Black Sea are associated with recollections of the Russian revolution; the French workers know that those who are now serving terms of penal servitude in France mutinied in the Black Sea because they refused to become butchers of the Russian workers and peasants.[3] That is why the Entente has grown weak; that is why we say with confidence that our position is secure in the international field.
However, our victory is far from complete, comrades; we have won less than half of it. Yes, we have won a gigantic victory thanks to the self-sacrifice and enthusiasm of the Russian workers and peasants; we have been able to show that Russia is capable of producing not only the individual heroes who entered the struggle against tsarism and died at a time when the workers and peasants did not support them. We were right when we said that Russia would produce such heroes from among the masses, that she would be able to do so by the hundreds and thousands We said that it would come about, and that then capitalism would be a lost cause. The main reason of our victory, its chief source, is the heroism, the self-sacrifice, and the unparalleled tenacity displayed by our lied Army men who have laid down their lives at the front, and by the workers and peasants who have suffered so much, especially the industrial workers, most of whom have suffered more during these three years than the workers did during the early years of capitalist slavery. They have endured cold, hunger and suffering-all this in order to retain power. Thanks to this tenacity and this heroism, they have created a rear that has proved the only strong rear existing at the moment among the belligerent forces. That is why we are strong and firm, whereas the Entente is steadily disintegrating before our very eyes.
However, with this enthusiasm and heroism alone, the cause of the revolution cannot be completed, carried on to full victory. These qualities were sufficient to hurl hack the enemy when he flung himself on us and tried to strangle us; they were sufficient for victory in a bloody conflict, but not for the ultimate goal. They are not enough because we are now faced with the second half of our task, the major and more difficult part. Our triumph of today, our confidence that we shall win, must be imbued with a quality that will enable us to gain a victory just as decisive in the second half of the task. Mere enthusiasm, the mere readiness of the workers and peasants to face death in accomplishing the second half of our task are not enough, because the second task is a most difficult one of constructive and creative work. From capitalism we inherited not only a ruined culture, not only wrecked factories, not only a despairing intelligentsia; we inherited a disunited and backward mass of individual proprietors; we inherited inexperience, an absence of the team spirit and of all understanding that the past must be buried.
Such are the problems we have to solve today. We must remember that today’s temper has to be put to work for a long time to come, so that fragmentation of our economic life may be done away with. We cannot return to the old ways. By overthrowing the rule of the exploiters we have already accomplished the greater part of the job. We must now unite all working men and women and get them to work together. We have come here like conquerors entering now territory; yet, despil o difficult conditions we are working in, we have been victorious at the front. We see that our work is progressing today better than it did a year ago. We know that we cannot provide sufficient food for all, and we are not certain that hunger and cold will not knock at the doors of homes and cottages, but we do know that we have won. We know that our productive power is enormous even now, after the severe imperialist and civil wars; we know that we shall not let the workers and peasants starve and freeze; however, to be able to do that, we must count all our resources and share them out properly. We do not yet know how to do that because capitalism taught every petty proprietor to look alter his own interests, to think of how to get rich, and become one of the moneybags as quickly as possible; it did not teach anybody how to wage a common struggle for some definite idea. We must now be guided by another principle. The other and more difficult part of our task now faces us. The enthusiasm that now fills us may last another year, perhaps even five years. However we should remember that the struggle we shall have to wage is made up of ordinary workaday tasks. Around us are small-scale economic tasks. Furthermore, you know that the little units that keep our economic life going are the same that served in the past-petty officials, petty bureaucrats accustomed to the old and selfish way of doing things. The struggle against such things must become the task of the hour. On the occasion of these festivities, the occasion of this triumphant mood of ours, the occasion of the third anniversary of the establishment of Soviet rule we must become imbued with the labour enthusiasm, the will to work, and the persistence on which the speedy salvation of the workers and peasants, the salvation of the national economy now depends. We shall then see that our victory in the accomplishment of this task will be more effective and lasting than in all bloody battles of the past. (Prolonged applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The Red Army’s drive against Wrangel began at the end of Octo-ber 1920. After heavy fighting Wrangel was hurled back into the Crimea. On the night of November 7 the Red Army troops launched an offensive on the Perekop Isthmus and by November 16 cleared the Crimea of the whiteguards. Thus the period of the Civil war and foreign intervention was in the main brought to an end. [See also Leon Trotsky, How the Revolution Armed, Volume 3]
[2] The extraordinary congress of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany met in Halle on October 12-17, 1920. The main question on the agenda was the terms of admission into the Communist International. The fierce struggle over this question caused a split in the party, 237 delegates voting for affiliation to the Comintern, and 156 against. The Right wing called its own congress and elected an executive committee, retaining the old name of the party. The Left wing and the Communist Party (the Spartacists) formed the United Communist Party of Germany.
[3] The mutiny in the Second Black Sea squadron of the French navy, which broke out in April-May 1919, was directed against the French Government’s policy in sending 300,000 soldiers and sailors to Russia to crush Soviet power. The interventionists troops in the South numbered over 130,000 men. The Odessa undergroundcommittee of the Bolshevik Party headed by Smirnov (Lastochkin), and its Foreign Collegium with Joanne Labourbe as a member of its Bureau, played an important role in fostering the revolutionary spirit of the soldiers and sailors of the interventionist troops. The Collegium included such experienced Communist agitators as Yakov Yelin, Vladimir Dyogot and others, who established contacts with soldiers and the crews of a number of ships. The mutiny began on April 20 on the battleships France and Jean Bart, which were riding off Sevastopol harbour. Other ship crews and soldiers of the 175th French Infantry Regiment supported their action. Then the mutiny spread to the ships in Odessa harbour. The mutineers demanded that the intervention should be stopped at once and the troops sent home, threatening to join the Red Army if their demands were not granted. The French command arrested the mutineers’ leaders and sent them off to France, where they were treated most harshly. The mutiny was defeated because the mutineers did not have a clear revolutionary aim or capable leadership, as no Communist Party yet existed in France. However, the action of the French soldiers and sailors, who gave revo-lutionary support to the world’s first working people’s state stimulated the growth of the revolutionary movement in France.The successes of the Red Army, revolutionary action in the French army and navy, and the workers’ pressure compelled the French Government to withdraw its troops from Russia.

 Collected Works Volume 31 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 
    Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram to J. V. Stalin, November 13, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to J. V. Stalin


Written: 13 November, 1920
 
First Published: Pravda No. 21,
January 21, 1937 Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 407
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Stalin
How is the struggle against the bands progressing? Is it true that they have over 20,000 rifles and sabres? Are the reinforcements designated for the Caucasus front suffi-cient? Do you consider a peaceful settlement of relations with Georgia and Armenia possible, and on what basis? Then, is the work on the fortification of the approaches to Baku being conducted in real earnest? I also ask for infor-mation on Turkey and Persia, briefly by telegram, and in detail by letter.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Theses on Production Propaganda











Theses On Production Propaganda



V. I. Lenin
Theses On Production Propaganda[1]
Rough Draft


Written: 18 November, 1920 
      
First Published: 1928; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 404-406
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


1. In connection with the R.S.F.S.R.’s
    military victories and its international position in general,
    production propaganda must now be given special prominence, and be
    accentuated and organised.
2. The leading newspapers, Izvestia and
    Pravda in the first place, should: a) reduce the space
    devoted to politics, and increase space for production propaganda;
    h) influence all the work of the Party and of Soviet institutions,
    in the sense of mobilising greater forces for production
    propaganda; c) endeavour to work systematically to place
    production propaganda on a nation-wide footing, and evolve
    extensive measures for its encouragement and improvement, with a
    special view to verifying the successes actually achieved in
    practice.
3. In just the same way, work should be
    systematised, extended and developed in selecting able
    administrators, organisers and inventors from the masses of
    workingmen and peasants.
4. Throughout the R.S.F.S.R. production propaganda
    should be placed under the direction of a single body, with the
    aim of economising forces and improving guidance of this work. In
    this, the greatest autonomy, both local and within each trade, is
    indispensable. Any marked success should be systematically and
    judiciously rewarded (bonuses in kind, etc.). Verification of
    successes to be organised impartially and competently.
5. The editorial hoard of a mass newspaper with a
    circulation of between 500,000 and 1,000,000 should be made the
    solo body guiding production propaganda.
Bednota[2]] is the right
    newspaper for the purpose.
It would be harmful to have a division into an
    industrial newspaper and an agricultural newspaper, since it is
    the aim of socialism to bring industry and agriculture closer
    together and unite them. In practice, the guiding role of the
    industrial proletariat both in the cities and in the rural areas,
    particularly in the urbanisation of agriculture and the
    electrification of the entire country, calls precisely for a
    single newspaper devoted to problems of production (and for a
    single body in charge of production propaganda) both for the
    workers and the peasants.
6. This guiding collegiate body should consist of
    five members representing: 1) the All-Russia Central Council of
    Trade Unions; 2) the Supreme Council of the National Economy; 3)
    the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture; 4) the Chief
    Committee for Political Education; 5) the Central Committee of the
    R.C.P. (or an editor-in-chief) This collegiate body and the
    newspaper should be attached to the All-Russia Central Council of
    Trade Unions (perhaps there should also be a representative of the
    Central Board for Vocational Training?).
7. This newspaper, devoted to matters of
    production, should be a popular one, in the sense of being
    understood by millions of readers, without falling into
    vulgarisation. The paper should not descend to the level of the
    uncultivated reader, but should work steadily-and by very gradual
    degrees-to promote his development. Little space-not exceeding a
    quarter of the total-should be devoted to politics. Top priority
    should be given to a single economic plan, to the labour front,
    production propaganda, the training of workers and peasants in the
    work of administration, to seeing that Soviet laws and measures
    established by Soviet institutions are given due effect, and to an
    extensive and properly organised exchange of opinions with the
    rank-and file reader.
8. Materials published in the newspaper or
    addressed to it, as well as all other kinds of material, should be
    systematically and periodically brought out in pamphlet or leaflet
    form and compulsorily supplied to libraries, as well as to
    factories and enterprises in the given field of production (the
    pamphlets and leaflets should systematise all the material
    relating to each particular branch of production). Together with
    manuals and reviews of foreign technology, this material should
    serve to spread vocational training and polytechnical
    education.
A more rational distribution of the newspaper, as
    well as of pamphlets and leaflets dealing with questions of
    production, among all libraries in the R.S.F.S,R. should,
    in particular, be the object of special attention.
9. It is indispensable that engineers, agronomists,
    schoolteachers, and also Soviet functionaries possessing definite
    professional qualifications, should be drawn into systematic
    participation in production propaganda (this in connection with
    the liquidation of illiteracy).
The organisation of lectures, talks, reports,
    etc.
Compulsory labour service on the part of all those
    who are able to acquaint the population with problems of
    electrification, with the Taylor system, etc.
10. The more extensive and systematic use of films
    for production propaganda. Joint work with the cinema section.
Soviet gramophone records. Displays of diagrams and
    cartograins at clubs, village reading-rooms, in streets,
    etc. Bills and placards to he displayed near factories, workshops,
    technical schools, etc.
11. The organisation, jointly with the
    People’s Commissariat of Labour and other institutions, of
    an inspectorate of production. The latter’s work to be
    co-ordinated with that of production propaganda, as well as with
    the work of instructors, exhibition trains and ships, and the
    like.
12. Extensive publicity for exemplary
    enterprises. Organisation of factory workers with foreign
    industrial experience-this to be done in special workshops,
    sections or groups, etc. Such workers to be utilised for the
    training of backward workingmen, for the dissemination of
    vocational-technical and polytechnical instruction, etc.
N. Lenin

    

      18.11.1920

Endnotes
[1]
    This document served as a basis for the draft theses of the Chief
    Committee for Political Education, which were published in
    Pravda No. 267 on November 27, 1920, under the heading
    “Production Propaganda (Draft Theses of the Chief Committee
    for Political Education)”. The question of production
    propaganda was first raised in connection with the discussion of
    the immediate tasks of economic development, at the Ninth Party
    Congress held from March 29 to April 5, 1920. But after
    Poland’s attack on the Soviet Republic, the brief respite
    came to an end and the questions of economic development receded
    into the background. Only at the end of 1920, after the signing of
    a preliminary peace with Poland and the defeat of Wrangel, did the
    question of production propaganda aimed at drawing the masses into
    the work of economic rehabilitation come up again with renewed
    urgency. Production propaganda, first suggested by Lenin, remains
    to this day one of the main tasks of the political, cultural and
    educational activities of the Party and the Soviet state.
[2]
Bednota (The Poor)—a daily newspaper published by
    the C.C. C.P.S.U.(B.) from March 27, 1918 to January 31, 1931. On
    February 1, 1931 it merged with Sotsialisticheskoye
    Zemledeliye (Socialist Farming).
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Extract From Direct-Line Talk Between
    V. I. Lenin And J. V. Stalin











Extract From Direct-Line Talk Between V. I. Lenin And J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Extract From Direct-Line Talk
Between V. I. Lenin And J. V. Stalin


Discussed: 20 November, 1920 or earlier. 
 
First Published: November 20, 1920 or earlier First published In t945 in Lenin Miscellany XXXV Published according to the text of the telegraph tape
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 407
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



      I can give no reply without convening the Political Bureau. I
      advise that you immediately submit a concrete proposal and at
      once table it for the Political Bureau, or act independently on
      the basis of the powers conferred on Stalin, or else expedite
      your coming to Moscow to settle the entire Caucasus question as
      a whole. In any case, the bringing up of reinforcements should
      be intensified and speeded up. Communicate your exact
      opinion.
Lenin
    


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Our Foreign and Domestic Position and Party Tasks
    Speech Delivered To The Moscow Gubernia Conference
    Of The R.C.P.(B.)











Our Foreign and Domestic Position and Party Tasks, Speech Delivered To The Moscow Gubernia Conference  Of The R.C.P.(B.), November 21, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Our Foreign and Domestic Position and Party Tasks
 Speech Delivered To The Moscow Gubernia Conference  Of The R.C.P.(B.)[1]
November 21, 1920


Delivered: 21 November, 1920 or earlier. 
 
First Published: Published in 1920 in the pamphlet: Current Questions of the Party’s present work. Published by the Moscow Committee, R.C.P.(B.) the text of the pamphlet  
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 408-426
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 (Applause.) Comrades, in speaking of the
    international position of the Soviet Republic we naturally have to
    deal mainly with the Polish war and Wrangel’s defeat. I
    think that at a meeting of Party workers who have, of course,
    followed the Party press and have frequently heard major reports
    on this question, there is no need and indeed it would be
    superfluous, for me to speak in detail on this period or on each
    phase of the war against Poland, on the character of our
    offensives, or on the significance of our defeat at Warsaw. I
    presume that most of the comrades are so familiar with this aspect
    of the matter that I would only be repeating myself, which would
    be unsatisfactory to these comrades. I shall therefore speak, not
    on the various episodes and turns of our Polish campaign but on
    the results we now have before us. 
After the Red Army’s brilliant victories in the summer,
    the serious defeat at Warsaw, and the conclusion of a preliminary
    peace with Poland, which at this very moment, in Riga, is being or
    at least should be turned a conclusive peace, the chances of that
    preliminary peace really becoming conclusive have greatly
    increased as a result of Wrangel’s
    débâcle. Now that the latter has become an
    established fact the imperialist press in the Entente countries is
    beginning to show its cards and disclose what it has most of all
    kept in the dark. 
I do not know whether you noticed a brief news item published
    in the papers today or some days ago to the effect that the
    newspaper Temps, mouthpiece of the French imperialist
    bourgeoisie, now speaks of the peace with Poland having been
    signed against France’s advice. There can be no doubt that
    the French bourgeoisie’s spokesmen are admitting a truth
    they would have preferred to cover up and indeed have covered up
    for a very long time. Despite the unfavourable terms of the Polish
    peace (which are more advantageous than those we ourselves offered
    to the Polish landowners this April in order to avoid any war),
    and they are indeed unfavourable as compared to what might have
    been achieved but for the extremely serious situation at Warsaw,
    we succeeded in getting terms that frustrate the greater part of
    the imperialists’ over-all plan. The French bourgeoisie have
    now acknowledged that they insisted on Poland continuing the war,
    and were opposed to the conclusion of a peace, because they feared
    the rout of Wrangel’s army and wished to support a new
    intervention and campaign against the Soviet Republic. Though
    Polish imperialism’s conditions have impelled it to go to
    war against Russia—despite this—the French
    imperialists’ plans have collapsed, and as a result we now
    have gained something more than a mere breathing-space. 
Of the small states formerly belonging to the Russian Empire,
    Poland has been among those that have been most of all at odds
    with the Great-Russian nation during the last three years, and
    made the greatest claims to a large slice of territory inhabited
    by non-Poles. We concluded peace with Finland, Estonia and
    Latvia[2] also against the wishes of the
    imperialist Entente, but this was easier because the bourgeoisie
    of Finland, Estonia and Latvia entertained no imperialist aims
    that would call for a war against the Soviet Republic, whereas the
    Polish bourgeois republic had an eye, not only to Lithuania and
    Byelorussia but the Ukraine as well. Furthermore, it was impelled
    along the same direction by the age-old struggle of Poland, who
    used to be a great power and is now pitting herself against
    another great power—Russia. Even at present, Poland cannot
    hold back from this age-long struggle. That is why Poland has been
    far more bellicose and stubborn in her war plans against our
    Republic, and why our present success in concluding peace against
    the wishes of the Entente is so much more resounding. Among the
    states which have preserved the bourgeois system and border on
    Russia, there is no other country but Poland on which the Entente
    can rely in a long-term plan of military intervention; that is why
    in their common hate of the Soviets, all the bourgeois states are
    directly interested in having Eastern Galicia under the control of
    the Polish landed proprietors. 
Moreover, Poland lays claim to the Ukraine and Lithuania. This
    gives the campaign a particularly acute and stubborn
    character. Keeping Poland supplied with war materials has,
    naturally, been the main concern of France and certain other
    powers, and it is quite impossible to estimate just how much money
    has gone into this. Therefore, the importance of the Red
    Army’s final victory despite our defeat at Warsaw, is
    particularly great, for it has placed Poland in a position in
    which she is unable to prosecute the war. She has had to agree to
    peace terms that have given her less than those we proposed in
    April 1920, before the Polish offensive, when we, unwilling to
    discontinue our work of economic construction, proposed boundaries
    that were highly disadvantageous to us. At that time, the press of
    the petty-bourgeois patriots, to whose number both our
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks belong, accused the
    Bolsheviks of submissiveness, and an almost Tolstoyan attitude
    displayed by the Soviet government. The latter term was used to
    qualify our acceptance of peace along the proposed Pilsudski line,
    which left Minsk in Polish hands, the boundary lying some 50 vests
    and at places some 100 vests east of the present line. Of course,
    I do not have to tell a meeting of Party workers why we accepted,
    and had to accept, worse boundaries if indeed our work of economic
    construction was to go on. The outcome was that, by waging war,
    Poland, which had retained her bourgeois system, brought about an
    acute dislocation of her entire economy, a tremendous growth of
    discontent, and a bourgeois reign of terror, not only against the
    industrial workers but against the farm labourers as
    well. Poland’s entire position as a bourgeois state became
    so precarious that there could be no question of continuing the
    war. 
The successes scored in this respect by the Soviets have been
    tremendous. When, three years ago, we raised the question of the
    tasks and the conditions of the proletarian revolution’s
    victory in Russia, we always stated emphatically that victory
    could not be permanent unless it was followed up by a proletarian
    revolution in the West, and that a correct appraisal of our
    revolution was possible only from the international point of
    view. For victory to be lasting, we must achieve the victory of
    the proletarian revolution in all, or at any rate in several, of
    the main capitalist countries. After three years of desperate and
    stubborn struggle, we can see in what respect our predictions have
    or have not materialised. They have not materialised in the sense
    that there has been no rapid or simple solution of the
    problem. None of us, of course, expected that such an unequal
    struggle as the one waged by Russia against the whole of the
    capitalist world could last for three years. It has emerged that
    neither side—the Russian Soviet Republic or the capitalist
    world—has gained victory or suffered defeat; at the same
    time it has turned out that, while our forecasts did not
    materialise simply, rapidly and directly, they were fulfilled
    insofar as we achieved the main thing—the possibility has
    been maintained of the existence of proletarian rule and the
    Soviet Republic even in the event of the world socialist
    revolution being delayed. In this respect it must be said that the
    Republic’s international position today provides the best
    and most precise confirmation of all our plans and all our
    policy. 
Needless to say, there can be no question of comparing the
    military strength of the R.S.F.S.R. with that of all the
    capitalist powers. In this respect we are incomparably weaker than
    they are, yet, after three yeas of war, we have forced almost all
    of these states to abandon the idea of further intervention. This
    means that what we saw as possible three years ago, while the
    imperialist war was not yet over, i.e., a highly protracted
    situation, without any final decision one way or the other, has
    come about. That has been, not because we have proved militarily
    stronger and the Entente weaker, but because throughout this
    period the disintegration in the Entente countries has
    intensified, whereas our inner strength has grown. This has been
    confirmed and proved by the war. The Entente was unable to fight
    us with its own forces. The workers and peasants of the capitalist
    countries could not be forced to fight us. The bourgeois states
    were able to emerge from the imperialist war with their bourgeois
    regimes intact. They were able to stave off and delay the crisis
    hanging over them, but basically they so undermined their own
    position that, despite all their gigantic military forces, they
    had to acknowledge, after three years, that they were unable to
    crush the Soviet Republic with its almost non-existent military
    forces. It has thus turned out that our policy and our predictions
    have proved fundamentally correct in all respects and that the
    oppressed people in any capitalist country have indeed shown
    themselves our allies, for it was they who stopped the
    war. Without having gained an international victory, which we
    consider the only sure victory, we are in a position of having won
    conditions enabling us to exist side by side with capitalist
    powers, who are now compelled to enter into trade relations with
    us. In the course of this struggle we have won the right to an
    independent existence. 
Thus a glance at our international position as a whole will
    show that we have achieved tremendous successes and have won, not
    only a breathing-space but something much more significant. By a
    breathing-space we understand a brief period during which the
    imperialist powers have had many opportunities to renew in greater
    force the war against us. Today, too, we do not underestimate the
    danger and do not deny the possibility of future military
    intervention by the capitalist countries. It is essential for us
    to maintain our military preparedness. However, if we cast a
    glance at the conditions in which we defeated all attempts made by
    the Russian counter-revolutionaries and achieved a formal peace
    with all the Western states, it will be clear that we have
    something more than a breathing space: we have entered a new
    period, in which we have won the right to our fundamental
    international existence in the network of capitalist
    states. Domestic conditions have not allowed a single powerful
    capitalist state to hurl its army against Russia; this has been
    due to the revolution having matured within such countries,
    preventing them from overcoming us as quickly as they might have
    done. There were British, French and Japanese armies on Russian
    territory for three years. There can be no doubt that the most
    insignificant concentration of forces by these three powers would
    have been quite enough to win a victory over us in a few months,
    if not in a few weeks. We were able to contain that attack only on
    account of the demoralisation among the French troops and the
    unrest that set in among the British and Japanese. We have made
    use of this divergence of imperialist interests all the time. We
    defeated the interventionists only because their interests divided
    them, thereby enhancing our strength and unity. This gave us a
    breathing-space and rendered impossible the complete victory of
    German imperialism at the time of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk. 
These dissensions have become more aggravated of late,
    especially because of the project of an agreement on concessions
    with a group of American capitalist sharks, with the toughest of
    them, headed by a multimillionaire who expects to form a group of
    multimillionaires.[3] We know that almost all reports from
    the Far East bear witness to the extreme resentment felt in Japan
    over the conclusion of this agreement, although so far there has
    been no agreement, but only the draft of one. Japanese public
    opinion, however, is already seething, and today I read a
    communication which said that Japan is accusing Soviet Russia of
    wanting to set Japan against America. 
We have correctly appraised the intensity of the imperialist
    rivalry and have told ourselves that we must make systematic use
    of the dissension between them so as to hamper their struggle
    against us. Political dissension is already apparent in the
    relations between Britain and France. Today we can speak, not
    merely of a breathing space, but of a real chance of a new and
    lengthy period of development. Until now we have actually had no
    basis in the international sense. We now have this basis, the
    reason being the attitude of the smaller powers that are
    completely dependent on the Great Powers both in the military and
    in the economic sense. It now appears that, despite the pressure
    brought to bear by France, Poland has signed a peace with us. The
    Polish capitalists have a hate of Soviet power; they crush the
    most ordinary strikes with unparalleled ferocity. They want war
    with Soviet Russia more than anything else, yet they prefer to
    make peace with us rather than carry out the conditions set by the
    Entente. We see that the imperialist powers dominate the whole
    world although they comprise an insignificant part of the
    world’s population. The fact that a country has appeared
    that for three years has resisted world imperialism has
    considerably changed the international situation; the minor
    powers—and they form the majority of the world’s
    population—are therefore all inclined to make peace with
    us. 
The entry of the socialist country into trade relations with
    capitalist countries is a most important factor ensuring our
    existence in such a complex and absolutely exceptional
    situation. 
I have had occasion to observe a certain Spargo, an American
      social-chauvinist close to our Right Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks, one of the leaders of the Second International
      and member of the American Socialist Party, a kind of American
      Alexinsky, and author of a number of anti-Bolshevik books, who
      has reproached us—and has quoted the fact as evidence of
      the complete collapse of communism—for speaking of
      transactions with capitalist powers. He has written that he
      cannot imagine better proof of the complete collapse of
      communism and the break down of its programme. I think that
      anybody who has given thought to the matter will say the
      reverse. No better proof of the Russian Soviet Republic’s
      material and moral victory over the capitalists of the whole
      world can be found than the fact that the powers that took up
      arms against us because of our terror and our entire system have
      been compelled, against their will, to enter into trade
      relations with us in the knowledge that by so doing they are
      strengthening us. This might have been advanced as proof of the
      collapse of communism only if we had promised, with the forces
      of Russia alone, to transform the whole world, or had dreamed of
      doing so. However, we have never harboured such crazy ideas and
      have always said that our revolution will be victorious when it
      is supported by the workers of all lands. In fact, they went
      half-way in their support, for they weakened the hand raised
      against us, yet in doing so they were helping us.

    
   
      I shall not dwell any further on this question but shall only
      remark that at the moment conditions in the Caucasus are
      becoming most complex and extremely difficult to analyse, with
      the likelihood that war may be forced on us any day. But with
      the peace with Poland almost assured and Wrangel wiped out, this
      war cannot be so alarming and, if forced on us, only promises to
      strengthen and fortify our position even more. Newspaper reports
      of events in Armenia and Turkey give us some idea of this.[4] An extremely confused situation has
      arisen, but I am absolutely confident that we shall emerge from
      it, preserving peace on the present basis, which in some
      respects is extremely favourable, on a basis that is
      satisfactory to us and permits our economic existence. We are
      doing all we can to ensure this. It is, however, quite likely
      that circumstances may arise which will directly force war on us
      or indirectly lead to it. We can view this prospect quite
      calmly—this will be a war in a distant region, with the
      balance of forces fully in our favour, probably ensuring greater
      advantages than the Polish war. The Polish war was a war on two
      fronts, with a threat from Wrangel, and it could not be called
      peripheral, because the Pilsudski line did not run so far from
      Moscow. With this, I shall conclude my review of the
      international situation. 
I now turn to the state of affairs at home. The failure of a
    number of attempts at military intervention has led to a
    considerable improvement in our economic position. The main cause
    of our former desperate position was that we in Central Russia,
    industrial Russia, proletarian Russia—Petrograd, Moscow, and
    Ivanovo-Voznesensk—were cut off from all the main
    grain-producing areas such as Siberia, the South and the
    South-East; we were cut off from the Donets Basin, one of the main
    sources of fuel, and from the sources of oil, and it seemed
    absolutely impossible for the Republic to hold out. You know what
    appalling distress, what extreme privation, what grain shortages
    and famine we experienced because we were cut off from the richest
    grain-producing areas and the most important economic regions. The
    return of these territories is to a considerable extent
    responsible for the improvement now to be seen. Thanks to the
    possibility of drawing on Siberia and the Caucasus, and to the
    social changes developing in our favour in the Ukraine, there is
    promise that with the state food procurements in the forthcoming
    food campaign we shall not only emerge without an actual shortage
    as we did this year, but shall have sufficient food for all
    industrial workers. This is the first campaign when we can hope
    that, as a result of the doubtless improvement in the transport
    system, the government will dispose of such food
    stocks—between 250 and 300 million poods of grain—that
    we shall not merely be talking about socialist construction and
    doing precious little, as at present, but shall actually operate
    with real armies of labour; we shall be able to transfer hundreds
    of thousands of industrial workers, or workers now engaged in
    provisioning for industry, to really urgent and essential work,
    and to improve that work in the same way as the improved fuel
    situation made it possible to restore the textile industry. The
    Ivanovo-Voznesensk Gubernia mills have begun to work. At first,
    not more than a quarter of a million spindles were operating but
    at present there are already half a million, perhaps 600,000, and
    by the end of the year we count on a million spindles in
    operation. We think the number will go up to four million next
    year. Whereas quite recently we made both ends meet with the
    greatest difficulty by using up old stocks, conditions have now
    set in in which we are starting to rehabilitate Russia’s
    ruined industry, and shall be able, while collecting grain from
    the countryside, to supply the peasants in return with salt and
    paraffin oil, and, though in small quantities, with
    textiles. Without this it is useless to talk of socialist
    construction. 
While in the international sense we have gained a footing by
    concluding a series of military campaigns and by wresting peace
    treaties from a number of states, it has only now become
    economically possible for us to supply the industrial workers with
    bread and to provide the bread of industry, namely fuel, on a
    scale enabling us to set about the construction of socialism. That
    is our main task, the root of the problem, a transition we have
    several times tried to make. I remember that at a meeting of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee in April 1918, I said that
    our military tasks appeared to be ending and that we had not only
    convinced Russia, not only won her from the exploiters, for the
    working people but had now to tackle other tasks in order to
    govern Russia in the interests of her economic construction.[5] Our breathing-space at the time proved
    quite brief. The war that was forced on us, starting with the
    Czechoslovak revolt in the summer of 1918, was most
    ferocious. However, we made several attempts, both in the spring
    of 1918 and, on a broader scale, in the spring of this year when
    the question of labour armies was posed in practice. We must now
    once again give top priority to this transitional stage and exert
    every effort to achieve it. Regarded from the international point
    of view, from the standpoint of victory over capitalism in
    general, this is a paramount task of the entire socialist
    revolution To defeat capitalism in general, it is necessary, in
    the first place, to defeat the exploiters and to uphold the power
    of the exploited, namely, to accomplish the task of overthrowing
    the exploiters by revolutionary forces; in the second place, to
    accomplish the constructive task, that of establishing new
    economic relations, of setting an example of how this should be
    done. These two aspects of the task of accomplishing a socialist
    revolution are indissolubly connected, and distinguish our
    revolution from all previous ones, which never went beyond the
    destructive aspect. 
If we do not accomplish this second task, nothing will follow
    from our successes, from our victories in overthrowing the
    exploiters, and from our military rebuff to international
    imperialism, and a return to the old system will be inevitable. In
    the theoretical sense, that is beyond question. In this instance,
    the transitional stage is abrupt and most difficult, and calls for
    new methods, a different deployment and use of forces, a different
    emphasis, a new psychological approach, and so on. In the place of
    methods of the revolutionary overthrow of the exploiters and of
    repelling the tyrants, we must apply the methods of constructive
    organisation; we must prove to the whole world that we are a force
    capable, not only of resisting any attempt to crush us by force of
    arms but of setting an example to others. All the writings of the
    greatest socialists have always provided guidance on these two
    aspects of the task of the socialist revolution which, as two
    aspects of the same task, refer both to the outside world, to
    those states that have remained in capitalist hands, and to the
    non-proletarians of one’s own country. We have convinced the
    peasants that the proletariat provides them with better conditions
    of existence than the bourgeoisie did; we have convinced them of
    this in practice. When the peasants, though they were dissatisfied
    with Bolshevik government, compared it in practice with the rule
    of the Constituent Assembly, Kolchak and the others they drew the
    conclusion that the Bolsheviks guaranteed them a better existence
    and defended them militarily from violence by world
    imperialism. Yet, under conditions of bourgeois rule, half of the
    peasantry lived in a bourgeois fashion, and this could not have
    been otherwise. The proletariat must now solve the second problem:
    it must prove to the peasant that the proletariat can provide him
    with the example and practice of economic relations of a higher
    level than those under which every peasant family farms on its
    own. The peasant still believes only in this old system; he still
    considers this the normal state of affairs. That is beyond
    doubt. It would be absurd to think that the peasant will change
    his attitude to vital economic problems, as a result of our
    propaganda. His is a wait-and-see attitude. From being neutrally
    hostile, he has become neutrally sympathetic. He prefers us to any
    other form of government because he sees that the workers’,
    the proletarian state, the proletarian dictatorship, does not mean
    brute force or usurpation, as it has been described, but is a
    better defender of the peasants than Kolchak, Denikin, and the
    rest are. 
But all that is not enough; we have not achieved the main
    object: to show that the proletariat will restore large-scale
    industry and the national economy so that the peasants can be
    transferred to a higher economic system. After proving that, by
    revolutionary organisation, we can repel any violence directed
    against the exploited, we must prove the same thing in another
    field by setting an example that will convince the vast mass of
    the peasants and petty bourgeois elements, and other countries as
    well, not in word but in deed, that a communist system and way of
    life, can be created by a proletariat which has won a war. This is
    a task of world-wide significance. To achieve the second half of
    the victory in the international sense, we must accomplish the
    second half of the task, that which bears upon economic
    construction. We discussed this at the last Party conference, so I
    think there is hardly any need or possibility to go into detail on
    the various points; this is a task that embraces every aspect of
    economic construction. I have briefly described the conditions
    ensuring bread for the industrial workers and fuel for
    industry. These conditions are fundamental in providing the
    possibility of further construction. I should add that, as you
    have seen from the agenda published in the newspapers! the
    question of economic construction will be the main item to be
    discussed at the forthcoming Congress of Soviets. The entire
    agenda has been drawn up so that the entire attention and concern
    of all delegates and of the whole mass of Government and Party
    workers throughout the Republic will be concentrated on the
    economic aspect, on the restoration of transport and industry, on
    what is cautiously termed “aid to the peasant economy”
    but which implies far more—a system of carefully thought-out
    measures to raise to the appropriate level the peasant economy,
    which will continue to exist for some time to come. 
The Congress of Soviets will, therefore, discuss a report on
    the electrification of Russia, so that an all-over economic plan
    for the rehabilitation of the national economy, of which we have
    spoken, can be drawn up in the technological aspect. There can be
    no question of rehabilitating the national economy or of communism
    unless Russia is put on a different and a higher technical basis
    than that which has existed up to now. Communism is Soviet power
    plus the electrification of the whole country, since industry
    cannot be developed without electrification. This is a long-term
    task which will take at least ten years to accomplish, provided a
    great number of technical experts are drawn into the work. A
    number of printed documents in which this project[6] has been
    worked out in detail by technical experts will be presented to the
    Congress. We cannot achieve the main objects of this
    plan—create so large regions of electric power stations
    which would enable us to modernise our industry—in less than
    ten years. Without this reconstruction of all industry on lines of
    large-scale machine production, socialist construction will
    obviously remain only a set of decrees, a political link between
    the working class and the peasantry, and a means of saving the
    peasants from the rule by Kolchak and Denikin; it will remain an
    example to all powers of the world, but it will not have its own
    basis. Communism implies Soviet power as a political organ,
    enabling the mass of the oppressed to run all state
    affairs—without that, communism is unthinkable. We see proof
    of this throughout the world, because the idea of Soviet power and
    its programme are undoubtedly becoming victorious throughout the
    world. We see this in every phase of the struggle against the
    Second International, which is living on support from the police,
    the church and the old bourgeois functionaries in the
    working-class movement. 
This guarantees political success. Economic success, however,
    can be assured only when the Russian proletarian state effectively
    controls a huge industrial machine built on up-to-day technology;
    that means electrification. For this, we must know the basic
    conditions of the application of electricity, and accordingly
    understand both industry and agriculture. This is an enormous
    task, to accomplish which will require a far longer period than
    was needed to defend our right to existence against
    invasion. However, we are not afraid of such a period and we think
    we have won a victory by attracting to this work tens and hundreds
    of engineers and scientists imbued with bourgeois ideas, whom we
    have given the mission of reorganising the entire economy,
    industry and agriculture, in whom we have aroused interest and
    from whom we have received a great deal of information being
    summarised in a number of pamphlets. Each region earmarked for
    electrification is dealt with in a separate pamphlet. The plan for
    the electrification of the Northern region is ready, and those
    interested may receive it. Pamphlets dealing with each region,
    with the over-all plan for reorganisation, will be published by
    the time the Congress of Soviets meets. It is now our task to
    carry on systematic work throughout the country, in all Party
    cells, in every Soviet institution, according to this all-over
    plan covering many years, so that we may in the near future have a
    clear idea of how and in what measure we are progressing, without
    deceiving ourselves or conceal- ing the difficulties confronting
    us. The entire Republic is faced with the task of accomplishing
    this single economic plan at any cost. All the Communist
    Party’s activities, propaganda and agitation must be
    focussed on this task. From the angle of theory, it has been dealt
    with on more than one occasion; nobody argues against it, but
    scarcely a hundredth part of what has to be done has been
    accomplished. 
It is natural that we have grown used to a period of political
    warfare; we have all been steeled in the political and military
    struggle and, therefore, what has been accomplished by the present
    Soviet government is only an approach to a task which demands that
    the train should be switched over to other rails; this is a train
    which has to carry tens of millions of people. The switching of
    this heavy load on to other rails, along a track on which there
    are no rails at all in places, calls for concentrated attention,
    knowledge and very great persistence. The cultural level of the
    peasants and the workers has not been high enough for this task
    and, at the same time, we have become almost totally accustomed to
    tackling political and military tasks; this has led to a revival
    of bureaucratic methods. This is generally admitted. It is the
    task of the Soviet government to completely destroy the old
    machinery of state as it was destroyed in October, and to transfer
    power to the Soviets. However, our Programme recognises that there
    has been a revival of bureaucratic methods and that at present no
    economic foundation yet exists for a genuinely socialist
    society. A cultural background, literacy, and in general a higher
    standard of culture are lacking in the mass of workers and
    peasants. That is because the best forces of the proletariat have
    been engaged with militally tasks. The proletariat has made
    tremendous sacrifices to assure the success of military tasks into
    which tens of millions of peasants had to be drawn, and elements
    imbued with bourgeois views had to be put to work, because no
    others were available. That is why we had to state in the
    Programme—in a document like the Party Programme—that
    there has been a revival of bureaucratic methods, against which a
    systematic struggle has to be waged. It is natural that the
    bureaucratic methods that have reappeared in Soviet institutions
    were bound to have a pernicious effect even or Party
    organisations, since the upper ranks of the Party are at the same
    time the upper ranks of the state apparatus; they are one and the
    same thing. Since we recognise that the evil consists in the old
    bureaucratic methods which have been able to appear in the Party
    apparatus, it is obvious and natural that all the symptoms of this
    evil have revealed themselves in the Party organisations. Since
    that is so, the question has been placed on the agenda of the
    Congress of Soviets and has received a great deal of attention
    from this Conference. That is how it should be, because a disease
    that has affected the Party and has been acknowledged in the
    resolutions of the general Party Conference  exists,
    not in Moscow alone, but has spread throughout the entire
    republic. It is a result of the need to carry on political and
    military work, when we had to involve the peasant masses and were
    unable to increase our demands for a broader plan to raise the
    level of the peasant economy, and that of the mass of
    peasants. 
Allow me in conclusion to say a few words about the situation
    within the Party, about the struggle and the appearance of an
    opposition, of which all those present are fully aware and which
    took up a great deal of energy and attention at the Moscow City
    and Gubernia Conference perhaps considerably more than we would
    have all liked. It is quite natural that the great transition now
    in progress at a time when all the forces drawn by the Republic
    from the proletariat and the Party during three years of struggle
    have been exhausted, has placed us in a difficult position in the
    face of a task to accurately assess which is beyond our powers. We
    have to acknowledge that we do not know the real extent of the
    evil, and that we cannot determine the relationships and the exact
    groupings. The Party Conference’s main task is to raise the
    question, not cover up the existing evil, but to draw the
    Party’s attention to it, and call on all Party members to
    work on remedying the evil. From the point of view of the Central
    Committee and also, I think, of the immense majority of Party
    comrades, it is perfectly natural and beyond doubt (as far as I am
    aware of the views, which nobody has repudiated), that in
    connection with the crisis in the Party the opposition which
    exists, not only in Moscow but throughout Russia, reveals many
    tendencies that are absolutely healthy, necessary and inevitable
    at a time of the Party’s natural growth and the transition
    from a situation in which all attention was concentrated on
    political and military tasks to a period of construction and
    organisation, when we have to take care of dozens of bureaucratic
    institutions, this at a time when the cultural level of the
    majority of the proletariat and the peasants is unequal to the
    task. After all, the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection
    exists more as a pious wish; it has been impossible to set it in
    motion because the best workers have been sent to the front, and
    the cultural level of the peasant masses is such that they have
    been unable to produce a sufficient number of officials. 
Of course the opposition, whose slogan urges a more speedy
    transition, the enlistment of the greatest number of fresh and
    young forces and the promotion of local workers to more
    responsible posts, has extremely sound aspirations, trend and
    programme. No doubts on this score exist either in the Central
    Committee or among comrades who hold positions of any
    responsibility, as far as can be seen from their statements. It
    is, however, equally beyond doubt that, besides the sound elements
    which are united on the platform of fulfilment of Conference
    decisions, others also exist. At aIl meetings, including
    preliminary meetings attended by a larger number of delegates than
    this Conference, opinions on this question were unanimous. Our
    general Programme must be carried out’that is beyond doubt,
    and difficult work awaits us. Of course, the important thing is
    not to confine ourselves to overthrowing the opponent and
    repelling him. Here we have petty-bourgeois elements surrounding
    us and numbering tens of millions. We are fewer in number; there
    are very few of us compared with this petty-bourgeois mass. We
    must educate this mass and prepare it, but it has so happened that
    all the organised forces engaged in such preparatory work have had
    to be directed elsewhere and employed in an undertaking that is
    essential, arduous and very risky, involving great sacrifices,
    i.e., warfare. War calls for every ounce of effort, and there is
    no getting away from this fact. 
The question we must ask ourselves in connection with this
    state of affairs is; is the Party quite healthy again?Have we a
    complete victory over bureaucratic methods so as to place economic
    construction on a more correct foundation, and get the
    Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection operating, not only
    in the sense of issuing decrees but by actually drawing the masses
    of workers into the work? This is a difficult matter, and our main
    task’if we are to speak of Party tasks’must be the
    speediest possible elimination of the so-called line of the
    opposition. If this is a question of diverging views, differing
    interpretations of current events, different programmes or even of
    future activities, the Central Committee must devote the greatest
    attention to the matter at all meetings of the Political Bureau
    and at plenary meetings, where various shades of opinion are
    voiced. Harmonious work by the entire Party will ensure the
    accomplishment of this task. We regard this as a matter of the
    utmost importance. We now face an economic effort that is more
    taxing than the military task we have accomplished thanks to the
    enthusiasm of the peasants, who undoubtedly preferred the
    workers’ state to that of Kolchak. Things are quite
    different today when the peasant masses have to be switched over
    to construction work that is quite unfamiliar to them, which they
    do not understand and cannot have any faith in. This task calls
    for more systematic work, greater perseverance, and greater
    organising skill, and so far as the latter quality is concerned,
    the Russian is not in the picture. This is our weakest point, so
    we must try rapidly to eliminate everything that hampers this
    work. The opposition, which is a reflection of this period of
    transition, no doubt contains a sound element, but when it turns
    into an opposition for the sake of opposition, we should certainly
    put an end to it. We have wasted a great deal of time on
    altercations, quarrels and recrimination and we must put an end to
    all that, and try to come to some agreement to work more
    effectively. We must make certain concessions, better greater than
    smaller, to those who are dissatisfied, who call themselves the
    opposition, but we must succeed in making our work harmonious, for
    otherwise we cannot exist when we are surrounded by enemies at
    home and abroad. 
There can be no doubt that the old petty-bourgeois
    elements’small property-owners’outnumber us. They are
    stronger than the socialist sector of an economy geared to meet
    the requirements of the workers. Anyone who has had contacts with
    the rural areas and has seen the speculation in the cities,
    realises perfectly well that this social sector, which is based on
    small-scale economy units is stronger than we are: hence the
    necessity of absolutely harmonious effort. We must achieve it at
    all costs. When I had occasion to observe the controversies and
    the struggle in the Moscow organisations, and saw the numerous
    debates at meetings, and the altercations, and quarrels there, I
    came to the conclusion that it was high time to put an end to all
    this and to achieve general unity on the Conference platform. It
    should be said that we have paid a heavy price for this. It was
    sad, for example, to see hours wasted at Party meetings on
    altercation as to whether someone had arrived at the meeting
    punctually or not, or whether a particular individual had made his
    stand clear in one way or another. Do people attend meetings for
    this sort of thing? For that we have a special commission, which
    decides whether or not an individual on the list of delegates has
    made his stand clear in one way or another. Here, however, it is a
    question of the content of the meeting. For instance, take an
    experienced Party comrade like Bubnov. I heard his speech on the
    platform proposed by the Conference. This platform boils down to
    greater freedom of criticism. The Conference, however, was held in
    September, and it is now November. Freedom of criticism is a
    splendid thing’but once we are agreed on this, it would be
    no bad thing to concern ourselves with the content of
    criticism. For a long time the Mensheviks,
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and others tried to scare us with
    freedom of criticism, but we were not afraid of that. If freedom
    of criticism means freedom to defend capitalism then we shall
    suppress it. We have passed that stage. Freedom of criticism has
    been proclaimed, but thought should be given to the content of
    criticism. 
And here we have to admit something that is highly regrettable:
    criticism is devoid of content. You visit a district and ask
    yourself what criticism actually contains. The Party organisations
    cannot overcome illiteracy by using the old bureaucratic
    methods. What methods of defeating red tape are there other than
    bringing workers and peasants  into the work? Meanwhile, criticism
    at district meetings is concerned with trifles, and I have not
    heard a single word about the Workers’ and Peasants’
    Inspection. I have not heard of a single district encouraging
    workers and peasants to take part in this work. Genuine
    construction work means applying criticism which must be
    constructive. For instance, the management of every small block of
    flats, every large plant, every factory in Moscow must have its
    own experience. If we wish to combat bureaucratic methods, we must
    draw people from below into this work. We must acquaint ourselves
    with the experience of certain factories, learn what steps they
    have taken to remove their bureaucrats, and study the experience
    of a house management or of a consumers’ society. A most
    rapid functioning of the entire economic machine is needed, but
    meanwhile you do not hear a word about this, although there is
    plenty of altercation and recrimination. Of course, such a
    gigantic upheaval could not have taken place without a certain
    amount of dirt and some scum coming to the surface. It is time we
    posed the question, not only of freedom of criticism but also of
    its content. It is time we said that, in view of our experience,
    we must make a number of concessions but that in future we shall
    not tolerate the slightest tendency to recrimination. We must
    break with the past, set about genuine economic construction, and
    completely overhaul all Party work so as to enable it to guide
    Soviet economic construction, ensure practical successes, and
    conduct propaganda more by example than by precept. Today neither
    the worker nor the peasant will be convinced by words; that can be
    done only by example. They have to be persuaded that they can
    improve the economy without the capitalists, and that conflicts
    can be abolished without the policeman’s truncheon or
    capitalist starvation; for that they need Party leadership. This
    is the attitude we must adopt; if we do so, we shall achieve
    successes in future economic construction which will lead to our
    complete victory on a world-wide scale. 

Endnotes
[1]
    The Conference was held in the Kremlin between November 20 and
    22, 1920, during the discussion on trade unions, which had begun
    in the Party. The acute struggle waged by opposition groups
    against the Party’s policy created a tense atmosphere at the
    Conference. The anti-Party “Democratic Centralism”,
    “Workers’ Opposition” and Ignatov’s groups
    demagogically attacked the Party’s policy. Before and during
    the Conference they tried to gain decisive influence in the
    Party’s Moscow organisation. In an attempt to get the
    maximum number of their supporters elected to the Moscow Committee
    the “Workers’ Opposition” group held a special
    conference of their supporters from among the worker
    delegates.
Directed by Lenin, the Conference repulsed the
    anti-Party attacks and pointed to the need of combating the
    unscrupulous groups bred by an atmosphere of recriminations. After
    hearing the report of the Moscow Committee, the Conference passed
    a resolution reflecting the viewpoint of the Central
    Committee. The list of candidate members of the Moscow Committee,
    drawn up by the opposition at the private conference was
    blackballed, and only those delegates were elected who had been
    nominated by the Political Bureau of the Central Committee. 
[2]
Peace between the R.S.F.S.R. and Finland was signed on
    October 14, 1920. The treaty terminated the state of war,
    confirmed Finland’s independence and sovereignty as granted
    by the Soviet Government in 1917, and laid down the state
    frontiers between the two countries. 
Peace between the R.S.F.S.R. and Estonia was
    signed in Yuryev (now Tartu) on February 2, 1920. Under the treaty
    Soviet Russia recognised Estonia’s independence.   
 Latvian ruling circles were also compelled to
    sign peace with the R.S.F.S.R., following the defeat of the
    foreign interventionists and the whiteguards in 1919 and the
    resulting consolidation of Soviet Russia’s international
    position. On March 25, 1920, the Latvian Foreign Ministry
    approached the Soviet Government suggesting that peace talks be
    started. On April 16, the Soviet and Latvian representatives
    started peace talks in Moscow and on August 11 a treaty was signed
    with Latvia in Riga.
[3]
    In the autumn of 1920 Washington Vanderlip, who represented the
    U.S. Vanderlip Syndicate, arrived in Moscow to negotiate a
    concession for fishing, prospecting and extracting oil and coal in
    Kamchatka and elsewhere in Siberia, east of the 160th
    meridian. 
In agreeing to the concession, the Soviet
    Government intended not only to establish mutually advantageous
    co-operation with American businessmen but also to normalise
    relations between Soviet Russia and the United
    States. Vanderlip’s move, however, did not get the support
    of the U.S. Administration and financial tycoons, and the
    agreement was never signed.
[4]
    To incite Turkey against Soviet Russia and torpedo the talks
    between the two countries on the establishment of friendly
    relations, the Entente diplomats provoked Dashnak Armenia’s
    attack on Turkey. The Dashnak nationalist party, then in power in
    Armenia (1918-20), pursued an aggressive policy with regard to
    Turkey and aimed at establishing a “Greater Armenia”
    that would include nearly half of Asia Minor. On September 24,
    1920 the Dashnak government began hostilities against Turkey, but
    five days later the Turkish troops checked the Dashnak offensive
    and, in a counter-offensive lasting from September to November
    occupied Sarykamysh, Kars and Alexandropol. The Turkish Government
    decided to take advantage of the adventurist Dashnak policy and
    occupy the whole of Armenia. 
On November 11 the People’s Commissariat
    for Foreign Affairs of the R.S.F.S.R. offered its mediation to the
    warring parties. Turkey rejected Soviet mediation, and the Dashnak
    government had to agree to a shackling treaty which made Armenia a
    Turkish protectorate. The treaty, however, did not go into force,
    because by November 29, when it was to be signed, the Dashnak
    government bad been overthrown and Soviet power proclaimed in
    Armenia. Claiming that the treaty was still valid, the Turkish
    Government held up the evacuation of Alexandropol district. Only
    after the Soviet Government had, in the middle of May 1921, firmly
    demanded the evacuation of the district, were the Turkish forces
    withdrawn.

      Lenin is referring to his Report on the Immediate Tasks of
      the Soviet Government which he delivered at a session
      of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on April 19, 1918
      
[5]
    The reference is to the book Plan for the Electrification of
    the R.S.F.S.R. Report of the State Commission for the
    Electrification of Russia to the Eighth Congress of Soviets
    published in Moscow in 1920. The outcome of collective work by
    leading scientists and specialists, the plan was the first
    long-term plan for the creation of the material foundation of
    socialism on the basis of the country’s
    electrification. Lenin called this plan “the Party’s
    second programme”. 
[6]
    Lenin is referring to the resolutions of the Ninth All-Russia
    Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) (see VKP(B) v rezolutsiyakh i
    resheniyakh syezdov, konferentsii i plenumov TsK [the
    C.P.S.U.(B.) in the Resolutions and Decisions of Its
    Congresses, Conferences and Plenums of the Central
    Committee ], Part. I, 1940, pp. 349-54).


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 






==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at the Moscow Gubernia
    Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) On Elections to the
    Moscow Committee











Speech Delivered at the Moscow Gubernia
Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) On Elections to the Moscow Committee, November 21, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at the Moscow Gubernia
Conference of the R.C.P.(B.)
On Elections to the Moscow Committee
November 21, 1920


Delivered: 21 November, 1920 or earlier. 
 
First Published: Published for the first time In the Fourth (Russian) edition
of the collected Works; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 427-428
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I have often-perhaps too often-had to take part in elections: in Party elections following on a struggle waged by various groups, trends and even factions, and in conditions of a most furious struggle marked by mutual control to such a degree that no voting at any Party cell was considered valid unless conducted in the presence of scrutineers from both groups, who counted the votes cast. Never, however, has the principle of proportional representation been practised in the election of guiding bodies the Petrograd Committee, the Moscow Committee or the Central Committee. When two groups, two trends or factions, are contesting elections, proportional representation is essential in calling a Party conference as a directing body, or a Party congress. When, however, it is a question of setting up an executive body charged with the conduct of practical work, proportional representation has never been applied, and can hardly be considered justified. I think that, in this connection, the preceding speaker departed from the proportional principle when he declared, together with Ignatov, that it stood to the credit of the list presented by him that it proposed eleven candidates, as he said. I am not in a position to verify eleven out of the thirty-eight, but I think that the concession should be greater than that desired by the effective majority at this assembly, or by the group that consider themselves adherents of the Moscow Committee. I have already elaborated on the motives behind this view, but what should stand first now is the selection of persons. I do not know most of the comrades on these lists, but you, who have the decisive votes at this Conference, evidently know them all. I think that, in choosing the comrades you know personally, you will no doubt be guided exclusively by a desire to set up a group that will be able to work harmoniously, a group that will give expression to any Party trend with something healthy in it, whether or not it has assumed definite shape, or has perhaps remained indeterminate in some respects; however, it has to be a group that, on the whole, directs practical politics, does not proportionally represent all the shades of opinion at this assembly, but carries on militant work—the struggle against the internal and external enemies, in the spirit of Conference decisions, and in a way that leaves no room for discord or lack of harmony. That is why the decisive consideration must be that you, members of this Conference, should have a personal knowledge of each candidate, and give preference to that group which may be expected to work harmoniously, and not the principle of proportionality in the election of an executive body, a principle that has never been applied, and to apply which would hardly be right at present.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at a Conference Of Factory Trade Union Committees
    Of Moscow Enterprises Of The Printing And Publishing Industry November 25, 1920











Speech Delivered At A Conference Of Factory Trade Union Committees
Of Moscow Enterprises Of The Printing And Publishing Industry November 25, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Conference
Of
 Factory Trade Union Committees
Of Moscow Enterprises
Of The Printing And Publishing
Industry
November 25, 1920[1]
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 25 November, 1920 or earlier. 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 269, November 30, 1920; Published according to the  Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 429
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Comrade Lenin, who was met with a storm of applause from all present, spoke on the first item on the agenda-the international and domestic situation of the Republic and the immediate tasks of the working class.) Comrade Lenin indicated the causes that have prevented world imperial-ism from carrying out its plan to crush the proletarian republic, causes stemming in the main from the decay of the capitalist system and the development of the revolution-ary movement among the workers of all lands. The language used by our Red Army is the one that is most convincing and comprehensible to the plunderers and robbers, and they have now been forced to talk to us about trade. However, the Red Army’s victory will not be complete or lasting unless we cope with the next task, which is more formidable and gigantic, that of rehabilitating industry and improving the national economy.
Lenin touched on the question of electrification, without which the renascence of the country is impossible. After dealing with the question of the invitation of foreign capital and the granting of concessions, the speaker went on to the part played by the printing and publishing industry in the national economy as a whole, and concluded by expressing the confidence that the workers and peasants of Russia will show a splendid example of victory on the peace front, just as they have done so often on the war fronts. (Prolonged applause.)

Endnotes
[1] This Conference was bald in the Hall of Columns, the House of Trade Unions, on November 25, 1920, and was attended by more than 2,000 delegates. Lenin delivered a report cm the interna-tional and domestic position of the Soviet Republic and the immediate tasks of the working class. 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at a Meeting of Cells’ Secretaries
    Of The Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.) November 25, 1920











Speech Delivered At A Meeting of Cells’ Secretaries
Of The Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.) November 25, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech  Delivered At A Meeting of
  Cells’ Secretaries
Of The Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.)
November 26, 1920[1]
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 26 November, 1920 or earlier. 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 269, November 30, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text checked against the verbatim report.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 430-433
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In the first written question submitted, a comrade asks whether
    it is true that all institutions of administration are to he
    transferred to Petrograd. That is inaccurate. The rumour has
    arisen from the fact that the Moscow Soviet has had the idea of
    transferring non-essential institutions from Moscow to Petrograd
    because of the housing shortage in the capital. It appears that
    Petrograd can accept up to 10,000 Soviet office workers, who
    number 200,000 in Moscow. To study all aspects of the matter, a
    committee has been set up, which is now working. Its findings will
    be submitted to the Council of People’s Commissars.[2] So you see that this rumour is
    inaccurate in some respects.
The second question and the third ask about concessions. You
    will allow me to dwell on the subject.
In one of his books, Spargo, the American Socialist, a man who
    is something like our Aiexinsky, and has a vindictive hate of the
    Bolsheviks, speaks of concessions as proof of the collapse of
    communism. Our Mensheviks say the same thing. The challenge has
    been made, and we are ready to take it up. Let us consider the
    question in terms of the facts. Who has got the worse of it, we or
    the European bourgeoisie? For three years they have been
    calumniating us, calling us usurpers and bandits; they have had
    recourse to all and every means tooverthrow us, but have now had
    to confess to failure, which is in itself a victory for us. The
    Mensheviks assert that we are pledged to defeating the world
    bourgeoisie on our own. We have, however, always said that we are
    only a single link in the chain of the world revolution, and have
    never set ourselves the aim of achieving victory by our own
    means. The world revolution has not yet come about, but then we
    have not yet been overcome. While militarism is decaying, we are
    growing stronger; not we, but they have had the worse of it.
They now want to subdue us by means of a treaty. Until the
    revolution comes about, bourgeois capital will be useful to
    us. How can we speed up the development of our economy whilst we
    are an economically weaker country? We can do that with the aid of
    bourgeois capital. We now have before us two drafts of
    concessions. One of them is for a ten-year concession in
    Kamchatka. We were recently visited by an American
    multimillionaire, who told us very frankly of the reasons behind
    the treaty, viz., that America wants to have a base in Asia in
    case of a war against Japan. This multimillionaire said that if we
    sold Kamchatka to America, he could promise us such enthusiasm
    among the people of the United States that the American Government
    would immediately recognise the Soviets of Russia. If we gave them
    only the lease, there would be less enthusiasm. He is now on his
    way to America, where he will make it known that Soviet Russia is
    a far cry from what people believed her to he.
We have till now been more than a match for the world
    bourgeoisie, because they are incapable of uniting. The Treaties
    of Brest-Litovsk and Versailles[3]  have both divided
    them. An intense hostility is now developing between America and
    Japan. We are making use of this and are offering a lease of
    Kamchatka instead of giving it away gratis; after all, Japan has
    taken a huge expanse of our territory in the Far East,[4] this by
    force of arms. It is far more to our advantage to run no risk,
    grant a lease of Kamchatka, and receive part of its products, the
    more so for our being unable, in any case, to run or exploit
    it. The treaty has not been signed, but it is already being spoken
    of in Japan with the utmost anger. Through this treaty we have
    aggravated the differences between our enemies. 

    

      The second kind of
      concession is represented by our granting the lease of several
      million dessiatines[a Russian unit of land
measure equal to 2.7 acres.—Editor] of
      timberland in Archangel Gubernia which, despite all our efforts,
      we cannot fully exploit. We are arranging a kind of checker-board
      pattern, with sections of timberland we shall be exploiting
      alternating with the leased sections, so that our workers will be
      able to learn the use of felling equipment from their
      neighbours. All this is very much to our advantage.
And now for the final aspect of the question.
Concessions do not mean peace; they too are a kind of warfare,
    only in another form, one that is to our advantage. Previously war
    was waged with the aid of tanks, cannon and the like, which
    hindered our work; the war will now be conducted on the economic
    front. They may perhaps try to restore the freedom to trade, but
    they cannot get along without us. Besides, they have to submit to
    all our laws, and our workers can learn from them; in case of
    war—and we must always be prepared for war against the
    bourgeoisie—the property will remain in our hands by virtue
    of the laws of war. I repeat: concessions are a continuation of
    war on the economic front, but here we do not destroy our
    productive forces, but develop them. They will no doubt try to
    evade our laws and deceive us, but we have the appropriate bodies
    to deal with that, such as the All-Russia Cheka, the Moscow Cheka,
    the Gubernia Cheka, and so on, and we are sure that we shall
    win.
Eighteen months ago we wanted to sign a peace that would have
    given Denikin and Kolchak a vast territory. They turned this down
    and in consequence lost everything.,[5]  We have napped out
    the right road to the world revolution, but this road is not a
    straight one, but goes in zigzags. We have weakened the
    bourgeoisie, so that it cannot overcome us by force of arms. They
    used to ban our conduct of communist propaganda; but there can be
    no question of that at present, and it would be ridiculous to
    demand such things. They are decaying from within, and that gives
    us strength. We do not imagine that we shall defeat the world
    bourgeoisie by force of arms alone, and the Mensheviks are wrong
    in ascribing that intention to us.
I did not hear Comrade Kamenev’s report on the
    Conference, but I shall say that the latter teaches us a lesson:
    no matter how the struggle proceeded and whatever memories remain,
    we must put a complete end to everything. It should be remembered
    that the consolidation of our forces is the main and most
    important task. Tasks of economic construction await us. That
    transition will be difficult after six years of war, and we have
    to tackle the problem with united forces, on the platform of the
    All-Russia Conference’s resolutions, which must he carried
    out. The struggle against red-tape methods, and economic and
    administrative work call for unity. What is expected of us is
    propaganda by example; the non-Party masses have to be set an
    example. It will be no easy matter to carry out the resolutions,
    but we must concentrate all our forces on that task and set about
    working in all earnest. I call upon you to do that.

Endnotes
[1]
    Held in the Hall of Columns, the House of Trade Unions, on
    November 20, 1920, this meeting discussed reports on the Mos cow
    Gubernia Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) and the war situation. Lenin
    spoke at the meeting in connection with the publicationof the
    decree on concessions, on November 25.—Editor
[2]
    The Council of People's Commissars, with Lenin as chairman, was
    formed by the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets in October
    1917. It was occasionally called the great, or full, Council to
    distinguish it from the small, or limited, Council,
    whichfunctioned under its auspices from December 1917 to 1926 as
    acommission dealing with minor questions and preparing various
    questions for consideration by the full Council of
    People'sCommissars.—Editor
[3]
    The Peace Treaty of Versailles, which concluded the First World
    War, was signed on June 28, 1919, by the U.S.A., the British
    Empire, France, Italy, Japan and other Allied Powers, on the one
    hand, and Germany, on the other. Lenin wrote, "this is an
    unparalleled and predatory peace, whichhas made slaves of tens of
    millions of people, including the most civilised" (see p. 320 in
    this volume). The treaty consolidated the repartition of the
    capitalist world in favour of the victors, and established a
    system of relationships between countries which was aimed at
    strangling Soviet Russia and suppressingthe world revolutionary
    movement.—Editor
[4]
    The imperialist government of Japan, in collusion with U.S. and
    British ruling circles, invaded the Far East in the spring of 1918
    in an attempt to seize Soviet territory east of Lake Baikal. On
    April 5, Japanese troops landed in Vladivostok. Operating from
    their main strategic base in Vladivostok, they occupied the
    Maritime Province, Northern Sakhalin and the Trans-Baikal
    region. The rout of Keichak at the end of 1919, the growing
    guerilla movement and the economic crisis in Japan in 1920-21,
    which was aggravated by the Japanese-American contradictions,
    spoiled the doom of the interventionists. By the autumn of 1922
    their rout was complete and on October 25 the last
    interventionistsleft Vladivostok.—Editor
[5]
    The reference is to the talks with Bullitt (see Note 1from Speech at Conference of
    Workers and Red Army Men In Rogozhsko-Simonovsky District Of
    Moscow).


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

##  
    Speech Delivered at a Meeting of Cells’ Secretaries
    Of Communists Of Zamoskvorechye District, Moscow











Speech Delivered At A Meeting of Cells’ Secretaries
Of Communists Of Zamoskvorechye District, Moscow November 29, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A General Meeting
Of
Communists Of Zamoskvorechye District, Moscow
November 29, 1920
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 29 November, 1920 or earlier. 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 273 December 4, 1926; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 434-436
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrade Lenin dwelt in detail on the problem of the struggle against bureaucratic methods which, in its differences with the majority at the gubernia conference, our so-called ’opposition” is advancing almost as a matter of principle. Though he thought that the fact that the “oppo-sition” had raised this question was in itself a healthy sign, Lenin at the same time attacked the opposition for its frivo-lous attitude to the question. Indicating the causes of the recrudescence of bureaucratic methods in our Soviet state and the roots now nourishing them, Lenin very emphati-cally warned the comrades against the idea that this evil could be combated by resolutions on paper and by abstract criticism devoid of any substance. The Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were out to make capital out of this question, both reproached us with being unable to combat red tape in our Soviet apparatus. There had been a time when these gentlemen had said that we would be unable to preserve our Soviet state; now they said: “They have preserved it, it is true, but bureaucratic methods remain in the Soviet institutions, even though Lenin said in such-and-such a book that red tape would be abolished under the rule of the Soviets.”
But that was not how the matter stood.
First of all, general living standards had to be raised, so that the worker would not have to go about in search of flour, with a sack on his back, and hundreds of thousands and millions of working people should pass through the school of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection and learn to administer the state (which was something nobody had taught us), so that they might replace hundreds of thousands of bourgeois bureaucrats.
Incidentally, a reference to the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection. That body had been set up nearly a year before, but it had so far made itself felt very little as a school training people in the administration of the state. It would not be amiss for comrades who really wanted to expedite the fight against bureaucratic methods to work in this sphere and learn some useful lessons.
Lenin remarked that the question of combating red tape was particularly acute in Moscow, because there the comrades came up against, not only Moscow bureaucrats but bureaucrats on a national scale, since central institutions were concentrated there. There were 200,000 Soviet functionaries in Moscow, of whom only 10,000 could be transferred with their institutions to Petrograd in the near future.
It was only to be expected that red tape in the Soviet apparatus would penetrate into the Party apparatus, for these apparatuses are interwoven most intimately. The fight against the evil could and should be placed on the order of the day-not, however, in the sense of criticism for criti-cism’s sake, but of practical suggestions as to the methods of waging that struggle, and better still, of a real struggle in the institutions in which the criticising comrades were working, and of publicity for the results and lessons of the struggle.
Concluding Remarks
In his concluding remarks Comrade Lenin pointed out to his “opponents”, in sharp terms, that it was not befitting for Communists to indulge in such unsubstantiated criticism, such sweeping accusations against the Central Committee, without citing a single fact, such bandying about of names even of experts, and lumping them all together as “bourgeois elements”, without even trying to find out what kind of people they were. Lenin mentioned by name a number of workers who had been able to make a success of joint work with experts, establish correct relations with the latter, and obtain from them what was needed. Such workers did not complain of the experts; the grumbling came from those who had not coped with the work. An example was Shlyapnikov (one of the opponents, who had presented himself as a member of the Workers’ Opposition), a man who was sparing no effort, as Lenin put it, “to hatch differences”, a man who objected to what Lenin had said in his report about our deep debt to the peasantry, and went on to say that the “opposition disagrees with Comrade Lenin”. The self-same Shlyapnikov would turn a blind eye to his own poor work, and was out to present his mission to Archangel as exile imposed by the Central Committee. Another instance was Comrade Bubnov, who spoke so much about the struggle against red tape, without saying a single word about the way he was combating the evil at least in the Central Administration of the Textile Industry which he headed, and where there was no less red tape, perhaps even more, than in other institutions. That was why Vladimir Ilyich warned the Zaxnoskvorechye comrades in the following terms: “When you hear such criticism, criticism without any content, criticism for the sake of criticism, be on your guard; make inquiry to find out whether the criticising comrade’s vanity has not been injured in some way; perhaps he has been offended or is irritated, which drives him towards groundless opposition, opposition for its own sake.”
In conclusion, Comrade Lenin replied to written questions handed to him, and then dealt in detail with the question of concessions.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Telegram to the Chairman of the Revolutionary
    Military Committee  of Armenia











Telegram to the Chairman of the Revolutionary Military Committee  of Armenia, December 2, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to the Chairman of the
 Revolutionary Military Committee of Armenia[1]


Wired: December 2, 1920
 
 
First Published: Pravda No, 273, December 4, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 437
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Comrade Kasyan, Chairman of the Revolutionary
      Military Committee of Armenia, Yerevan
Through you I send greetings to the Soviet Armenia
    of the working people, liberated from the yoke of imperialism. I
    have no doubt that you will exert every effort to establish
    fraternal solidarity between the working people of Armenia, Turkey
    and Azerbaijan.
 Lenin

    

      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars

    

      Moscow, December 2, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    This telegram was sent in reply to greetings from the
    Revolutionary Military Committee of Armenia on the occasion of the
    establishment of Soviet power there. The Committee sent its
    greetings on November 30, 1920.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive








==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at a Meeting Of Activists Of The
    Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.)










Speech Delivered At A Meeting Of Activists Of The Moscow Organisation Of The R.C.P.(B.), December 6, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at a Meeting of Activists Of
The Moscow Organisation of the R.C.P.(B.)
December 6, 1920


Delivered: December 6, 1920
 
 
First Published: 1923; Published according to
the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 438-459
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I have noticed with great pleasure, although, I must confess, with surprise, that the question of concessions is arousing enormous interest. Cries are to he heard on all sides, mostly from the rank and file. “How can that be?” they ask. “We have driven out our own exploiters, and yet we are inviting others from abroad.”
It will readily be understood why these outcries give me pleasure. The fact that a cry of alarm has gone up from the rank and file about the possibility of the old capitalists returning, and that this cry has gone up in connection with an act of such tenth-rate significance as the decree on concessions, shows that there is a very keen consciousness of the danger of capitalism and the great danger of the struggle against it. That is excellent, of course, and it is all the more excellent because, as I have already said, alarm is being voiced by the rank and file.
From the political point of view, the fundamental thing in the question of concessions—and here there are both political and economic considerations—is a rule we have not only assimilated in theory, but have also applied in practice, a rule which will remain fundamental with us for a long time until socialism finally triumphs all over the world: we must take advantage of the antagonisms and the contradictions that exist between the two imperialisms, the two groups of capitalist states, and play them off against each other. Until we have conquered the whole world, and as long as we are economically and militarily weaker than the capitalist world, we must stick to the rule that we must be able to take advantage of the antagonisms and contradictions existing among the imperialists. Had we not adhered to this rule, every one of us would have long ago been strung up by the neck, to the glee of the capitalists. We gained our chief experience in this respect when we concluded the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. It should not be inferred that all treaties must be like that of Brest-Litovsk, or the Treaty of Versailles. That is not true. There may be a third kind of treaty, one that is advantageous to its.
Brest-Litovsk was significant in being the first time that we were able, on an immense scale and amidst vast difficulties, to take advantage of the contradictions among the imperialists in such a way as to make socialism the ultimate gainer. During the Brest-Litovsk period there were two immensely powerful groups of imperialist predators— the Austro-German and the Anglo-France-American. They were locked in a furious struggle which was to decide the fate or the world for the immediate future. That we were able to hold on—though from the military standpoint our forces were non-existent, we possessed nothing and were steadily sinking into the depths of economic chaos—the fact that we were able to hold on was a miracle that resulted from our having taken due advantage of the conflict between German and American imperialism. We made a tremendous concession to German imperialism; by doing so we at once safeguarded ourselves against persecution by both imperialisms. Germany was unable to concentrate on stifling Soviet Russia either economically or politically; she was too busy for that. We let her have the Ukraine, from which she could get all the grain and coal she wanted provided, of course, she was able to get them, and had the strength for the purpose. Anglo-France-American imperialism was unable to attack us because we first made an offer of peace. A big book by Robins has just appeared in America, in which the author describes the US. talks with Lenin and Trotsky, who gave their consent to the conclusion of peace. Although the Americans were helping the Czechoslovaks and making them take part in the military intervention, they were unable to interfere because they were busy with their own war. The outcome might have seemed something like a bloc between the first Socialist Republic and German imperialism, against another imperialism. However, we did not conclude a bloc of any kind; we nowhere exceeded the borderline that would undermine or defame the socialist state; we simply took advantage of the conflict between the two imperialisms in such a way that both were ultimately the losers. Germany obtained nothing from the Brest Peace except several million poods of grain, but she brought the disintegrating force of Bolshevism into the country. We, however, gained time, in the course of which the formation of the Red Army began. Even the tremendous distress suffered by the Ukraine proved reparable, although at a heavy price. What our antagonists had counted on, namely, the rapid collapse of Soviet rule in Russia, did not come to lass. We made use of the interval history had accorded us as a breathing-space in order to consolidate ourselves to a degree that would make it impossible to vanquish us by military force. We gained time, a little time, but in return had to sacrifice a great deal of territory. In those days, I recall, people used to philosophise and say that to gain time we must surrender territory. It was in accordance with the phi-losophers’ theory of time and space that we acted in practice and in policy: we sacrificed a great deal of territory, but won sufficient time to enable us to muster strength. Then, when all the imperialists wanted to launch a full-scale war against us, that proved impossible: they had neither the means nor the forces for such a war. At that time we sacrificed no fundamental interests; we conceded minor interests and preserved what was fundamental.
This, incidentally, raises the question of opportunism. Opportunism means sacrificing fundamental interests so as to gain temporary and partial advantages. That is the gist of the matter, if we consider the theoretical definition of opportunism. Many people have gone astray on this point. In the case of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, we sacrificed Russia’s interests, as understood in the patriotic sense, which were, in fact, secondary from the socialist point of view. We made immense sacrifices, yet they were only minor ones. The Germans hated Britain implacably. They hated the Bolsheviks too, but we held out a bait, and they fell for it.
They had all the time asserted that they would not go as far as Napoleon did. Indeed, they did not reach Moscow, but they penetrated into the Ukraine where they came to grief. They thought they had learnt a lot from Napoleon, but things worked out otherwise. We, on the other hand, gained a great deal.
The example of the Peace of Brest-Litovsk has taught us a lot. At present, we stand between two foes. If we are unable to defeat both of them, we must be able to dispose our forces in such a way as to make them fall out among themselves; whenever thieves fall out, honest men come into their own. However, as soon as we are strong enough to overcome capitalism as a whole, we shall immediately seize it by the scruff of the neck. Our strength is growing, and very rapidly. The Peace of Brest-Litovsk was a lesson we shall never forget, one which, in respect of the conclusions to be drawn from it, was worth more than any propaganda or preaching. We have now won in the sense that we stand on our own feet. We are surrounded by imperialist states which detest the Bolsheviks and are spending vast sums of money, using ideological means, the power of the press, and soon, and yet have been unable to defeat us in three years of war, although we are infinitely weak from the military and economic standpoint. We do not possess one-hundredth of the forces of the combined imperialist states, yet they are unable to stifle us. They cannot crush us because their soldiers will not obey; their war-weary workers and peasants do not want a war against the Soviet Republic. Such is the position now, and that is what we must proceed from. We do not know what the position will be like several years from now, since with every year the Western powers are recovering from the war.
Since the Second Congress of the Third International we have secured a firm foothold in the imperialist countries, not only in the sphere of ideology but also in that of organisation. In all countries there are groups which are carrying on independent work and will continue to do so. That has been accomplished. But the rate, the tempo of development of the revolution in the capitalist countries is far slower than in our country. It was evident that the revolutionary movement would inevitably slow down when the nations secured peace. Therefore, without surmising as to the future, we cannot now rely on this tempo becoming rapid. We have to decide what we are to do at the present time. Every people lives in a state, and every state belongs to a system of states, which are in a certain system of political equilibrium in relation to one another.
Let us bear in mind that all over the world the capitalists have bought up the vast majority of the richest sources of raw materials, or, if they have not actually bought them, they have seized them politically; since there is a, balance based on capitalism, that must be reckoned with and turned to account. We cannot go to war with the present-day Entente. Our agitation has been and is being conducted splendidly—of that we are certain. We must take political advantage of the differences among our opponents, but only of major differences that are due to profound economic causes. If we try to exploit minor and fortuitous differences, we shall be behaving like petty politicians and cheap diplomats. There is nothing of value to be gained by that. There are swarms of diplomats who play this game; they do so for several months, make careers, and then come to grief.
Are there any radical antagonisms in the present-day capitalist world that must be utilised? Yes, there are three principal ones, which I should like to enumerate. The first, the one that affects us closest, is the relations between Japan and America. War is brewing between them. They cannot live together in peace on the shores of the Pacific, although those shores are three thousand versts apart. This rivalry arises incontestably from the relation between their capitalisms. A vast literature exists on the future Japanese-American war. It is beyond doubt that war is brewing, that it is inevitable. The pacifists are trying to ignore the matter and obscure it with general phrases, but no student of the history of economic relations and diplomacy can have the slightest doubt that war is ripe from the economic viewpoint and is being prepared politically. One cannot open a single book on this subject without seeing that a war is brewing. The world has been partitioned. Japan has seized vast colonies. Japan has a population of fifty million, and she is comparatively weak economically. America has a population of a hundred and ten million, and although she is many times richer than Japan she has no colonies. Japan has seized China, which has a population of four hundred million and the richest coal reserves in the world. How can this plum be kept? It is absurd to think that a stronger capitalism will not deprive a weaker capitalism of the latter’s spoils. Can the Americans remain indifferent under such circumstances? Can strong capitalists remain side by side with weak capitalists and not be expected to grab everything they can from the latter? What would they be good for if they did not? But that being the case, can we, as Communists, remain indifferent and merely say: “We shall carry on propaganda for communism in these countries.” That is correct, but it is not everything. The practical task of communist policy is to take advantage of this hostility and to play one side off against the other. Here a new situation arises. Take the two imperialist countries, Japan and America. They want to fight and will fight for world supremacy, for the right to loot. Japan will fight so as to continue to plunder Korea, which site is doing with unprecedented brutality, combining all the latest technical inventions with purely Asiatic tortures. We recently received a Korean newspaper which gives an account of what the Japanese are doing. Here we find all the methods of tsarisin and all the latest technical perfections combined with a purely Asiatic system of torture and unparalleled brutality. But the Americans would like to grab this Korean titbit. Of course, defence of country in such a war ’would be a heinous crime, a betrayal of socialism. Of course, to support one of these countries against the other would he a crime against communism; we Communists have to play one off against the other. Are we not committing a crime against communism? No, because we are doing that as a socialist state which is carrying on communist propaganda and is obliged to take advantage of every hour granted it by circumstances in order to gain strength as rapidly as possible. We have begun to gain strength, but very slowly. America and the other capitalist countries are growing in economic and military might at tremendous speed. We shall develop far more slowly, however we muster our forces.
We must take advantage of the situation that has arisen. That is the whole purpose of the Kamchatka concessions. We have had a visit from Vanderlip, a distant relative of the well-known multimillionaire, if he is to he believed; but since our intelligence service in the Choke, although splendidly organised, unfortunately does not yet extend to the United States of America, we have not yet established the exact kinship of these Vanderlips. Some even say there is no kinship at all. I do not presume to judge: my knowledge is confined to having read a book by Vanderlip, not the one that was in our country and is said to be such a very important person that he has been received with all the honours by kings and ministers—from which one must infer that his pocket is very well lined indeed. He spoke to them in the way people discuss matters at meetings such as ours, for instance, and told then in the calmest tones how Europe should be restored. If ministers spoke to him with so much respect, it must mean that Vanderlip is in touch with the multimillionaires. His book reveals the outlook of a man of business who knows nothing else but business and who, after observing Europe, says: ’It looks as if nothing will come of it and everything will go to the devil.” The book is full of hatred of Bolshevism, but it does take up the matter of establishing business contacts. It is a most interesting hook from the point of view of agitation too, better than many a communist book, because its final conclusion is: “I’m afraid this patient is incurable—though we have lots of money and the means for his treatment.”
Well, Vanderlip brought a letter to the Council of People’s Commissars. It was a very interesting letter, for, with the utter frankness, cynicism and crudity of an American tightfist, the writer of the letter said: “We are very strong now, in 1920, and in 1923 our navy will be still stronger. However, Japan stands in the way of our growing might and we shall have to fight her, and you cannot fight without oil. Sell us Kamchatka, and I can vouch that the enthusiasm of the American people will be so great that we shall recognise you. The presidential elections in March will result in a victory for our party. If, however, you let us have only the lease of Kamchatka, I assure you there will be no such enthusiasm.” That is almost literally what he said in his letter. Here we have an unblushing imperialism, which does not even consider it necessary to veil itself in any way because it thinks it is magnificent just as it is. When this letter was received, we said that we must grasp at the opportunity with both hands. That he is right, economically speaking, is shown by the fact that in America the Republican Party is on the eve of victory. For the first time in the history of America, people in the South have voted against the Democrats. It is therefore clear that here we have the economically correct reasoning of an imperialist. Kamchatka belonged to the former Russian Empire. That is true. Who it belongs to at the present moment is not clear. It seems to be the property of a state called the Far Eastern Republic, but the boundaries of that state have not been precisely fixed.[1] True, certain documents are being drawn up on the subject, but, first, they have not yet been drawn up, and, second, they have not yet been ratified. The Far East is dominated by Japan, who can do anything she pleases there. If we  lease to America Kamchatka, which legally belongs to us but has actually been seized by Japan, we shall clearly he the gainers. That is the basis of my political reasoning, and on that basis we at once decided to conclude an immediate agreement with America. Of course, we have to bargain, as no businessman will respect us if we do not. Comrade Rykov accordingly began to bargain, and we drafted an agreement. But when it came to the actual signing, we said: “Everybody knows who we are, but who are you?” It transpired that Vanderlip could provide no guarantee, whereupon we said that we were ready to accommodate. Why, we said, this is merely a draft, and you said yourself that it would conic into force when your party gained the upper hand; it has not gained the upper hand as yet, so we shall wait. Things worked out as follows: we drew up a draft of the treaty, as yet unsigned, giving Kamchatka—a big slice of the territory of the Far East and North-East Siberia to America for a period of sixty years, with the right to build a naval harbour in a port that is ice-free the year round, and has oil and coal.
A draft agreement is not binding in any way. We can always say that it contains unclear passages, and back out at any moment. In that case we shall only have lost time in negotiating with Vanderlip, and a few sheets of paper; yet we have already gained something. One has only to take the reports from Europe to see that. There is hardly a report from Japan which does not speak of the great concern caused by the expected concessions. “We shall not tolerate it,” Japan declares, “it infringes our interests.” Go ahead then, and defeat America; we have no objections. We have already set Japan and America at loggerheads, to put it crudely, and have thereby gained a point. We have also gained as far as the Americans are concerned.
Who is Vanderlip? We have not established who he is—but it is a fact that in the capitalist world telegrams are not dispatched all over the world about rank-and-file citizens. And when he left us, telegrams went to all corners of the earth. Well, he went about saying that he had obtained a good concession and, wherever he went, began to praise Lenin. That was rather funny, but let me tell you that there is a bit of politics in this funny situation. When Vanderlip had concluded all his negotiations here, he wanted to meet me. I consulted representatives of the appropriate departments and asked whether I should receive him. They said, “Let him leave with a sense of satisfaction.” Vanderlip came to see me. We talked about all these things, and when he began to tell me that lie had been in Siberia, that he knew Siberia and came of a worker’s family, just like most American multimillionaires, and so on, that they valued only practical things, and that they believed a thing only when they saw it, I replied, ’Well, you are a practical people, and when you see the Soviet system you will introduce it in your own country.” FIe stared at me in amazement at this turn in the conversation, and said to me in Russian (the whole conversation had been in English), “Mozhet byt.”* I asked in surprise where he had got his knowledge of Russian. “Why, I covered most of Siberia on horseback when I was twenty-five”. I will tell you of a remark by Vanderlip which belongs to the sphere of the humorous. At parting he said: “I shall have to tell them in America that Mr. Lenin has no horns.” I did not grasp his meaning at once, as I don’t understand English very well. “What did you say? Will you please repeat that?” He is a spry old fellow; pointing to his temple, he said, “No horns here.”

* Perhaps-Ed.
There was an interpreter present who said, “That is exactly what he says.” In America they are convinced that I have horns here, that is, the bourgeois say that I have been marked by the devil. ’And now I shall have to tell them that you have no horns,” said Vanderlip. We parted very amicably. I expressed the hope that friendly relations between the two states would be a basis not only for the granting of a concession, but also for the normal development of reciprocal economic assistance. It all went off in that kind of vein. Then telegrams came telling what Vanderlip had said on arriving home from abroad. Vanderlip had compared Lenin with Washington and Lincoln. Vanderlip had asked for my autographed portrait. I had declined, because when you present a portrait you write, “To Comrade So-and-so”, and I could not write, “To Comrade Vanderlip”. Neither was it possible to write: “To the Vanderlip we are signing a concession with” because that concession agreement would be concluded by the Administration when it took office. I did not know what to write. It would have been illogical to give my photograph to an out-and-out imperialist. Yet these were the kind of telegrams that arrived; this affair has clearly played a certain part in imperialist politics. When the news of the Vanderlip concessions came out, Harding—the man who has been elected President, but who will take office only next March issued an official denial, declaring that he knew nothing about it, had no dealings with the Bolsheviks and had heard nothing about any concessions. That was during the elections, and, for all we know, to confess, during elections, that you have deahngs with the Bolsheviks may cost you votes. That was why he issued an official denial. He had this report sent to all the newspapers that are hostile to the Bolsheviks and are on the pay roll of the imperialist parties. The political advantages we can gain in respect of America and Japan are perfectly clear to us. This report is significant because it concretely shows the kind of concessions we want to sign, and on what terms. Of course this cannot be told to the press. It can be told only to a Party meeting. We must not be silent in the press about this agreement. It is to our advantage, and we must not say a single word that may hamper the conclusion of such an agreement because it promises us tremendous advantages and a weakening of both U.S. and Japanese imperialism with regard to us.
All this deal means deflecting the imperialist forces away from us—while the imperialists are sighing and waiting for an opportune moment to strangle the Bolsheviks, we are deferring that moment. When Japan was becoming involved in the Korean venture, the Japanese said to the Americans “Of course, we can heat the Bolsheviks, but what will you give us for it? China? We shall take her anyway, where as here we have to go ten thousand versts to beat the Bolsheviks, with you Americans in our rear. No, that is not politics.” Even then the Japanese could have beaten us in a few weeks, had there been a double-track railway and America’s aid in transport facilities. What saved us was the fact that while Japan was busy gobbling up China she could not advance westward, through all of Siberia, with America in her rear; moreover, she did not want to pull America’s chestnuts out of the fire.
A war between the imperialist powers would have saved us even more. If we are obliged to put up with such scoundrels as the capitalist robbers, each of whom is ready to knife us, it is our prime duty to make thorn turn their knives against each other. Whenever thieves fall out, honest men come into their own. The second gain is purely political. Even if this concession agreement does not materialise, it will be to our advantage. As for the economic gain, it will provide us with part of the products. If the Americans received part of the products, it would be to our advantage. There is so much oil and ore in Kamchatka that we are obviously not in a position to work them.
I have shown you one of the imperialist antagonisms we must take advantage of that which exists between Japan and America. There is another—the antagonism between America and the rest of the capitalist world. Practically the entire capitalist world of ’victors” emerged from the war tremendously enriched. America is strong; she is everybody’s creditor and everything depends on her; she is being more and more detested; she is robbing all and sundry and doing so in a unique fashion. She has no colonies. Britain emerged from the war with vast colonies. So did France. Britain offered America a mandate—that is the language they use nowadays—for one of the colonies she had seized, but America did not accept it. U.S. businessmen evidently reason in some other way. They have seen that, in the devastation it produces and the temper it arouses among the workers, war has very definite consequences, and they have come to the conclusion that there is nothing to be gained by accepting a mandate. Naturally, however, they will not permit this colony to be used by any other state. All bourgeois literature testifies to a rising hatred of America, while in America there is a growing demand for an agreement with Russia. America signed an agreement with Koichak giving him recognition and support but here they have already come to grief, the only reward for their pains being losses and disgrace. Thus we have before us the greatest state in the world, which by 1923 will have a navy stronger than the British, and this state is meeting with growing enmity from the other capitalist countries. We must take this trend of things into account. America cannot come to terms with the rest of Europe—that is a fact proved by history. Nowhere has the Versailles Treaty been analysed so well as in the book by Keynes, a British representative at Versailles. In his book Keynes ridicules Wilson and the part he played in the Treaty of Versailles. Here, Wilson proved to be an utter simpleton, whom Clemenceau and Lloyd George twisted round their little fingers. Thus everything goes to show that America cannot come to terms with the other countries because of the profound economic antagonism between them, since America is richer than the rest.
We shall therefore examine all questions of concessions from this angle: if the least opportunity arises of aggravating the differences between America and the other capitalist countries, it should be grasped with both hands. America stands in inevitable contradiction with the colonies, and if she attempts to become more involved there she will be helping us ten times as much. The colonies are seething with unrest, and when you touch them, whether or not you like it, whether or not you are rich—and the richer you are the better—you will be helping us, and the Vanderlips will be sent packing. That is why to us this antagonism is the main consideration. The third antagonism is that between the Entente and Germany. Germany has been vanquished, crushed by the Treaty of Versailles, but she possesses vast economic potentialities. Germany is the world’s second country in economic development, if America is taken as the first. The experts even say that as far as the electrical industry is concerned she is superior to America, and you know that the electrical industry is tremendously important. As regards the extent of the application of electricity, America is superior, but Germany has surpassed her in technical perfection. It is on such a country that the Treaty of Versailles has been imposed, a treaty she cannot possibly live under. Germany is one of the most powerful and advanced of the capitalist countries. She cannot put up with the Treaty of Versailles. Although she is herself imperialist, Germany is obliged to seek for an ally against world imperialism, because she has been crushed. That is the situation we must turn to our advantage. Everything that increases the antagonism between America and the rest of the Entente or between the entire Entente and Germany should be used by us from the viewpoint of the concessions. That is why we must try and attract their interest; that is why the pamphlet Milyut iii promised to bring, and has brought and will distribute, contains the decrees of the Council of People’s Commissars written in a way that will attract prospective concessionaires. The booklet contains maps with explanations. We shall get it translated into all languages and encourage its distribution with the aim of setting Germany against Britain, because concessions will be a lifeline to Germany. We shall likewise set America against Japan, the entire Entente against America, and all Germany against the Ent elite.
These, then, are the three antagonisms that are upsetting the imperialists’ applecart. That is the crux of the matter; that is why, from the political standpoint, we should be heart and soul—or rather with all our wits—in favour of concessions.
I now go over to the economics. When we were speaking of Germany we came up to the question of economics. Germany cannot exist from the economic standpoint following the Peace of Versailles; neither can all the defeated countries, such as Austria-Hungary in her former boundaries, for although parts of that country now belong to the victor states, she cannot exist under the Treaty of Versailles. These countries form, in Central Europe, a vast group with enormous economic and technical might. From the economic standpoint they are all essential to the restoration of the world economy. If you carefully read and reread the Decree on Concessions of November 23, you will find that we stress the significance of the world economy, and we do so intentionally. That is undoubtedly correct. For the world economy to he restored, Russian raw materials must be utilised. You cannot get along without them—that is economcally true. It is admitted oven by a bourgeois of the first water, a student of economics, who regards things from a purely bourgeois standpoint. That man is Keynes, author of The Economic Consequences of the Peace. Vanderlip, who has travelled all over Europe as a financial magnate, also admits that the world economy cannot be restored because it appears that there is very little raw material available in the world, it having been dissipated in the war. He says that Russia must be relied on. And Russia now comes forward and declares to the world: we undertake to restore the international economy—here is our plan. That is sound economics. During this period Soviet government has grown stronger; not only has it grown stronger, but it has advanced a plan for the restoration of the entire world economy. The rehabilitation of the international economy by means of a plan of electrification is scientifically sound. With our plan we shall most certainly attract the sympathy, not only of all the workers but of sensible capitalists as well, regardless of the fact that in their eyes we are “those terrible Bolshevik terrorists”, and so forth. Our economic plan is therefore correct; when they read this plan, all the petty-bourgeois democrats will swing over towards its, for while the imperialists have already fallen out among themselves, here is a plan to which engineers and economists can offer no objection. We are entering the field of economics and are offering the world a positive programme of construction; we are opening up prospects based on economic considerations, prospects which Russia regards not as a selfish plan to destroy the economies of other lands, as was the rule in the past, but as a way to restore those economies in the interests of the whole world.
We are shifting the question to the anti-capitalist plane. We say that we undertake to build the whole world on a rational economic foundation; there can be no doubt that this idea is a correct one. There can be no doubt that if we set to work properly, with modern machinery and the help of science, the whole world economy can be restored at once.
We are conducting a kind of industrial propaganda when we say to the master class: “You capitalists are useless; while you are going to rack and ruin, we are building in our own way; so don’t you think, gentlemen, it is time to come to terms with us?” To which all the capitalists of the world will have to reply, though grudgingly: “Yes, perhaps it is. Let us sign a trade agreement.”
The British have already made a draft and sent it to us.[2] It is under discussion. New times are setting in. Their war schemes have miscarried and they now have to fight in the economic field. We fully understand that. We never imagined that with the fighting over and the advent of peace, the capitalist wolf would lie down with the socialist lamb. No, we did not. Yet the fact that you have to fight us in the economic field is a tremendous step forward. We have presented you with a world programme by regarding concessions from the standpoint of the world economy. That is indisputable from the viewpoint of economics. No engineer or agronomist who has anything to do with the national economy will deny that. Many capitalists say there cannot be a stable system of capitalist states without Russia. Yet we have advanced such a programme in the capacity of builders of a world economy based on a different plan. That is of tremendous propaganda value. Even if they do not sign a single concession—which I regard as quite possible—even if the sole outcome of all this talk of concessions will be a certain number of Party meetings and decrees, without a single concession being granted, we shall still have gained something. Besides advancing a plan of economic reconstruction, we are winning over all states that have been ruined by the war. At the congress of the Third, Communist International I said that the whole world is divided into oppressed and oppressor nations.
The oppressed nations constitute not less than seventy per cent of the population of the earth. To these the Peace of Versailles has added another hundred or hundred and fifty million people.
We now stand, not only as representatives of the proletarians of all countries but as representatives of the oppressed peoples as well. A journal of the Communist International recently appeared under the title of Narody Vostoka.[3] It carries the following slogan issued by the Communist International for the peoples of the East: “Workers of all countries and all oppressed peoples, unitel” “When did the Executive Committee give orders for slogans to be modified?” one of the comrades asked. Indeed, I do not remember that it ever did. Of course, the modification is wrong from the standpoint of the Communist Manifesto, but then the Communist Manifesto was written under entirely different conditions. From the point of view of present-day politics, however, the change is correct. Relations have become tense. All Germany is seething; so is all of Asia. You have read how the revolutionary movement is developing in India. In China there is a fierce hatred of the Japanese, and also of the Americans. InGermany there is such seething hatred of the Entente as can only be understood by those who have seen the hatred of the German workers for their own capitalists. As a result, they have made Russia the immediate representative of the entire mass of the oppressed population of the earth; the events are teaching the peoples to regard Russia as a centre of attraction. A Menshevik newspaper in Georgia recently wrote: “There are two forces in the world: the Entente and Soviet Russia.” What are the Menslioviks? They are people who trim their sails to the wind. When we were weak internationally, they cried, “Down with the Bolsheviks!” When we began to grow stronger, they cried, “We are neutral!” Now that we have beaten off the enemies, they say, “Yes, there are two forces.”
In the concessions decree we come forward, on behalf of all humanity, with an economically irreproachable programme for the restoration of the world’s economic forces by utilising all raw materials, wherever they are to be found. What we consider important is that there should be no starvation anywhere. You capitalists cannot eliminate it; we can. We are speaking for seventy per cent of the population of the earth. This is sure to exert an influence. Whatever comes of the project, no exception can be taken to it from the angle of economics. The economic aspect of concessions is important, regardless of whether they are signed or not.
As you see, I have been obliged to make a rather long introduction and to demonstrate the advantages of concessions. Of course, concessions are important to us also as a means of obtaining commodities. That is unquestionably true, but the chief thing is the political aspect. By the time the Congress of Soviets meets you will receive a book of six hundred pages—the plan for the electrification of Russia. This plan has been devised by the leading agronomists and engineers. We cannot expedite its realisation without the help of foreign capital and means of production. But if we want assistance, we must pay for it. So far, we have been fighting the capitalists, and they said that they would either strangle us or compel us to pay up twenty thousand millions. However they are in no position to strangle us, and we shall not pay the debts. For the time being we are enjoying a certain respite. As long as we are in need of economic assistance we are willing to pay you—that is the way we put the matter, and any other way would be economically unsound. Russia is in a state of industrial ruin; she is ten times or more worse off than before the war. Had we been told three years ago that we would be fighting the entire capitalist world for three years, we would not have believed it. But now we shall be told that to restore the economy, with only one-tenth of the pre-war national wealth is a still more difficult task. And indeed it is more difficult than fighting. We could fight with the help of the enthusiasm of the working-class masses and the peasants, who were defending themselves against the landowners. At present it is not a question of defence against the landowners, but of restoring economic life along lines the peasants are not accustomed to. Here victory will not depend on enthusiasm, dash, or self-sacrifice, but on day-by-day, monotonous, petty and workaday effort. That is undoubtedly a more difficult matter. Where are we to procure the means of production we need? To attract the Americans, we must pay: they are men of business. And what are we to pay with? With gold? But we cannot throw gold about. We have little gold left. We have too little even to cover the programme of electrification. The engineer who drew up the programme has estimated that we need at least a thousand and one hundred million rubles of gold to carry it out. We do not have such a stock of gold. Neither can we pay in raw materials, because we have not yet fed all our own people. When, in the Council of People’s Commissars, the question arises of giving 100,000 poods of grain to the Italians, the People’s Commissar for Food gets up and objects. We are bargaining for every trainload of grain. Without grain we cannot develop foreign trade. What then shall we give? Rubbish? They have enough rubbish of their own. They say, let us trade in grain; but we cannot give them grain. We therefore propose to solve the problem by means of concessions.
I pass to the next point. Concessions create new dangers. I shall mention what I said at the beginning of my speech, namely, that an outcry is going tip from the rank and file, from the working-class masses: “Don’t yield to the capitalists; they are clever and crafty.” It is good to hear that, because it is a sign of the development of that vast mass which will fight the capitalists tooth and nail. There are some sound ideas in the articles of Comrade Stepanev, which he planned on pedagogical lines (first set forth all the arguments against concessions, and then say that they must be accepted; but certain readers, before they get to the good part, may stop reading, convinced that concessions are unnecessary); but when he says that we must net give concessions to Britain because that will mean some Lockhart coming here, I cannot agree. We coped with him at a time when the Cheka was still in its infancy, not as effective as it is now. If we cannot catch spies after three years of war, then all that can be said is that such people should not undertake to run the state. We are solving far more difficult problems. For instance, there are at present 300,000 bourgeois in the Crimea. These are a source of future profiteering, espionage and every kind of aid to the capitalists. However, we are net afraid of them. We say that we shall take and distribute them, make them submit, and assimilate them.
To say after this that foreigners who will be attached to the various concessions will be a danger to us, or that we shall not be able to keep an eye on them, is ridiculous. Why, then, should we have started the whole business? Why, then, should we have undertaken to run the state? The task here is purely one of organisation, and it is not worth dwelling on at length.
It would, of course, be a great mistake to think that concessions imply peace. Nothing of the kind. Concessions are nothing but a new form of warfare. Europe waged war on us, and now the war is shifting to new sphere. Previously, the war was conducted in a field in which the imperialists were infinitely stronger than we were—the military field. If you count the number of cannon and machine-guns they have and the number we have, the number of soldiers their governments can mobilise and the number our government can mobilise, then we certainly ought to have been crushed in a fortnight. Nevertheless, we held our own in this field, and we undertake to continue the fight and are going over to an economic war. We definitely stipulate that next to a concession area, a concession square of territory, there will be our square, and then again their square; we shall learn from them how to organise model enterprises by placing what is ours next to theirs. If we are incapable of doing that, there is no use talking about anything. Operating up-to-date equipment nowadays is no easy matter, and we have to learn to do so, learn it in practice. That is something that no school, university or course will teach you. That is why we are granting concessions on the chequer-board system. Come and learn on the job.
We shall get a tremendous economic gain from concessions. Of course, when their dwelling areas are created they will bring capitalist customs along with them and will try to demoralise the peasantry. We must be on the alert and exercise our communist counter-influence at every step. That too is a kind of war, a duel between two methods, two political and economic systems—the communist and the capitalist. We shall prove that we are the stronger. We are told: “Very good, you have held your own on the external front; well, start construction, go ahead and build, and  we shall see who wins  Of course, the task is a difficult one, but we have said, and still say, that socialism has the force of example. Coercion is effective against those who want to restore their rule. But at this stage the significance of force ends, and after that only influence and example are effective. We must show the significance of communism in practice, by example. We have no machinery; the war has impoverished us and deprived Russia of her economic resources. Yet we do not fear this duel, because it will be advantageous to us in all respects.
That, too, will be a war in which we will not yield an inch. This war will be to our advantage in every respect; the transition from the old war to this new one will also be of advantage, to say nothing of the fact that there is a certain indirect guarantee of peace. At the meeting which was so poorly reported in Pravda, I said that we had passed from war to peace, but that we had not forgotten that war will return. While capitalism and socialism exist side by side, they cannot live in peace: one or the otherwill ultimately triumph—the last obsequies will be observed either for the Soviet Republic or for world capitalism. This is some respite from war. The capitalists will seek pretexts for going to war. If they accept our proposal and agree to concessions, that will be harder for them. On the one. hand, we shall have the best conditions in the event of war; on the other hand, those who want to go to war will not agree to take concessions. The existence of concessions is an economic and political argument against war. States that might go to war with us will not be able to do so if they take concessions. This will bind them. We set such a high value by this that we shall not be afraid to pay, the more so that we shall be paying from the means of production that we cannot develop. For Kamchatka we shall pay in terms of 100,000 poods of oil, taking only 2 per cent for ourselves. If we do not pay up we shall not get even two poods. This is an exorbitant price, but while capitalism exists we cannot expect a fair price from it. Yet the advantages are beyond doubt. From the angle of the danger of a collision between capitalism and Bolshevism, it can be said that concessions are a continuation of the war, but in a different sphere. Each step of the enemy will have to be watched. Every means of administration, supervision, influence and action will be required. And that is also warfare. We have fought a much bigger war; in this war we shall mobilise even larger numbers of people than in the preceding. In this war all working people will be mobilised to a man. They will be told and given to understand: ’Jf capitalism does this or that, you workers and peasants who have overthrown the capitalists must do no less. You must learn!”
I am convinced that the Soviets will overtake and out-strip the capitalists and that our gain will not be a purely economic one. We shall get the miserable two per cent very little indeed, yet it is something. But then we shall be getting knowledge and training; no school or university is worth anything without practical knowledge. You will see from the map appended to the pamphlet Comrade Milyutin will show you that we are granting concessions principally in the outlying regions. In European Russia there are 70,000,000 dessiatines of northern forest land. About 17,000,000 dessiatines are being set aside for concessions. Our timber enterprises are mapped out chequerwise: these forests are in West Siberia and in the Far North. We have nothing to lose. The principal enterprises are located in West Siberia, whose wealth is immense. We cannot develop a hundredth part of it in ten years. However, with the help of foreign capitalists, by letting them have, say, a single mine, we shall be able to work our own mines. In granting concessions, we do the choosing of the locations.
How are the concessions to be organised as regards supervision? They will try to demoralise our peasantry, our masses. A small master by his very nature, the peasant is inclined to freedom of trade, something we consider criminal. That is a matter for the state to combat. Our task here is to contrapose the socialist system of economy to the capitalist system. That, too, will be a war in which we shall have to fight a decisive battle. We are suffering from a tremendous crop failure, lack of fodder and loss of livestock, yet at the same time vast areas of land are uncultivated. In a few days a decree will be issued providing that every effort be exerted to achieve the largest possible sowing of crops and the greatest possible improvement of agriculture.[4] 
Next, we have a million dessiatines of virgin soil which we cannot bring under the plough because we have not enough draught animals and implements, whereas with tractors this land can be ploughed to any depth. It is therefore to our advantage to let out this land on lease. Even if we surrender half of the produce, or even three-quarters, we shall be the gainers. That is the policy we are guided by, and I can say that our actions must be guided, not only by economic considerations and the trend of the world economy, but also by profound political considerations. Any other approach to the matter would be short-sighted. If it is a question of whether concessions are economically advantageous or disadvantageous, the reply is that the economic advantages are beyond dispute. Without concessions, we shall not be able to carry out our programme and the electrification of the country; without them, it will be impossible to restore our economic life in ten years; once we have restored it we shall be invincible to capital. Concessions do not mean peace with capitalism, but war in a now sphere. The war of guns and tanks yields place to economic warfare. True, it also holds out new difficulties and new dangers, but I am certain that we shall overcome them. I am convinced that if the question of concessions is posed in this way, we shall easily he able to convince the vast majority of the Party comrades of the necessity of concessions. The instinctive apprehension I have spoken of is a good and healthy sentiment, which we shall convert into a driving force that will secure us a more rapid victory in the impending economic war.
 Endnotes
[1] The Far Eastern Republic was set up in April 1920 and included the Trans-Baikal, Amur, Maritime and Kamchatka regions and Northern Sakhalin. Formally a bourgeois-democratic state, it, actually pursued a Soviet polity. Its formation was in keeping with the interests of Soviet Russia, which needed a prolonged respite from war in the Far East and wanted to stave off war with Japan. At the same time, however, its creation was a step the Soviet Government had been compelled to take by the pressure of circumstances (see p. 465 in this volume). After the interventionists and whiteguards were driven out,of the Soviet Far East (except Northern Sakhalin), the People’s Assembly of the Republic voted for entry into the R.S.F.S.R.on November 14, 1922.
[2] This refers to the draft of a trade agreement between Great Britain and the R.S.F.S.R., which President of the Beard of Trade Edward F. Wise presented to L. B. Krasin, head of the Soviet trade delegation in London, on November 29, 1920. The talks to normalise economic and political contacts, which had started in May 1920, dragged on and nearly broke down on several occasions. On March 16, 1921, they ended in the signing of atrade agreement.
[3] Narodl Vostoka (Peoples of the East)-a monthy journal, organ of the Council for Propaganda and Guiding the Activities of the Peoples of the East, published by a decision of the First Congress of the Peoples of the East, which was held in Baku from Septem-ber 1. to September 7, 1920. Only one issue appeared—in October 1920. It came out in Russian, Turkish, Persian and Arabic.
[4] Lenin is referring to the bill “On Measures to Strengthen and Develop Peasant Farming” which the Council of People’s Commissars submitted to the Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee for consideration by the Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. It was published in Izvestia No. 281 on December 14, 1920.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 



==========

## Eighth All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets











Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets December 29, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets
December 29, 1920,[1]


Delivered: December 29, 1920 
First Published: Report on concessions; speech to the R.C.P.(B.) group on December 24 and draft resolutions of the Congress were first published in 1930; report on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars, and reply to the debate were published in 1921 in the book The Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. Verbatim Report; Report on concessions and speech to the R.C.P.(B.) group are published according to the verbatim report; report on the work of the Council of People’s Commissars, and reply to the debate—according to the text in the book. 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, pages 461-534
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

Table of Contents
Part I
Report On Concessions Delivered To The R
      C.P.(B.) Group At The Eighth Congress Of Soviets, December 21
Part II
 Report On The Work Of The Council Of
      People’s Commissars, December 22
Part III
 Reply To The Debate On The Report On The Work
    Of The Council Of People.’s Commissars, December 23
Speech Delivered At A Meeting Of The R.C P.(B.)
    Group Of The Eighth Congress Of Soviets, December 24
 Draft Resolution Of The Eighth Congress Of
    Soviets On The Report On Electrification
 Draft Resolution Of The R.C.P.(B.) Group Of The
    Eighth Congress Of Soviets

Endnotes
[1]
    The Congress was held in Moscow from December 22 to 29,
    1920. There was a record attendance of 2,537 delegates, of whom
    1,728 had full voting rights, and 809 had deliberative votes.
The Congress met at a time when the Soviet
    Republic had won victory over the foreign interventionists and
    internal counter-revolution, and the economic front, as Lenin
    said, had become “the main, the principal front”. 
 The Congress was guided by Lenin, who
    delivered a report on the work of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee and the Council of People’s Commissars, and a
    speech closing the debate on his report at plenary sessions of the
    Congress on December 22 and 23. He also took the floor six times
    at sittings of the Communist group of the Congress on December 21,
    22, 24 and 27 to deal with the question of concessions and the
    bill on measures to strengthen and develop peasant farming. 
 After the debate on Lenin’s report, the
    Congress passed a resolution by an overwhelming majority,
    approving the activities of the Soviet Government. The delegates
    gave a concerted rebuff to representatives of the petty-bourgeois
    parties who made a number of anti-Soviet declarations at the
    Congress and tabled a draft resolution of their own.
 The Congress adopted the plan for the
    electrification of Russia which was drawn up on Lenin’s
    initiative and in keeping with his directions. This was the first
    long-term economic plan of the Soviet state, which Lenin called
    “the Party’s second programme”. The resolution
    adopted on Krzhizhanovsky ’s report was drafted by Lenin
    (see p. 532 in this volume).
 One of the most important questions on the
    agenda was the bill on measures to strengthen and develop peasant
    farming, passed by the Council of People’s Commissars on
    December 1-4, 1920. Lenin participated in the discussion of the
    main clauses of the law at a private meeting of non-Party peasant
    delegates onDecember 22 and in the Communist group of the Congress
    on December 24 and 27. The Congress unanimously approved the
    bill. 
 The transition to peaceful construction called
    for the improvement and reorganisation of the entire Soviet
    apparatus. The Congress passed a detailed resolution on the
    question, setting up proper relations between central and local
    administrative bodies. The Congress dealt extensively with
    questions relating to the reorganisation of the entire system of
    economic management to meet the new tasks. The delegates discussed
    and approved a new statute of the Council of Labour and
    Defence.
 The Congress instituted the Order of the Red
    Banner of Labour to be awarded for labour heroism, initiative and
    organisation in solving economic tasks.


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

## 
  Letter to Workers of Red Presnya District of Moscow











Letter to Workers of Red Presnya District of Moscow December 25, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Letter to Workers of Red Presnya District of Moscow[1]  December 25, 1920


Written: December 25, 1920
First Published: Daily Bulletin of the Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets No. 5, December 25, 1920; Published according to the Bulletin text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 31, page 535
Translated: Julius Katzer
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 Fifteen years ago the proletariat of Moscow raised the banner of revolt against tsarism. 180 This was the culmination in the development of the first working-class revolution against tsarism. The workers suffered defeat and workers' blood was shed in Presnya District. The unmatched heroism of the Moscow workers provided the toiling masses of Russia with a model in the struggle. However, the masses were then as yet too unprepared and too divided, and did not give support to the heroes of Presnya District and Moscow, who had risen up in an armed struggle against the tsarist monarchy af landowners. 
The defeat of the Moscow workers was followed by the defeat of the first revolution. For twelve long years the most ferocious reaction maintained by the landowners tormented all the workers and peasants, all the peoples of Russia. 
The exploit of the Presnya workers was not useless. Their sacrifices were not in vain. The first breach was made in the edifice of the tsarist monarchy, a breach that slowly but steadily grew wider and undermined the old and medieval order. 
The exploit of the Moscow workers deeply agitated the urban and rural working masses, a frame of mind whose impress has persisted despite all persecution. 
Prior to the armed uprising of December 1905, the people of Russia had proved incapable of a mass armed struggle against the exploiters. 
The December events brought about profound changes in the people. It became transformed. It had gone through its baptism of fire. It had become steeled in the insurrection, and brought forth numerous fighters who triumphed in 1917 and today—despite immense difficulties, the torments of famine, and the destruction caused by the imperialist war—are defending the cause of socialism's world-wide victory. 
Long live the workers of Red Presnya District, a detachment in the vanguard of the world working-class revolution!
N. Lenin

Endnotes
[1]The reference is to the armed uprising in Moscow in December 1905, during the first Russian revolution. In December 1905 and January 1906 the uprising spread to Nizhni-Novgorod, Rostov-on-Don, Novorossisk, the Donets coal basin, Ekaterinoslav, Perm (Motovilikha Plant), Ufa, Krasnoyarsk, and Chita. Large-scale armed uprisings took place in the Trans-Caucasus, Poland, the Baltic provinces and Finland, which were ruthlessly suppressed by the tsarist government. For a full accounting of the socialist revolution of 1905 see Leon Trotsky’s 1905
The December armed uprising was the peak of the first Russian revolution. Lenin wrote about the uprising in his article “Lessons of the Moscow Uprising” (see present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 171-78). 


Collected Works Volume 31

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive

 





