# Volume 17

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 17







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 17 



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 17
Dec. 1910--Apr. 1912



Preface




1910



Letter to the Russian Collegium of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.

48k



The State of Affairs in the Party

58k



Certain Features of the Historical Development of Marxism

20k


1911



Judas Trotsky's Blush of Shame

8k



The Career of a Russian Terrorist

22k



Lev Tolstoi and His Epoch

17k



Marxism and Nasha Zarya

28k



Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov

   

¶ I
   

¶ II
   

¶ III
   

¶ IV
   

¶ V

92k



The Cadets on “Two Camps” and “Sensible Compromise”

19k



The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Fall of Serfdom

16k



Paul Singer

13k



Comments
Menshikov, Gromoboi, Izgoyev

34k



To the Russian Collegium of the C.C.

14k



Apropos of an Anniversary

29k



“The Peasant Reform” and the Proletarian-Peasant Revolution

34k



Wreckers of the Party in the Role of “Wreckers of Legends”

19k



The Cadets and the Octobrists

17k



In Memory of the Commune

16k



The Social Structure of State Power, the Prospects and Liquidationism

72k



Polemical Notes

14k



The Meaning of the Crisis

17k



Conference of the British Social-Democratic Party

18k



A Conversation Between a Legalist and an Opponent of Liquidationism

33k



“Regret” and “Shame”

20k



The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.
May 28-June 4 (June 10-17). 1911

Letter to the Meeting of
    the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P. Abroad
Summary (Plan) For Report by Three Bolshevik Members
      of the C.C. to a Private Meeting of Nine Members of the
    Central Committee
Draft Resolution Defining
      Terms of Reference


21k



The Results of the Duma Session
“We Did This Together”

17k



Old Truths That Are Ever New

18k



Resolution Adopted by the Second Paris Group of the R.S.D.L.P. on the State of Affairs in the Party

   
¶ Introduction
   

¶ I
   

¶ II
   

¶ III

35k



Introduction to the Pamphlet Two Parties

18k



Reformism in the Russian Social-Democratic Movement

43k



From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (September 4, 1911)
Dedicated to Our
  “Conciliators” and Advocates of
  “Agreement”

13k



Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat Editors on Statement by Commission Convening Plenary Meeting of C.C.

9k



Stolypin and the Revolution

31k



The New Faction of Conciliators, Or the Virtuous

68k



The Election Campaign and the Election Platform

27k



From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (October 18, 1911)

17k



The Grand Total

17k



Two Centres

10k



Old and New (November 5, 1911)
Notes of a
  Newspaper Reader

14k



Speech Delivered in the Name of the R.S.D.L.P. at the Funeral of Paul and Laura Lafargue November 20 (December 3), 1911

6k



Hyndman on Marx

25k



A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto

   

¶ I
   

¶ II
   

¶ III

49k



The Social-Democratic Group in the Second Duma
An Account of the Whole Affair

20k



The Slogans and Organisation of Social-Democratic Work Inside and Outside the Duma

35k



Agency of the Liberal Bourgeoisie

6k



The Climax of the Party Crisis

41k



From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (December 8, 1911)

18k



Trotsky's Diplomacy and a Certain Party Platform

20k



The Results of the Arbitration of the “Trustees”

10k



The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma

Fundamental Questions of
      Principle
The Role of Worker
      Electors in the Election Campaign
The Peasantry and the
      Peasant Electors in the Election Campaign
Conclusions Based on the Experience of the Elections
      to the Third Duma


74k



Old and New (December 10, 1911)

15k



Meeting of the Bolshevik Groups Abroad
December 14-17 (27-30), 1911

1. Draft Resolution on the Report “State Of
    Affairs In the Party”. Organisation of the
      Social-Democratic Party Forces Abroad and the Tasks of the
      Bolsheviks.
2. Resolution on the Russian Organising Commission for
    the Convening of a Conference


14k



Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign

   

¶ I
   

¶ II
   

¶ III
   

¶ IV
   

¶ V
   

¶ VI
   

¶ VII

109k



First Exposure of Cadet Negotiations with the Cabinet

28k



Three Questions

42k



The Famine and the Reactionary Duma

14k


1912



The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
January 5-17 (18-30), 1912

Draft Resolution on the Constitution of the
    Conference. Resolution on the Constitution
Draft Resolution on the Tasks of the Party in the
    Present Situation
Draft Resolution on the Tasks of Social-Democrats In
    the Struggle Against the
    Famine
Draft Resolution on Liquidationism and the
    Group of
    Liquidators. Liquidationism and the Group of
      Liquidators
Resolutions of the Conference

    
The Russian
  Organising Commission for Convening the
Conference
The Constitution
      of the Conference
The Absence of
Delegates from the Non-Russian National
Centres from the General Party Conference
On the Reports of the Local
      Organisations
The Tasks of the
      Party in the Present Situation
Elections to the
      Fourth Duma

   

¶ I
   

¶ II
   

¶ III

The Social-Democratic Group
      in the Duma
The Character and Organisational Forms of Party
Work
The Tasks of Social-Democracy in the Struggle Against
the Famine
The Party's Attitude to the Workers' State
Insurance
Duma Bill

   

¶ I
   

¶ II

The “Petition
      Campaign”
Liquidationism
      and the Group of Liquidators
The Central
      Organ
Rabochaya
      Gazeta
Newspaper Pravda
Changes in the Organisational Rules
      of the Party
Property in
the Hands of the Former Trustee, and
Financial Reports
The Red
      Cross
The Party
      Organisation Abroad
The Russian Government's Attack on Persia
The Chinese
      Revolution
The Policy of the Tsarist Government in
      Finland
Greetings to the
      German Social-Democratic Party




204k



An Organ of a Liberal Labour Policy

16k



Against Unity—With the Liquidators

21k



Political Parties in the Five Years of the Third Duma

   

¶ I
   

¶ II

20k



Report to the International Socialist Bureau on the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.

11k



The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.

24k



To the Editorial Board of Zvezda
P.S. to “The Election Platform of the
  R.S.D.L.P.”

6k



Put Your Cards on the Table

20k



Deputy T. O. Belousov’s Withdrawal from the Social-Democratic Group in the Duma

19k



Famine

8k



The Peasantry and the Elections to the Fourth Duma

10k



The Anonymous Writer in Vorwärts and the State of Affairs in the R.S.D.L.P.

Preface


39k



A Letter to Huysmans, Secretary of the International Socialist Bureau

15k



The Bloc of the Cadets with the Progressists and its Significance

16k



A Poor Defence of a Liberal Labour Policy

23k



The Second Ballot in Russia and the Tasks of the Working Class

20k



Liberalism and Democracy

   

¶ I
   

¶ II

32k


 



      Volume 17 Transcription/Mark-up:
 
R.
      Cymbala,   July 10-22, 2004
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Letter to the Russian Collegium of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: Letter to the Russian Collegium of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the Russian Collegium of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.[2]




Written: Written not later than December 15 (28), 1910 

Published:

      First published in 1941 in Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 1.

      Published according to a typewritten copy.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 17-22.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Recent events in the life of the Russian Social-Democratic
Labour Party abroad clearly show that the “unity crisis” of the Party is
coming to a head. I, therefore, consider it my duty, solely by way of
information, to let you know the significance of recent happenings, the
denouement that may be expected (according to this course of events) and
the position adopted by orthodox Bolsheviks.  

In Golos,

No. 23,[3] Martov in his article “Where Have We Landed?” gibes at the
Plenary

Meeting,[4] at the fact that the Russian Collegium of the Central
Committee has not met once during the year, and that nothing has been done
to carry out the decisions. He, of course, “forgets” to add that it is
precisely the liquidator group of Potresovs that has sabotaged the work of
the Russian Central Committee; we know of the non-recognition of the
Central Committee by Mikhail, Roman, and

Yuri,[5] and their statement that its very existence is harmful. The
C.C. in Russia has been wrecked. Martov rejoices at this. It stands to
reason that the Vperyod

group[6] also rejoices, and this is reflected in the Vperyod
symposium, No. 1. In his glee, Martov has blurted out his views
prematurely. He screams with delight that “legality will finish them”
(the Bolsheviks or the “Polish Bolshevik bloc”). By this he means that
thanks to the obstruction of the Central Committee’s work by the
liquidators, there is no way out of the present situation that would be

    legal[1]

from the Party point of view. Obviously, nothing

    

pleases the liquidators more than a hopeless situation for the Party.  

But Martov was in too much of a hurry. The Bolsheviks still have at
their disposal an archi-legal means of emerging from this situation as
foreseen by the Plenary Meeting and published in its name in No. 11 of the
Central

Organ.[7] This is the demand for the return of the funds, because the
Golos and Vperyod groups obviously have not abided by the
terms agreed on—to eliminate factions and to struggle against the
liquidators and the

otzovists.[8] It was precisely on these conditions, clearly
agreed to, that the Bolsheviks handed over their property to the Central
Committee.  

Then, on the 5th December, 1910 (New Style), the Bolsheviks, having
signed the conditions at the Plenary

Meeting[9] applied for the return of the funds. According to legal
procedure this demand must lead to the convening of a plenary
meeting. The decision of the Plenary Meeting states that “should it
prove impossible” (literally!) for a plenary meeting to take place within
three months from the date of the application, then a commission of five
members of the C.C.—three from the national, non-Russian, parties, one
Bolshevik and one Menshevik—is to be set up.  

Immediately, the Golos supporters revealed themselves in their
true colours. The Golos, supporter

Igor,[10] a member of the Central Committee Bureau

Abroad,[11] conscious of the policy of the Russian liquidators, handed in
a statement that he was against holding a plenary meeting, but was in
favour of a commission. The violation of legality by the Golos
group is thus apparent, since a plenary meeting may be convened before the
conclusion of the three-month period. Once such a request has been made it
is not even permissible to raise the question of a commission.  

The liquidator Igor, true servant of the Party traitors,
Messrs. Potresov and Co., calculates quite simply that the plenary meeting
is a sovereign body and consequently its session would open the door to a
solution of the whole Party crisis. A commission, however, is not a
sovereign body and has no rights apart from the investigation into the
claim put forward in the application. (Three Germans are now considering
this claim.) Hence, having obstructed the Russian Central Committee, the
liquidators (and their lackeys

    

abroad, the Golos group) are now trying to prevent anything in the
nature of a Central Committee from working. We shall yet see whether this
attempt succeeds. The Poles in the Central Committee Bureau

Abroad[12] are voting for the plenary meeting. It now all depends on the
Latvians and the Bund

members,[13] from whom so far no reply has been received. Our
representative in the Bureau Abroad has submitted and distributed a firm
protest against Igor. (Copies of Igor’s statement and this protest are
attached here with.)  

It has become clear that the struggle for the plenary meeting is a
struggle for a legal way out, a struggle for the Party. The fight of the
Golos group against the plenary meeting is a fight against a way
out of the Party crisis, is a fight against legality.  

Plekhanov and his

friends,[14] whom we kept informed of every step, are in complete
agreement with us on the necessity for a plenary meeting. They, too, are in
favour of it; the draft of our joint statement on this matter is now being
considered, and in the near future we shall either come for ward with a
statement together with Plekhanov’s group, or we shall publish an article
on the question in the Central Organ.  

Further, on the 26th November (N.S.), 1910, Trotsky carried through a
resolution in the so-called Vienna Party Club (a circle of Trotskyites,
exiles who are pawns in the hands of Trotsky) which he published as a
separate leaflet. I append this leaflet.  

In this resolution, open war is declared on Rabochaya

Gazeta,[15] the organ of the Bolsheviks and Plekhanov’s group. The
arguments are not new. The statement that there are now “no essential
grounds” for a struggle against the Golos and Vperyod
groups is the height of absurdity and hypocrisy. Everybody knows that the
Golos and Vperyod people had no intention of dispersing
their factions and that the former in reality support the liquidators,
Potresov and Co., that the Vperyod group organised the factional
school

abroad[16] (using funds of well-known origin), where they teach Machism,
where they teach that otzovism is a “legal shade of opinion” (taken
literally from their platform), etc., etc.  
 

Trotsky;s call for “friendly” collaboration by the Party with the
Golos and Vperyod groups is disgusting hypocrisy and
phrase-mongering. Everybody is aware that for the whole year since the Plenary
Meeting the Golos and Vperyod groups have worked in a
“friendly” manner against the Party (and were secretly supported by
Trotsky). Actually, it is only the Bolsheviks and Plekhanov’s group who have for
a whole year carried out friendly Party work in the Central Organ, in
Rabochaya Gazeta, and at

Copenhagen,[17] as well as in the Russian legal press.


Trotsky’s attacks on the bloc of Bolsheviks and Plekhanov’s group are not new;
what is new is the outcome of his resolution: the Vienna Club (read:
“Trotsky”) has organised a “general Party fund for the purpose of preparing
and convening a conference of the R.S.D.L.P.”.


This indeed is new. It is a direct step towards a split. It is a clear violation
of Party legality and the start of an adventure in which Trotsky will come to
grief. This is obviously a split. Trotsky’s action, his “fund”, is supported
only by the Color and Vperyod groups. There can be no question
of participation by the Bolsheviks and Plekhanov ’s group. That the liquidators
(of Color) in Zurich have already supported Trotsky is
comprehensible. It is quite possible and probable that “certain”
Vperyod “funds” will be made available to Trotsky. You will
appreciate that this will only stress the adventurist character of his
undertaking.


It is clear that this undertaking violates Party legality, since not a word is
said about the Central Committee, which alone can call the conference. In
addition, Trotsky, having ousted the C.C. representative on

Pravda[18] in August 191O, himself lost all trace of legality,
converting Pravda from an organ supported by the representative of the
C.C. into a purely factional organ.


Thus, the whole matter has taken on definite shape, the situation has clarified
itself. The Vperyod group collected “certain funds” for struggle
against the Party, for support of the “legal shade of opinion”
(otzovism). Trotsky in the last number of Pravda (and in his lecture in
Zurich) goes all out to flirt with Vperyod. The liquidators in Russia
sabotaged the work of the Russian Central Committee. The liquidators abroad want
to prevent a plenary meeting abroad—in other

    

words, sabotage anything like a Central Committee. Taking advantage of this
“violation of legality”, Trotsky seeks an organisational split, creating “his
own” fund for “his own” conference.


The roles have been assigned. The Golos group defend Potresov and Co.,
as a “legal shade of opinion”, the Vperyod group defend otzovism, as
a “legal shade of opinion”. Trotsky seeks to defend both camps in a “popular
fashion”, and to call his conference (possibly on funds supplied by
Vperyod). The Triple Alliance (Potresov+Trotsky+Maximov) against the
Dual Alliance (Bolsheviks+Plekhanov’s group). The deployment of forces has been
completed and battle joined.


You will understand why I call Trotsky’s move an adventure; it is an adventure
in every respect.


It is an adventure in the ideological sense. Trotsky groups all the enemies of
Marxism, he unites Potresov and Maximov, who detest the “Lenin-Plekhanov”
bloc, as they like to call it. Trotsky unites all to whom ideological decay is
dear, all who are not concerned with the defence of Marxism; all philistines who
do not understand the reasons for the struggle and who do not wish to learn,
think, and discover the ideological roots of the divergence of views. At this
time of confusion, disintegration, and wavering it is easy for Trotsky to become
the “hero of the hour” and gather all the shabby elements around himself, The
more openly this attempt is made, the more spectacular will be the defeat.


It is an adventure in the party-political sense. At present everything goes to
show that the real unity of the Social-Democratic Party is possible only on the
basis of a sincere and unswerving repudiation of liquidationism and otzovism. It
is clear that Potresov (together with Golos) and the Vperyod
group have renounced neither the one nor the other. Trotsky unites them, basely
deceiving himself, deceiving the Party, and deceiving the proletariat. In
reality, Trotsky will achieve nothing more than the strengthening of Potresov’s
and Maximov’s anti-Party groups. The collapse of this adventure is inevitable.


Finally, it is an organisational adventure. A conference held with Trotsky’s
“funds”, without the Central Committee,

    

is a split. Let the initiative remain with Trotsky. Let his be the
responsibility.  

Three slogans bring out the essence of the present situation within the
Party: 

1. Strengthen and support the unification and rallying of Plekhanov’s
supporters and the Bolsheviks for the defence of Marxism, for a rebuff to
ideological confusion, and for the battle against liquidationism and
otzovism.  

2. Struggle for a plenary meeting—for a legal solution to the Party
crisis.  

3. Struggle against the splitting tactics and the unprincipled
adventurism of Trotsky in handing Potresov and Maximov against
Social-Democracy.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See footnote to p. 29.—Tr.  
 



[2]
The Russian Collegium of the Central Committee (“narrow
circle of the C.C.”, “the acting C.C. in Russia”), confirmed by the
Plenary Meeting of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. in August 1908, existed until
1910. It consisted originally of one representative each from the
Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, Polish Social-Democrats, Latvian Social-Democrats
and the Bund.  

According to the C.C. Rules adopted at the Plenary Meeting in
January 1910, the composition of the Russian Collegium of the C.C. was to
be enlarged to seven to include the four members of the C.C. elected at the
Fifth (London) Congress and three representatives of national (non-Russian)
organisations. However, owing to the refusal of the Menshevik-liquidators
to co-operate, it was impossible to organise the work of the Russian
Collegium of the C.C. after the January Plenary Meeting. Lenin suggested
bringing into the Russian Collegium pro-Party Mensheviks to replace the
liquidators, but the conciliator members of the C.C. (Nogin, Goldenberg,
Leiteisen, and others) did not carry this out.  

In the course of 1910 and early in 1911 all Bolshevik members of the
C.C. working in Russia were arrested.  

This letter is published according to a copy found in the files of the
Police Department. The heading to the document has been provided by the
Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U





[3]
Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (Voice of the
Social-Democrat)—a Menshevik-liquidator organ published in Geneva,
and later in Paris, from February 1908 to December 1911.  

For Lenin’s appraisal of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata see his
article “Golos (Voice) of the Liquidators Against the Party”
(see present edition, Vol. 16).





[4]
The Plenary Meeting of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P., commonly
known as the “Unity” Meeting, was held from January 2 to 23 (January
15–February 5), 1910, in Paris. The Meeting was convened despite Lenin’s
wishes with the assistance of Trotsky’s secret allies, Zinovyev, Kamenev,
and Rykov. In addition to the Bolsheviks, representatives of all the
factions and factional groups and representatives of the non-Russian
Social-Democratic organisatons were
present. Lenin’s plan for closer relations with the pro-Party Mensheviks
(Plekhanov’s group) in the struggle against the

   

liquidators was opposed by the conciliators, who were secret
Trotskyites. They demanded the disbandment of all factions, and the
amalgamation of the Bolsheviks with the liquidators and Trotskyites. The
conciliators were in the majority at the Meeting. The Bolsheviks were in
the minority. It was only due to Lenin’s insistence that the Plenary
Meeting adopted a resolution condemning liquidationism and
otzovism. Notwithstanding Lenin’s attitude, the Meeting adopted decisions
to abolish the Bolshevik organ Proletary, disband the Bolshevik
Centre and hand over its property to the C.C., and the available funds to
the representatives of the international Social-Democratic movement (the
“trustees”) Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, and Karl Kautsky. Lenin
succeeded in getting conditions for the simultaneous liquidation of the
Golos and Vperyod factional centres included in the
resolution of the Plenary Meeting. The Meeting carried a resolution to the
effect that financial assistance be given to Trotsky’s Vienna
Pravda, which his agents, Zinovyev and Kamenev, tried to convert
into the organ of the Central Committee.  

Despite Lenin’s protest, Menshevik-liquidators were elected to the
central bodies. For Lenin’s struggle at the Plenary Meeting against the
liquidators, Trotskyites and conciliators see his article “Notes of a
Publicist”





[5]
Mikhail (I. A. Isuv), Roman (K. M. Yermolayev) and
Yuri (P. A. Bronstein)—Menshevik-liquidators, candidate members
of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., elected at the Fifth (London)
Congress of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party.





[6]
Vperyod (Forward) group—an anti-Party group of
otzovists, ultimatumists, god-builders

and empirio-monists (sup porters of the reactionary, idealistic philosophy
of Mach and Avenarius). The group was formed in December 1909 on the
initiative of A. Bogdanov and G. Alexinsky. It had its own organ called
Vperyod. In 1912 the Vperyod group, together with the
Menshevik-liquidators, united in a general anti-Party bloc (the August
bloc) organised by Trotsky against the Bolsheviks.  

Since it had no support among the workers the group actually began to
disintegrate as early as 1913, and its final, formal dissolution took place
in 4947, after the February Revolution.





[7]
Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P.—Sotsial-Demokrat
(The Social Democrat)—an illegal newspaper published from
February 1908 to January 1917; in all there were 58 issues. The first
number was published in Russia, later it was published abroad, first in
Paris, then in Geneva in accordance with the decision of the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., the Editorial Board of the Central Organ was
made up of representatives of the Bolsheviks, Mensheviks, and Polish
Social-Democrats. More than 80 articles and notes by Lenin appeared in
Sotsial-Demokrat. Within the Editorial Board Lenin campaigned for
a consistent Bolshevik

   

line. Some of the editors (Kamenev and Zinovyev) adopted a conciliatory
attitude towards the liquidators, and tried to prevent the implementation
of the Leninist line. The Menshevik members, Martov and Dan, sabotaged the
work of the Editorial Board of the paper and at the same time openly
defended liquidationism in Golos Sotsial-Demokrata. Lenin’s
uncompromising struggle against the liquidators led to Martov and Dan
leaving the Editorial Board of Sotsial-Demokrat in June 1911. From
December 1911 it was edited by Lenin.





[8]
Liquidationism—an opportunist trend that spread among the
Menshevik Social-Democrats after the defeat of the 1905–07 Revolution.


The liquidators demanded the dissolution of the illegal party of the
working class. Summoning the workers to give up the struggle against
tsarism, they intended calling a non-Party “labour congress” to establish
an opportunist “broad” labour party which, abandoning revolutionary
slogans, would engage only in the legal activity permitted by the tsarist
government. Lenin and other Bolsheviks ceaselessly exposed this betrayal of
the revolution by the liquidators. The policy of the liquidators was not
sup ported by the workers. The Prague Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. which
took place in January 1912 expelled them from the Party.  

Otzovism (from the Russian word otozvat—to
recall)—an opportunist trend represented by a small section of the
Bolsheviks which arose after the defeat of the 1905–07 Revolution.  

The otzovists demanded the recall of the Social-Democratic deputies
from the State Duma, and the rejection of work in the trade unions and
other mass legal and semi-legal organisations. Under cover of
“revolutionary” phrases, the otzovists would actually have deprived the
Party of the possibility of employing legal methods of struggle, isolated
it from the workers and placed it in danger of attacks by the reactionary
forces. Lenin sharply criticised the otzovists and called them
“liquidators of a new type” and “Mensheviks turned inside-out”.





[9]
Lenin is referring to the conditions (“agreement”) of the Bolsheviks
which were signed and made known at the “Unity” Plenary Meeting of the
Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1910 (see pp. 365–67 of
this volume).





[10]
Igor (Igorev, Gorev)—the Menshevik-liquidator B. I. Goldman.





[11]
The Central Committee Bureau Abroad was set up by the Plenary
Meeting of the C.C., R.S.D.L.P. in August 1908 as a general Party
representative body abroad, subordinate and responsible to the Russian
Collegium of the C.C. Shortly after the January Plenary Meeting of the
C.C. in 1910, the liquidators were in the majority, and the Bureau Abroad
became the centre of the anti Party forces. Its liquidationist tactics
compelled the Leninist

   

Bolsheviks to recall their representative Alexandrov (N. A. Semashko) in
May 1911. Some time later the Polish and Latvian Social-Democrat
representatives were also recalled. In January 1912 the Bureau Abroad was
disbanded.





[12]
This refers to the representatives of the Polish Social-Democrats in
the Central Committee Bureau Abroad.  

The Social-Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland and
Lithuania—a revolutionary party of the Polish working class, arose
in 1893, first as the Social-Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland, and
from August 1900, after the Congress of the Social-Democratic organisations
of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania at which the Polish and part of the
Lithuanian Social-Democratic parties merged, it began to call itself the
Social-Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania
(S.D.P.P. & L.). Its merit was in guiding the Polish working class
towards unity with the Russian working-class movement and in fighting
against nationalism.  

During the 1905–07 Revolution, the S.D.P.P. & L. conducted its
struggle under slogans very similar to those of the Bolshevik Party, and
adopted an uncompromising attitude towards the liberal bourgeoisie. At the
same time the S.D.P.P. & L. committed a number of errors; it did not
understand Lenin’s theory of socialist revolution, did not appreciate the
leading role of the Party in the democratic revolution, underestimated the
role of the peasantry as an ally of the working class, and the significance
of the national-liberation movement. Lenin criticised the mistaken views of
the S.D.P.P. & L. but at the same time drew attention to its services
to the revolutionary movement in Poland. He noted that the Polish
Social-Democrats “for the first time formed a purely proletarian p arty in
Poland, and proclaimed the vitally important principle of the closest
alliance between Polish and Russian workers in their class struggle”

At the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1906 the
S.D.P.P. & L. was accepted into the R.S.D.L.P. as a territorial
organisation.  

The S.D.P.P. & L. welcomed the Great October Socialist Revolution
and launched a struggle for the victory of the proletarian revolution in
Poland. In December 1918, at the Unity Congress of the
S.D.P.P. & L. and the Left wing of the P.P.S., these parties united and
formed the Communist Workers’ Party of Poland.





[13]
This refers to the representatives of the Social-Democratic Part of the
Latvian Region and the Bund.  

The Social-Democratic Party of the Latvian Region (until 1906
the Latvian Social-Democratic Workers’ Party) was formed in June 1904 at
the First Congress of the Party, and its programme was adopted at its
Second Congress in June 1905. In 1905–07 the Latvian Social-Democratic
Workers’ Party (L.S.D.W.P.)  led the revolutionary action of the
workers. Lenin pointed out that “during the Revolution the Latvian
proletariat and Latvian Social-Democratic

   

Party occupied one of the first and most important places in the struggle
against the autocracy and all the forces of the old order” (see present
edition, Vol. 16, “The Jubilee Number of Zihna”).  

The L.S.D.W.P. joined the R.S.D.L.P. at the Fourth (Unity) Congress as
a territorial organisation and became known as the Social-Democratic Party
of the Latvian Region.  

The Bund—the General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania,
Poland, and Russia, was organised in 1897 at an inaugural Congress of
Jewish Social Democratic groups in Wilno; it united in the main the
semi-proletarian elements, Jewish artisans, in the Western regions of
Russia. At the First Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (1898) the Bund joined it
“as an autonomous organisation, independent only in regard to questions
specially concerning the Jewish proletariat”.  

The Bund was the vehicle of nationalism and separatism in the Russian
working-class movement. The Fourth Congress of the Bund, held in April
1901, voted to change the organisational relations with the
R.S.D.L.P. which had been established by the First Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. In its resolution the Congress stated that it regarded the
R.S.D.L.P. as a federated association of national organisations which the
Bund joins as a federal unit.  

After the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. had rejected its demand to
be recognised as the sole representative of the Jewish proletariat, the
Bund left the Party. It rejoined in 1906 on the basis of a decision of the
Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.  

Within the R.S.D.L.P. the Bundists constantly supported the opportunist
wing (Economists, Mensheviks, liquidators) and waged a struggle against the
Bolsheviks and Bolshevism. They opposed the Bolshevik programmatic demand
for the right of nations to self-determination and called for national
cultural autonomy. During the years of Stolypin reaction the Bund adopted a
liquidationist position and played an active part in forming the anti-Party
August bloc. During the First World War, the Bundists took a
social-chauvinistic stand. In 1917 the Bund support ed the bourgeois
Provisional Government, and fought on the side of the enemies of the
October Socialist Revolution. During the years of foreign military
intervention and civil war, the Bund leadership joined the forces of
counter-revolution. At the same time there was evidence of a change among
the rank-and-file members of the Bund in favour of co-operation with Soviet
power. In March 1921 the Bund dissolved itself, and part of its members
were accepted into the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks) on the
conditions as laid down in the Rules.





[14]
This refers to the p re-Party Mensheviks who, led by
G. V. Plekhanov, opposed the liquidators during the years of reaction. In
December 1908, Plekhanov left the Editorial Board of the liquidation 1st
newspaper Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and in 1909 resumed publication
of The Diary of a Social-Democrat in order to struggle against the
liquidators. While maintaining a Menshevik position, Plekhanov’s

   

group stood at the same time for the preservation and strengthening of the
illegal Party organisation, and with this aim in view supported a bloc with
the Bolsheviks. In 1909 groups of pro-Party Mensheviks were formed in
Paris, Geneva, San Remo, Nice and other towns. In St. Petersburg, Moscow,
Ekaterinoslav, Kharkov, Kiev, and Baku, many pro-Party Mensheviks opposed
the liquidators and supported the revival of the illegal R.S.D.L.P.  

Lenin, calling on the Bolsheviks to draw closer to the pro-Party
Mensheviks, showed that agreement with them was possible on the basis of a
struggle for the Party, against liquidationism, “with out any ideological
compromises, without any glossing over of tactical and other differences of
opinion within the limits of the Party line”

The pro-Party Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks worked together in the local
Party committees, contributed to the Bolshevik publications Rabochaya
Gazeta, Zvezda, and the Central Organ of the Party,
Sotsial-Demokrat. Lenin’s tactics of collaboration with
Plekhanov’s group, which was supported by the majority of the worker
Mensheviks in Russia, assisted the extension of Bolshevik influence in the
legal workers’ organisations, and the ousting of the liquidators from them.


At the end of 1911 Plekhanov dissolved the bloc with the
Bolsheviks. Under the guise of struggle against “factionalism” and
against the split in the R.S.D.L.P. he tried to reconcile the Bolsheviks
and the opportunists. In 1912, Plekhanov’s group, together with the
Trotskyites, Bundists and liquidators, opposed the decisions of the Prague
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.





[15]
Rabochaya Gazeta (Workers’ Gazette)—the popular
organ of the Bolsheviks, to which the pro-Party Mensheviks also
contributed, published in Paris from October 30 (November 12), 1910, to
July 30 (August 12), 1912. In all, nine issues appeared. Lenin was the
founder and leading editor of Rabochaya Gazeta, and it published
about a dozen of his articles.  

The Prague Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (January 1912) noted that
Rabochaya Gazeta was a determined and consistent defender of the
Party and Party principles and pronounced it the official organ of the
Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.  (Bolsheviks).





[16]
Factional school abroad—the factional centre of the
otzovists, ultimatumists and god-builders, who united for struggle against
the Bolsheviks. It was organised in 1909 by A. Bogdanov (Maximov),
G. Alexinsky and A. Lunacharsky on the Isle of Capri with the participation
of Maxim Gorky. Using the Party as a screen Bogdanov’s supporters persuaded
a number of local Social-Democratic organisations to send thirteen students
to the school, which lasted nearly four months (August-December 1909). A
split took place amongst the students in November and a group headed by the
worker N. Y. Vilonov definitely dissociated themselves from Bogdanov’s
group. The Leninist students sent a protest to the Editorial Board of the
newspaper Proletary against the anti-Party behaviour

   

of the lecturers and, as a result, were expelled from the school. At the
end of November 1909 at Lenin’s invitation they went to Paris and attended
a course of lectures including his lectures on “The Present Situation and
Our Tasks” and the “Agrarian Policy of Stolypin”. Those students who
remained at Capri together with the lecturers formed the anti-Party
Vperyod group in December 1909.  

A meeting of the enlarged Editorial Board of Proletary
condemned the Capri school as a “new centre of the faction breaking away
from the Bolsheviks”.





[17]
Lenin is referring to the joint work of the Bolsheviks with
G. V. Plekhanov in the R.S.D.L.P. delegation to the International Socialist
Congress in Copenhagen which was held from August 28 to September 3
(N. S.), 1910. During the Congress, V. I. Lenin and G. V. Plekhanov sent a
protest to the Executive Committee of the German Social-Democratic Party
against the publication, in Vorwärts, the central organ of
German Social-Democrats, of an anonymous, scurrilous article by Trotsky on
the internal situation in the Russian Social-Democratic Party.





[18]
Pravda (Vienna)—a Menshevik-liquidator newspaper, Trotsky’s
factional organ, published during 1908–12 in Vienna. Posing as
“non-factional”, the newspaper adopted a liquidationist position on all
basic questions, and also supported the otzovists and ultimatumists. In
1912 Trotsky with the help of his paper organised the anti-Party August
bloc.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The State of Affairs in the Party









Lenin: The State of Affairs in the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
The State of Affairs in the Party




Written: Written not later than December 15 (28), 1910 

Published:

      Published on December 23 or 24, 1910 (January 5 or 6, 1911) as a reprint from the supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 19–20.

      Published according to the text of the reprint verified with the text in the supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat No. 19–20.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 23-38.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

The question of the crisis in our Party has again been
given priority by the Social-Democratic press abroad, leading to stronger
rumours, perplexity and vacillation among wide Party circles. It is,
therefore, essential for the Central Organ of the Party to clarify this
question in its entirety. Martov’s article in Golos, No. 23, and
Trotsky’s statement of November 26, 1910 in the form of a “resolution” of
the “Vienna Club”, published as a separate leaflet, present the question
to the reader in a manner which completely distorts the essence of the
matter.  

Martov’s article and Trotsky’s resolution conceal definite practical
actions—actions directed against the Party. Martov’s article is
simply the literary expression of a campaign launched by the Golos
group to sabotage the Central Committee of our Party. Trotsky’s
resolution, which calls upon organisations in the localities to prepare for
a “general Party conference “independent of, and against, the Central
Commit tee, expresses the very aim of the Golos group—to
destroy the central bodies so detested by the liquidators, and with
them, the Party as an organisation. It is not enough to lay bare the
anti-Party activities of Golos and Trotsky; they must be
fought. Comrades to whom the Party and its revival are dear must
come out most resolutely against all those who, guided by purely factional
and narrow circle considerations and interests, are striving to destroy the
Party.  

Martov’s article “Where Have We Landed?” is poorly disguised mockery
of the Plenary Meeting’s decisions and the rejoicing of a liquidator over
the adversities suffered by the Party. “Not once did they succeed
in convening in
    

Russia the Collegium of the Central Committee although it consists
of only a few members”—this is how Martov writes, using italics, as if
bubbling over with the pleasure all liquidators will derive from the
publication of this fact.  

Unfortunately, what Martov says is true. The Russian Central Committee
has riot succeeded in meeting. But Martov is mistaken if he thinks that he
can evade the question as to who sabotaged the work of the Central
Committee in Russia. It was not only the police who hindered the holding of
the meeting, in addition to the police there was one obstacle of a
political nature. That obstacle was the well-known refusal by
Mikhail, Roman, and Yuri to attend a meeting of the Central Committee even
if only to co-opt new members, and their statement that they
“consider the very existence of the Central Committee harmful”.  

It cannot be denied that refusal to attend even one meeting for the
purpose of co-option, refusal to attend at the invitation of people who
carry on their work amid a host of obstacles placed in their way by the
police, means sabotaging the work of the Central Committee. Nor
can it be denied that this political act, accompanied by a statement that
its motives were matters of principle, was carried out by members
of the group of “most prominent” Golos contributors in Russia
(the letter of the

sixteen[6] in Golos, No. 19–20), who are also members
of the liquidationist legal groups of Potresov and Co. All these
are facts. The group of independent legalists, the enemies of the
Social-Democratic Party—these are the people who sabotaged the work of
the Central Committee in Russia.  

When Axelrod asserts (in Golos, No. 23) that the “label” of
liquidator is tacked on “indiscriminately”, when lie stoops even to such
nonsense as to state that we are capable of calling a liquidator someone
who is physically tired or crushed by the struggle for his daily bread;
when, indulging as he does in this kind of infantile twaddle, he
maintains silence about that particular group and those very
groups of liquidators who have been mentioned in the Central Organ of the
Party by name, then there is no need to prove the unscrupulousness
of such subterfuges. When Martov and other Golos people pretend to
“argue” in Golos against the liquidators

    

in Russia, declaring that their acts are “frivolous” (!), and exhorting”
them to wait a little longer (Martov on Levitsky in No. 23), and at the
same time work hand in glove with them, and, together with them, form
a separate faction abroad for the purpose of fighting the Party
and lending support to its enemies, such as Mr. Potresov, we can see in
this but one of many manifestations of political hypocrisy. No
politically-minded person will say that Mr. Milyukov is seriously fighting
the

Vekhi[7] writers when he “argues” with them, declares them to
be “frivolous”, and at the same time works hand in glove with
them politically. Everyone will see that this only proves Mr. Milyukov’s
hypocrisy, and by no means disproves his political solidarity with
Vekhi. No politically-minded person will say that Mr. Stolypin and
his government are seriously fighting the Black

Hundreds[8] when he “argues” with them (in

Rossiya[9]), accuses them of “frivolity”, but at the same
time works hand in glove with them. Everyone will see that
Mr. Stolypin and the tear’s government thereby prove nothing but their
hypocrisy, that this by no means disproves the fact of their political
solidarity with the Purishkeviches.  

But if everyone is clear about the political hypocrisy of
Golos, Martov’s hint that “legality finishes” the
official representatives of the Party cannot be clear to 999 out
of 1,000 readers, because it is a deliberately vague hint.  

It is the duty of the Central Organ to disperse any haze enveloping our
Party affairs, so that the substance of the differences may become clear to
everyone.  

What Martov means is that, apart from a decision of the
Central Committee, there is no other way out of the crisis that
would conform to Party legality. Consequently, since the
liquidators in Russia have succeeded in sabotaging the work of the Central
Committee there (and if the liquidators abroad succeed in preventing
the Central Committee from meeting even outside Russia), there will be
no legal way out of the situation. And Martov rejoices in advance: the
Central Committee, he says, has been completely wrecked, there is
no legal way out, and the liquidators, ire thinks, have won their
game.  
 

Martov was in too much of a hurry. He has blurted out too soon
what Mr. Potresov and the other enemies of the Party have kept to
themselves.  

Yes, Martov is right! The Central Committee alone can find the way out
of the crisis in the Party. Hence, if, on account of police obstacles, and
on account of the above-mentioned political obstacles, the Central
Committee is prevented from meeting in Russia, it must be convened
abroad. This is the only way of approaching a solution to the
crisis. The Bolsheviks, one of the Party trends that concluded at the last
Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee the agreement which provided for
joint Party work out side the factions, took measures to hasten the only
possible solution to the Party crisis. The representatives of the Bolshevik
group placed its property at the disposal of the Party, on
condition that simultaneously with the dissolution of its own group
centre, those of the Mensheviks (the Golos group) and the
otzovists (the Vperyod group) would also be dissolved.

This has not been done. What is more, Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata (the leading organ of the Golos group), has
deliberately taken under its wing and protection the enemies within the
Party, whom the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee unanimously
instructed us to fight most resolutely, as representing bourgeois and
anti-Party deviations from Social-Democracy. In view of this obvious
violation of the terms of the agreement concluded at the Plenary Meeting
between all the Party trends and groups, in view of the obvious anti-Party
policy of one of the parties to the agreement, the Bolsheviks thought it
necessary to demand the return of the funds which a year before they had
placed at the disposal of the Party on definite conditions. On December 5,
1910, they filed an application to this effect with the Central Committee
Bureau Abroad. Whether the Bolsheviks were right or wrong in acting as they
did will be determined by the body appointed by the Plenary Meeting. The
point is that now, since the representatives of the Bolshevik
trend have filed their application, it is imperative to convene a plenary
meeting of the Central Committee abroad, and not only for the purpose of
finding a way out of the internal crisis in the Party; it is
imperative as a step dictated to all the trends and groups which
concluded

    

the agreement of January 6, 1910, according to the obligation they
themselves assumed, in the resolution which they themselves adopted

  unanimously.[1]

The convocation of a plenary meeting of the Central Committee has become
not only a necessity in the interests of the Party, it has become a
juridical obligation. We see again that there can be no legal
way out of the situation, other than the convening of a plenary meeting of
the Central Committee....  

It is on this point that the policy of the Golos group
immediately revealed itself.  

It would appear that, according to the clear and unequivocal decision
of the Central Committee, the only thing for its Bureau Abroad to do, in
view of the application filed by the Bolsheviks, was to call a plenary
meeting; and only if the attempts to convene it in the course of three
months failed, was the Bureau to resort to the other method of settling the
question as provided by the Central Committee. But the Golos group
acted differently.  

On December 12, Igorev of Golos, a member of the Central
Committee Bureau Abroad, filed a written statement in which he declared
that he was against calling a plenary meeting and would agree only
to a commission.  

It is obvious wherein lies the rub: a plenary meeting is a sovereign
body and, if it were convened, could find a legal way out
of the crisis, a legal way out of the impossible state of affairs in
Russia. A commission on the other hand, is not a sovereign body,
it has no rights (except that of examining the Bolsheviks’ claim to their
funds); it cannot find any legal way out of the crisis.

 

The saying has proved true—he who diggeth a pit shall fall into it.


The kind-hearted Martov had hardly shown the Party the “pit” of the
allegedly hopeless, from the legal point of view, situation in which the
liquidators would be so happy to see the official Party) when Igorev
of Golos found himself in that very
pit!  

The Russian liquidators have sabotaged the work of the Central
Committee in Russia. Now the liquidators abroad are trying to prevent the
meeting of the Central Committee outside Russia. The liquidators are happy
in anticipation of that greatest of joys (for Stolypin and for the
liquidators)—the absence of any Central Committee. What a boon
that would be for the Potresovs and for the Vperyod faction!  

We shall not dwell here on the subterfuges of Igorev of the
Golos group and on their refutation in the counter-statement filed
by a Bolshevik member of the Central Committee Bureau

       Abroad.[2]

We shall only note the fact that Igorev of Golos obligingly and
bluntly declared that he would protest against a plenary meeting even
if it were convened in conformity with the general Rules (for
which a unanimous decision of the Central Committee Bureau Abroad is
required), and not by the adoption of a special decision based on an
application. In the opinion of Igorev of Golos a plenary meeting
is “unwieldy”, etc. Naturally—since for the liquidators the very
existence of our illegal Party is too “unwieldy”. The other “reason”
advanced by Igorev is that the plenary meeting would be made up mostly of
exiles. But this does not prevent the Golos group from lending
every support to Trotsky’s purely émigré plan of
calling a “general Party” conference independently of, and against, the
Central Committee....  

The Golos group have decided to disrupt any and every
attempt to convene the Central Committee.  

Further, we must draw the attention of Party members to a more general
problem—the state of affairs in the R.S.D.L.P. Like every revolutionary
party, our Party can exist and develop only if there is at least an
elementary desire
    

on the part of revolutionaries to help one another in carrying out
common work.  

If the Party Rules and decisions (the Party’s “legality”) do not
serve to facilitate this joint work, but are used as
pretexts for people in some of the most important Party bodies to
hamper this work from within, then Party work becomes an
indignified farce. In any other party the difficulties attending the
convening of the Central Committee would have led at once to dozens of ways
and means being found to circumvent police obstacles, they would have
produced a host of new methods of work. We, however, find factionalists
inside the Party, some of whom serve the Potresovs, and others the
out-and-out otzovists and semi-anarchists, outside the Party. In
the hands of people like Igorev of Golos, “legality” is
converted into an instrument for damaging the Party from within,
for hampering its work, for helping the Potresovs to destroy the

Party[3]

.

This is an impossible situation. And it will not be remedied by
“well-meaning resolutions” which Martov legitimately holds up to
ridicule. In order to help matters, we must, first of all,
understand them. We must understand why it is absurd, unbecoming,
and ridiculous to concoct well-meaning resolutions about joint work with
gentlemen like Potresov and Co. Once the Party realises that we have here
two incompatible policies, that it is a question of Social-Democracy versus
liberalism, it will rapidly find a way out. Then we shall succeed in
creating a “legality” which the liquidators will be unable to
use as a means of tripping up the Party.  

It must be admitted that Mr. Potresov and his friends, as well as
Igorev of Golos, deserve our thanks for the successful
way in which they are helping the Party to realise this.  

Trotsky’s statement, though outwardly entirely unconnected
with Martov’s jeering at the adversities of the Party, and with the
attempts of the Golos supporters to sabotage the Central
Committee, is actually connected with the one

    

and the other by inseverable ties, by the ties of “interest”. There are
many Party members who still fail to see this connection. The Vienna
resolution of November 26, 1910, will undoubtedly help them understand the
essence of the matter.  

The resolution consists of three parts:

(1) a declaration of war against Rabochaya Gazeta (a call to
“rebuff it resolutely” as one of the “new factional group
undertakings”, using Trotsky’s expression);

(2) polemics against the line of the Bolshevik-Plekhanov “bloc”;

(3) a declaration that the “meeting of the Vienna Club [i.e., Trotsky and
his

       circle][4]

resolves: to organise a general Party fund for the purpose of preparing and
convening a conference of the R.S.D.L.P.”.  

We shall not dwell on the first part at all. Trotsky is quite right in
saying that Rabochaya Gazeta is a “private undertaking”, and
that “it is not authorised to speak in the name of the Party as a
whole”.  

Only Trotsky should not have forgotten to mention that he and his
Pravda are not authorised to speak in the name of the Party
either. In saying that the Plenary Meeting recognised the work of
Pravda as useful, he should not have forgotten to mention that it
appointed a representative of the Central Committee to the
Editorial Board of Pravda. When Trotsky, in referring to ’the
Meeting’s decisions on Pravda, fails to mention this fact, all one
can say about it is that he is deceiving the workers. And this
deception on the part of Trotsky is all the more malicious, since in
August1910 Trotsky removed the representative of the
Central Committee from Pravda. Since that incident, since
Pravda has severed its relations with the Central Committee,
Trotsky’s paper is nothing but a “private undertaking”, and one,
moreover, that has failed to carry out the obligations it assumed. Until
the Central Committee meets again, the only judge of the relations
between Pravda and the Central Committee is the Central Committee
representative appoint ed by the Plenary Meeting who has
declared that Trotsky behaved in a manner hostile to the Party.

 

That is what emerges from the question, so opportunely raised by
Trotsky, as to who is “authorised to speak in the name of the Party as a
whole”.  

Nor is that all. Inasmuch as (and so long as) the legalist
liquidator-independents obstruct the Central Committee in Russia, and
inasmuch as (and so long As) the Golos group obstruct the Central
Committee abroad, the sole body authorised “to speak in the name
of the Party as a whole” is the Central Organ.  

Therefore, we declare, in the name of the Party as a whole,
that Trotsky is pursuing an anti-Party policy; that, by failing to make the
least mention of the Central Committee in his resolution (as if he had
already come to an understanding with Golos that the work of the
Central Committee would be sabotaged), and by announcing in the name of
one group abroad the “organisation of a fund for the
purpose of convening a conference of the R.S.D.L.P.”, he is
contravening Party legality and is embarking on the path
of adventurism and a split. If the efforts of the
liquidators to sabotage the work of the Central Committee meet with
success, we, as the sole body authorised to speak in the name of the Party
as a whole, will immediately declare that we take no part whatever
in Trotsky’s “fund” or in his venture, and that we shall recognise as a
general Party conference only one convened by the Central
Organ, not one convened by Trotsky’s

       circle.[5]


But so long as events have not brought about the final wrecking of the
Central Committee, there is still hope for a way out that is entirely
legal from the Party point of view.  

While calling upon Party members to fight resolutely for this solution
based on Party legality, we shall try to investigate “the fundamental
principles” of the differences which the Golos group and Trotsky
are in a hurry to carry to the point of a split—the former, by
obstructing the work of the Central Committee, and the latter, by ignoring
it and “organising a fund” for the purpose of convening a

    

“conference of the R.S.D.L.P.” (no joke!) by Trotsky’s circle.  

Trotsky writes in his resolution that at present “there is no basis
for the struggle on principle” being waged by the “Leninists and
Plekhanovites” (in thus substituting personalities for the
trends of Bolshevism and pro-Party Menshevism, Trotsky aims at
disparagement, but succeeds only in expressing his own lack of
understanding).  

It is to investigate these fundamental principles that the Central
Organ calls upon Social-Democrats throughout Russia—examine this very
interesting question while the “uninteresting” struggle over the
convocation of the plenary meeting is still going on.  

We quote in full the reasons given by Trotsky for his statement that
the struggle of the Central Organ is not justified by any basic difference
of principle.  


   “The conviction has taken firm root among
   all [Trotsky’s italics] Party trends, that it is necessary to
   restore the illegal organisation, to combine legal with illegal work,
   and to pursue consistent Social-Democratic tactics. These fundamental
   directives were unanimously adopted by the last Plenary
   Meeting.  

   “The difficulty now, a year after the Meeting, is not
   the proclamation of these truths, but their application in
   practice. The way to achieve this is by harmonious work carried on
   jointly by all sections of the Party—the ‘Golos’,
   ‘Plekhanov’, ‘Leninist’, and ‘Vperyod’ groups, and the
   non-factionalists. The Party has already spiritually outgrown the period
   of its infancy, and it is time that all its members felt and acted as
   revolutionary Social-Democrats, as patriots of their Party and
   not as members of factions. This co-operation must take place within the
   framework of the Party as a whole, not around factional bodies.”  


That is an example of how fine words are worn into shreds by
phrase-mongering intended to disguise a monstrous untruth, a monstrous
deception both of those who revel in phrase-mongering and of the whole
Party.  

It is a plain and crying untruth that all Party
trends are convinced of the need to, revive the illegal organisation. Each
issue of Golos shows that its writers regard Mr. Potresov’s group
as a Party trend, and that not only do they “regard” it as such
but that they systematically take part in its “work”. Is it not
ridiculous, is it not disgraceful today, a year after the Plenary Meeting,
to play at hide and seek, to deceive oneself and deceive the workers, to
indulge in

    

verbal tricks, when it is a question, not of empty phrases, but of
“application in practice”?  

Yes or no? Does Trotsky regard the Potresovs who were specifically
mentioned In the Central Organ, as a “Party trend” or not? This is
precisely a question of the “application in practice” of the decisions of
the Plenary Meeting, and it is now a year since it was posed by
the Central Organ clearly, bluntly, and unambiguously, so that there could
be no evasions!  

Trotsky is trying again and again to evade the question by passing it
over in silence or by phrase-mongering; for he is concerned to keep the
readers and the Party ignorant of the truth, namely, that
Mr. Potresov’s group, the group of sixteen, etc., are absolutely
independent of the Party, represent expressly distinct factions, are not
only doing nothing to revive the illegal organisation, but are obstructing
its revival, and are not pursuing any Social-Democratic
tactics. Trotsky is concerned with keeping the Party ignorant of the truth,
namely, that the Golos group represent a faction abroad, similarly
separated from the Party, and that they actually render service to the
liquidators in Russia.  

And what about the Vperyod group? Trotsky knows perfectly well
that ever since the Plenary Meeting they have been strengthening
and developing their separate faction, disposing of funds independently of
the Party, and maintaining a separate factional school in which they teach,
not “consistent Social-Democratic tactics”, but that “otzovism is a
legal shade of opinion”; in which they teach otzovist views on the role of
the Third Duma, views expressed in the factional platform of
Vperyod.  

Trotsky maintains silence on this undeniable truth, because the truth
is detrimental to the real aims of his policy. The real aims,
however, are becoming clearer and more obvious even to the least
far-sighted Party members. They are: an anti-Party bloc of the
Potresovs with the Vperyod group—a
bloc which Trotsky supports and is organising. The adoption of Trotsky’s
resolutions (like the “Vienna” one) by the Golos group,
Pravda’s flirtation with the Vperyod group,
Pravda’s allegations that only members of the Vperyod
group and Trotsky’s group are active in the localities in Russia, the
publicity given by Pravda to the Vperyod
    

factional school, Trotsky’s direct assistance to this school, these are all
facts which cannot long remain concealed. Murder will out.  

The substance of Trotsky’s policy is “harmonious work” carried on by
Pravda together with the factions of the Potresovs and
Vperyod. The various roles in this bloc have been clearly cast:
Mr. Potresov and Co. are continuing their legalistic work, independently of
the Party, work of destroying the Social-Democratic Party; the
Golos group represent the foreign branch of this faction; and
Trotsky has assumed the role of attorney, assuring the naïve public
that “consistent Social-Democratic tactics” has taken “firm root among
all Party trends”. The Vperyod group also enjoy the
services of this attorney, who pleads their right to maintain a factional
school and resorts to hypocritical and formal phrases in order to gloss
over their policy. Naturally, this bloc will support Trotsky’s “fund” and
the anti-Party conference which he is convening, for here the Potresovs and
the Vperyod group are getting what they want, namely, freedom for
their factions, blessings of the conference for those factions, a cover for
their activity, and an attorney to defend that activity before the workers.


Therefore, it is from the standpoint of “fundamental principles” that
we must regard this bloc as adventurism in the most literal
meaning of the term. Trotsky does not dare to say that he sees in
Potresov and in the otzovists real Marxists, real champions of loyalty to
the principles of Social-Democracy. The essence of the position of an
adventurer is that he must forever resort to evasions. For it is obvious
and known to everyone that the Potresovs and the otzovists all
have their own line (an anti-Social-Democratic line) and that they
are pursuing it, while the diplomats of Golos and
Vperyod only serve as a screen for them.  

The most profound reason why this bloc is doomed to
failure—no matter how great its success among the philistines and no
matter how large the “funds” Trotsky may succeed in collecting with the
assistance of Vperyod and Potresov’s “sources”—is that it is
an unprincipled bloc. The theory of Marxism, “the fundamental
principles” of our entire world outlook and of our entire Party
programme and tactics, is now in the forefront of all Party life not by
mere

    

chance, but because it is inevitable. It was no mere chance that since the
failure of the revolution, all classes of society, the widest
sections of the popular masses, have displayed a fresh interest in
the very fundamentals of the world outlook, including the questions of
religion and philosophy, and the principles of our Marxist
doctrine as a whole; that was inevitable. It is no mere chance
that the masses, whom the revolution drew into the sharp struggle over
questions of tactics, have subsequently, in the period characterised by the
absence of open struggle, shown a desire for general theoretical
knowledge; that was inevitable. We must again explain the fundamentals
of Marxism to these masses; the defence of Marxist theory is again on
the order of the day.

When Trotsky declares that the rapprochement between the pro-Party
Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks is “devoid of political content” and
“unstable”, he is thereby merely revealing the depths of his own
ignorance, he is thereby demonstrating his own complete emptiness. For it
is precisely the fundamental principles of Marxism that have triumphed as a
result of the struggle waged by the Bolsheviks against the
non-Social-Democratic ideas of Vperyod, and as a result of the
struggle waged by the pro-Party Mensheviks against the Potresovs and
Golos. It was precisely this rapprochement on the question of
the fundamental principles of Marxism that constituted the
real basis for really harmonious work between the pro-Party Mensheviks
and the Bolsheviks during the whole year following the Plenary
Meeting. This is a fact—not words, nor promises, nor “well-meaning
resolutions”. And no matter what differences divided the Mensheviks and
the Bolsheviks in the past, and will divide them in future (only
adventurers are capable of attracting the crowd with promises that
the differences would be set aside, or that they would be “liquidated” by
this or that resolution)—this fact cannot be expunged from history. Only
the internal development of the principal factions themselves,
only their own ideological evolution, can provide the guarantee
that the factions will really be abolished as a result of their drawing
closer together, as a result of their being tested in joint work. This
began after the Plenary Meeting. We have so far not seen
harmonious work between Potresov and the Vperyod group and
Trotsky; all

    

we have seen is group diplomacy, juggling with words, solidarity in
evasions. But the Party has seen the pro-Party Mensheviks and the
Bolsheviks work in harmony for a whole year, and anyone who is capable of
valuing Marxism, any one who holds dear the “fundamental
principles” of Social-Democracy, will not doubt for a moment that
nine-tenths of the workers belonging to both groups will be fully
in favour of this rapprochement.  

It is precisely from the standpoint of “fundamental principles” that
Trotsky’s bloc with Potresov and the Vperyod group is
adventurism. And it is equally so from the stand point of the Party’s
political tasks. These tasks were indeed pointed out by the Plenary
Meeting unanimously, but that does not mean that they can be
reduced to that banal phrase—combining legal with illegal work (for the

Cadets[10] also “combine” the legal

Rech[11] with the illegal Central Committee of their
party)—which Trotsky deliberately uses in order to please the Potresovs
and the Vperyod group, who do not object to hollow phrases and
platitudes.  


   “The historical circumstances in which the
   Social-Democratic movement finds itself in the period of bourgeois
   counter-revolution,” the resolution of the Plenary Meeting states,
   “inevitably beget—as a manifestation of bourgeois influence upon the
   proletariat—on the ,one hand, the repudiation of the illegal
   Social-Democratic Party, the belittling of its role and importance,
   attempts to curtail the programmatical and tactical tasks and slogans of
   revolutionary Social-Democracy, etc.; and, on the other hand, repudiation
   of Social-Democratic work in the Duma and of the utilisation of
   opportunities for legal work, failure to appreciate the importance of the
   one and the other, inability to adapt revolutionary Social-Democratic
   tactics to the peculiar historical conditions of the present moment, etc.”
   


After a year’s experience, no one can evade a direct answer to
the question as to the real meaning of these points. Nor must it
be forgotten that at the Meeting all the representatives of the
non-Russian nationalities (joined at the time by Trotsky, who is in the
habit of joining any group that happens to be in the majority at
the moment) declared in a written statement that “in point of
fact it would be desirable to describe the trend mentioned in the
resolution as liquidationism, against which it is essential to fight”.


The experience of the year since the Plenary Meeting has shown in
practice that it is precisely Potresov groups

    

and the Vperyod faction that are the embodiment of this
bourgeois influence upon the proletariat. The evasion of this
obvious fact is what we call adventurism, for so far nobody has dared to
say openly that the line of Potresov and his friends is not
liquidationism, or that recognition of otzovism as “a legal shade of
opinion” conforms to the line of the Party. The year that
followed the Meeting has not been wasted on us. We have enriched our
experience. We have seen the practical manifestation of the
tendencies noted at the time. We have seen factions arise that
embody those tendencies. And words about the “harmonious work”
of these anti-Party factions in an allegedly “Party” spirit can
no longer deceive any large sections of the workers.  

Thirdly and lastly, Trotsky’s policy is adventurism in the
organisational sense; for, as we have already pointed out, it
violates Party legality; by organising a conference in the name of one
group abroad (or of a bloc of two anti-Party factions—the
Golos and Vperyod factions), it is directly making for a
split. Since we are authorised to speak in the name of the whole Party, it
is our duty to uphold Party legality to the end. But we by no means want
the Party membership to see only the form of “legality” and to
overlook the essence of the matter. On the contrary, we draw the
main attention of Social-Democrats to the essence of the
matter, which consists in the bloc formed by the Golos
and Vperyod groups—a bloc which stands for full freedom for
Potresov and his friends to engage in liquidationist activity and for the
otzovists to destroy the Party.  

We call upon all Social-Democrats to fight resolutely for Party
legality, to fight the anti-Party bloc, for the sake of the fundamental
principles of Marxism, and in order to purge Social-Democracy of the taint
of liberalism and anarchism.  

  

P. S. The publication of the above article in a special edition
(decided on by the vote of a majority of the Editorial Board—two
representatives of the Bolshevik trend and one representative of the Polish
organisation) has led to a pro test (published as a separate leaflet) on
the part of the two other members of the Editorial Board who belong to the
Golos trend. The authors of the leaflet do not deal with the

    

contents of the article, The State of Affairs in the Party, on
their merits, but accuse the majority of the Editorial Board

(1) of violating their formal rights as co-editors, and

(2) of committing an act of “police informing”. Since the dispute is not
conducted on the plane of principles and tactics but along the lines of an
organisational squabble and personal attacks, we consider that the most
proper procedure is to refer it entirely to the Central Committee. We
believe that, even before the Central Committee comes to a decision on this
question, all Party comrades will be able to form a proper opinion
of the “polemical” methods of the two members of the Editorial
Board—Martov and Dan.  

 
Notes
 

[1]

* At the Plenary Meeting, the Central Committee entered into an
agreement with certain representatives of the Bolshevik trend, providing
for the conditional transfer of their funds to the Party. This
agreement was recognised as Party law, as the source of Party
legality. It was published in the Central Organ (No. 11), together
with the entire procedure stipulated by the Meeting in connection with the
agreement. The principal provision was, that if the Bolsheviks filed an
application showing that the Golos and Vperyod trends violated
the terms of amalgamation, a plenary meeting was to be called
(abroad). The decision printed in No. 11 of the Central Organ, states:
“Should it prove impossible for various reasons to arrange a plenary
meeting within three months after the representatives of the Bolshevik
trend have filed their application”, a special commission “is to be set
up”.  —Lenin

[2]
In a letter addressed to the Central Organ this comrade requests us to
help him inform the Party of the Golos group’s attempts to prevent
the plenary meeting.  —Lenin

[3]
When Martov jeers at official Party institutions, saying that
“legality finishes them”, he is right insofar as the
fruitfulness of the Work is killed by such “legal” (i.e.,
created in accordance with the Party Rules or by decisions of the Plenary
Meeting) forms of these institutions as permit Mikhail, Roman,
Yuri, the Golos group (as represented by Igorev), etc., to hamper
the work.  —Lenin

[4]
Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin)
have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated.—Ed.


[5]
That a general Party conference, one convened by the Central Committee
of the Party, is really needed and should be called as soon as
possible—of that there can be no question.  —Lenin
 



[6]
The letter of the sixteen—an open letter of the
Menshevik-liquidators, their reply to G. V. Plekhanov’s statement in No. 9
of The Diary of a Social-Democrat (August 1909) against the
liquidators and their leader, A. N. Potresov.  

Lenin called the letter of the sixteen a “document, which ... will
have the ill-fame attaching to the name of Herostratus”





[7]
Vekhi group—contributors to a Cadet symposium entitled
Vekhi (Landmarks), published in Moscow in the spring of 1909,
containing articles by N. Berdyaev, S. Bulgakov, P. Struve,
M. Herschensohn, and other representatives of the counter-revolutionary
liberal bourgeoisie. In articles on the Russian intelligentsia these
writers tried to discredit the revolutionary-democratic traditions of the
best representatives of the Russian people, including V. G. Belinsky and
N. 0. Chernyshevsky. They vilified the revolutionary movement of 1905, and
thanked the tsarist government for having “with its bayonets and jails”
saved the bourgeoisie from “the fury of the people”. They urged the
intelligentsia to serve the autocracy. Lenin compared the philosophy and
politics of Vekhi with that of the Black-Hundred newspaper
Moskovskiye Vedomosti (Moscow Recorder), and called the
symposium an “encyclopaedia of liberal renegacy”, “nothing but
a flood of reactionary mud poured on democracy”.





[8]
Black Hundreds—monarchist bands, set up by the tsarist
police to fight the revolutionary movement. They murdered revolutionaries,
assaulted progressive intellectuals, and organised anti-Jewish pogroms.





[9]
Rossiya (Russia)—a daily newspaper of a reactionary
Black-Hundred type published in St. Petersburg from November 1905 to
April 1914. From 1906 it was the organ of the Ministry of the Interior. The
newspaper was subsidised from the secret government fund put at the
disposal of the Ministry of the Interior. Lenin called Rossiya a
“venal police newspaper”.





[10]

“Cadets—members of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, the leading
party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in Russia. Founded in
October 1905, its membership was made up of representatives of the
bourgeoisie, Zemstvo leaders of the landowning class, and bourgeois
intellectuals. Its leading members were: P. N. Milyukov, S. A. Muromtsev,
V. A. Maklakov, A. I. Shingaryov, P. B. Struve, F. I. Rodichev, and
others. In order to hoodwink the working people, the Cadets hypocritically
called themselves “the party of people’s freedom”, while in actual fact
they did not go beyond the demand for a constitutional monarchy. They
considered a struggle against the revolutionary movement to be their
primary task; they hoped to share power with the tsar and the feudal
landlords. During the First World War they actively sup ported the tsarist
government’s predatory foreign policy, and did their best to save the
monarchy during the bourgeois-democratic revolution of
February 1917. Holding leading posts in the bourgeois Provisional
Government they carried out a counter-revolutionary policy opposed to the
interests of the people, but approved by U.S., British and French
imperialists. After the victory of the Great October Socialist Revolution
the Cadets became irreconcilable enemies of Soviet power and actively
participated in all armed counter-revolutionary acts and campaigns of the
interventionists. They continued their anti-Soviet counter-revolutionary
activities when they fled abroad after the rout of the interventionists and
whiteguards.





[11]
Rech (Speech)—a daily newspaper, the central organ
of the Cadet Party, published in St. Petersburg from February 1906. It was
closed down by the Military Revolutionary Committee of the Petrograd Soviet
on October 26 (November 8), 1917.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Certain Features of the Historical Development of Marxism









Lenin: Certain Features of the Historical Development of Marxism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Certain Features of the Historical Development of Marxism[1]




Published:
Zvezda, No. 2, December 28, 1910.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 39-44.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



 

Our doctrine—said Engels, referring to himself and his
famous friend—is not a dogma, but a guide to action. This classical
statement stresses with remarkable force and expressiveness that aspect of
Marxism which is very often lost sight of. And by losing sight of it, we
turn Marxism into something one-sided, distorted and lifeless; we deprive
it of its life blood; we undermine its basic theoretical
foundations—dialectics, the doctrine of historical development,
all-embracing and full of contradictions; we undermine its connection with
the definite practical tasks of the epoch, which may change with every new
turn of history.  

Indeed, in our time, among those interested in the fate of Marxism in
Russia, we very frequently meet with people who lose sight of just this
aspect of Marxism. Yet, it must be clear to everybody that in recent years
Russia has under gone changes so abrupt as to alter the situation with
unusual rapidity and unusual force—the social and political situation,
which in a most direct and immediate manner determines the conditions for
action, and, hence, its aims. I am not referring, of course, to general and
fundamental aims, which do not change with turns of history if the
fundamental relation between classes remains unchanged. It is perfectly
obvious that this general trend of economic (and not only economic)
evolution in Russia, like the fundamental relation between the various
classes of Russian society, has not changed during, say, the last six
years.  

But the aims of immediate and direct action changed very sharply during
this period, just as the actual social

    

and political situation changed, and consequently, since Marxism
is a living doctrine, various aspects of it were bound to
become prominent.  

In order to make this idea clear, let us cast a glance at the change in
the actual social and political situation over the past six years. We
immediately differentiate two three year periods: one ending roughly with
the summer of 1907, and the other with the summer of 1910. The first
three-year period, regarded from the purely theoretical standpoint, is
distinguished by rapid changes in the fundamental features of the state
system in Russia; the course of these changes, moreover, was very uneven
and the oscillations in both directions were of considerable amplitude. The
social and economic basis of these changes in the “superstructure” was
the action of all classes of Russian society in the most
diverse fields (activity inside and outside the Duma, the press,
unions, meetings, and so forth), action so open and impressive and on a
mass scale such as is rarely to be observed in history.  

The second three-year period, on the contrary, is distinguished—we
repeat that we confine ourselves to the purely theoretical “sociological”
standpoint—by an evolution so slow that it almost amounted to
stagnation. There were no changes of any importance to be observed in the
state system. There were hardly any open and diversified actions by the
classes in the majority of the “arenas” in which these actions
had developed in the preceding period.  

The similarity between the two periods is that Russia underwent
capitalist evolution in both of them. The contradiction between this
economic evolution and the existence of a number of feudal and medieval
institutions still remained and was not stifled, but rather aggravated, by
the fact that certain institutions assumed a partially bourgeois character.


The difference between the two periods is that in the first the
question of exactly what form the above-mentioned rapid and uneven changes
would take was the dominant, his tory-making issue. The content of these
changes was bound to be bourgeois owing to the capitalist character of
Russia’s evolution; but there are different kinds of bourgeoisie. The
middle and big bourgeoisie, which professes a more or less

    

moderate liberalism, was, owing to its very class position, afraid of
abrupt changes and strove for the retention of large remnants of the old
institutions both in the agrarian system and in the political
“superstructure”. The rural petty bourgeoisie, interwoven as it is with
the peasants who live “solely by the labour of their hands”, was bound to
strive for bourgeois reforms of a different kind, reforms that
would leave far less room for medieval survivals. The wage-workers,
inasmuch as they consciously realised what was going on around them, were
bound to work out for them selves a definite attitude towards this clash of
two distinct tendencies. Both tendencies remained within the frame work of
the bourgeois system, determining entirely different forms of that system,
entirely different rates of its development, different degrees of its
progressive influence.  

Thus, the first period necessarily brought to the fore—and not by
chance—those problems of Marxism that are usually referred to as problems
of tactics. Nothing is more erroneous than the opinion that the disputes
and differences over these questions were disputes among “intellectuals”,
“a struggle for influence over the immature proletariat”, an expression
of the “adaptation of the intelligentsia to the proletariat”, as
Vekhi followers of various hues think. On the contrary, it was
precisely because this class had reached maturity that it could not remain
indifferent to the clash of the two different tendencies in Russia’s
bourgeois development, and the ideologists of this class could not avoid
providing theoretical formulations corresponding (directly or indirectly,
in direct or reverse reflection) to these different tendencies.  

In the second period the clash between the different tendencies of
bourgeois development in Russia was not on the order of the day,
because both these tendencies had been crushed by the
“diehards”, forced back, driven inwards and, for the time being,
stifled. The medieval

diehards[2] not only occupied the foreground but also inspired the
broadest sections of bourgeois society with the sentiments propagated by
Vekhi, with a spirit of dejection and recantation. It was not the
collision between two methods of re forming the old order that appeared on
the surface, but a loss of faith in reforms of any kind, a spirit of
“meekness”

    

and “repentance”, an enthusiasm for anti-social doctrines, a vogue of
mysticism, and so on.  

This astonishingly abrupt change was neither accidental nor the result
of “external” pressure alone. The preceding period had so profoundly
stirred up sections of the population who for generations and centuries had
stood aloof from, and had been strangers to, political issues that it was
natural and inevitable that there should emerge “a revaluation of all
values”, a new study of fundamental problems, a new interest in theory, in
elementals, in the ABC of politics. The millions who were suddenly awakened
from their long sleep and confronted with extremely important problems
could not long remain on this level. They could not continue without a
respite, without a return to elementary questions, without a new training
which would help them “digest” lessons of unparalleled richness and make
it possible for incomparably wider masses again to march forward, but now
far more firmly, more consciously, more confidently and more steadfastly.


The dialectics of historical development was such that in the first
period, it was the attainment of immediate reforms in every sphere of the
country’s life that was on the order of the day. In the second period it
was the critical study of experience, its assimilation by wider sections,
its penetration, so to speak, into the subsoil, into the back ward ranks of
the various classes.  

It is precisely because Marxism is not a lifeless dogma, not a
completed, ready-made, immutable doctrine, but a living guide to action,
that it was bound to reflect the astonishingly abrupt change in the
conditions of social life. That change was reflected in profound
disintegration and disunity, in every manner of vacillation, in short, in a
very serious internal crisis of Marxism. Resolute resistance to
this disintegration, a resolute and persistent struggle to up hold the
fundamentals of Marxism, was again placed on the order of the
day. In the preceding period, extremely wide sections of the classes that
cannot avoid Marxism in formulating their aims had assimilated that
doctrine in an extremely one-sided and mutilated fashion. They had learnt
by rote certain “slogans”, certain answers to tactical questions,
without having understood the Marxist criteria for these

    

answers. The “revaluation of all values” in the various spheres of social
life led to a “revision” of the most abstract and general philosophical
fundamentals of Marxism. The influence of bourgeois philosophy in its
diverse idealist shades found expression in the Machist epidemic that broke
out among the Marxists. The repetition of “slogans” learnt by rote but
not understood and not thought out led to the widespread prevalence of
empty phrase-mongering. The practical expression of this were such
absolutely un-Marxist, petty-bourgeois trends as frank or shamefaced
“otzovism”, or the recognition of otzovism as a “legal shade” of
Marxism.  

On the other hand, the spirit of the magazine Vekhi, the
spirit of renunciation which had taken possession of very wide sections of
the bourgeoisie, also permeated the trend wishing to confine Marxist theory
and practice to “moderate and careful” channels. All that remained of
Marxism here was the phraseology used to clothe arguments about
“hierarchy”, “hegemony” and so forth, that were thoroughly permeated
with the spirit of liberalism.  

The purpose of this article is not to examine these arguments. A mere
reference to them is sufficient to illustrate what has been said above
regarding the depth of the crisis through which Marxism is passing and its
connection with the whole social and economic situation in the present
period. The questions raised by this crisis cannot be brushed
aside. Nothing can be more pernicious or unprincipled than attempts to
dismiss them by phrase-mongering. Nothing is more important than to rally
all Marxists who have realised the profundity of the crisis and
the necessity of combating it, for defence of the theoretical basis of
Marxism and its fundamental propositions, that are being distorted from
diametrically opposite sides by the spread of bourgeois influence to the
various “fellow-travellers” of Marxism.  

The first three years awakened wide sections to a conscious
participation in social life, sections that in many cases are now for the
first time beginning to acquaint themselves with Marxism in real earnest,
The bourgeois press is creating far more fallacious ideas on this score
than ever before, and is spreading them more widely. Under these
circumstances disintegration in the Marxist ranks is particularly

    

dangerous. Therefore, to understand the reasons for the inevitability of
this disintegration at the present time and to close their ranks for
consistent struggle against this disintegration is, in the most direct and
precise meaning of the term, the task of the day for Marxists.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Zvezda (The Star), in which this article appeared,
was a Bolshevik legal newspaper, the forerunner of Pravda,
published in St. Petersburg from December 16 (29), 1910 to April 22
(May 5), 1912 (at first weekly, then from January 1912 twice and from
March, three times a week). On February 26 (March 10), 1912, No. 1 of
Nevskaya Zvezda (Neva Star) was published at the same
time as Zvezda, and, after the latter was closed down, continued
its work. The last, the 27th issue of Nevskaya Zvezda was
published on October 5(18), 1912.  


Contributers to Zvezda were N. N. Baturin, K. S. Yeremeyev,
N. G. Poletayev, M. S. Olminsky, and others, including Maxim Gorky, whom
Lenin enlisted as a contributor. The pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanov’s
group) contributed to Zvezda until the autumn of 1911. Lenin gave
the paper ideological leadership from abroad, and together Zvezda
and Nevskaya Zvezda published nearly fifty of his articles.  

Under Lenin’s guidance the legal newspaper Zvezda became the
militant paper of the Bolsheviks which defended the programme of the
illegal Party Zvezda established workers’ correspondence on a
broad scale, maintaining strong and regular contact with the workers. Some
of its issues achieved a circulation of 50,000–60,000 copies.  

The newspaper was the constant target of government repression; out of
96 issues of Zvezda and Nevskaya Zvezda, 39 were
confiscated and 10 were subject to fines. Zvezda paved the way for
the publication of the daily Bolshevik newspaper Pravda and on the
very day it was closed down by the government the first issue of
Pravda appeared.





[2]
The “diehards” was the name given by Russian political literature to
the extreme Right-wing representatives of the reactionary landlord class.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Judas Trotsky's Blush of Shame









Lenin: Judas Trotsky's Blush of Shame







V. I.  

      Lenin
Judas Trotsky’s Blush of Shame




Written: Written after January 2 (15), 1911 

Published:

      First published on January 21, 1932, in Pravda, No. 21.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      page 45.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At the Plenary Meeting Judas Trotsky made a big show of
fighting liquidationism and otzovism. He vowed and swore that he was true
to the Party. He was given a subsidy.  

After the Meeting the Central Committee grow weaker, the
Vperyod group grew stronger and acquired funds. The liquidators
strengthened their position and in Nasha

Zarya[1] spat in the face of the illegal Party, before Stolypin’s
very eyes.  

Judas expelled the representative of the Central Committee from,
Pravda and began to write liquidationist articles in

Vorwärts.[2] In defiance of the direct decision of the
School

Commission[3] appointed by the Plenary Meeting to the effect that no
Party lecturer may go to the Vperyod factional school, Judas
Trotsky did go and discussed a plan for a conference with the
Vperyod group. This plan has now been published by the
Vperyod group in a leaflet.  

And it is this Judas who beats his breast and loudly professes his
loyalty to the Party, claiming that he did not grovel before the
Vperyod group and the liquidators.  

Such is Judas Trotsky’s blush of shame.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn)—a legal journal published
monthly by the Menshevik-liquidators in St. Petersburg from 1910 to
1914. It became the rallying centre of the liquidators in Russia.





[2]
Vorwärts (Forward)—the central organ of German
Social-Democrats which began publication in 1876. Wilhelm Liebknecht was
one of its editors. Frederick Engels waged a struggle in its columns
against all opportunist manifestations. In the mid-nineties, after the
death of Engels, Vorwärts regularly published articles by the
opportunists who dominated German Social-Democracy and the Second
International.





[3]
The School Commission (or School Committee) was
appointed by the January Plenary Meeting of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P.,
1910, to organise a Party school abroad. It was composed of nine people:

two Bolsheviks, two Mensheviks, two members of the Vperyod group
and one representative from each of the national organisations—the Bund
and the Latvian and Polish Social-Democratic organisations.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Career of a Russian Terrorist









Lenin: The Career of a Russian Terrorist







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Career of a Russian Terrorist




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 19-20, January 13 (26), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 46-48.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The above is the subtitle of an article on the death of
Karaulov, which Mr. Rubanovich, representative of the
Socialist-Revolutionary

Party,[2] published in the French socialist newspaper

L’Humanité.[3] It is, indeed, an instructive career.


After the events of March 1, 1881, Karaulov arrived in Paris and
offered his services to the head of the Narodnaya

Volya[4] to put the organisation on its feet again. The editor of the
Vestnik Narodnoi

Voli,[5] the future renegade Tikhomirov, gave him
permission. Karaulov returned to Russia with Lopatin, Sukhomlin, and
others. In 1884 he was arrested in Kiev and sentenced to four years’ penal
servitude, although his colleagues received death sentences or penal
servitude for life.  

How is this “strange [in the words of Mr. Rubanovich] clemency” to be
explained? Rumour had it, Mr. Rubanovich informs us, that the President of
the military court was amazed by the resemblance Karaulov bore to his son,
who had died in tragic circumstances. But, Mr. Rubanovich adds, “other
explanations of this strange clemency” are current. However, he does not
tell us what they

 are.[1]


But there are no doubts as to Karaulov’s most recent “career”. In
1905 he came out so brazenly against the revolutionaries, that the voters
repudiated him in the elections to the First and the Second State
Dumas. “If I have to choose between two camps,” Karaulov said at a
meeting (according to a report in Birzheviye

Vedomosti[6]), “one of which is made

    

up of government troops, and the other of revolutionaries with the
notorious slogan of dictatorship of the proletariat, I should not hesitate
to join the former against the latter.” No wonder Witte interceded on
behalf of this man for the reinstatement of his rights. No wonder that
Karaulov gained prominence in the Third Duma as one of the most despicable
counter-revolutionary Cadets, one of those who always had some hypocritical
phrase ready.  

The surprising thing is that there are people who consider themselves
sympathisers of democracy, and who today, on the occasion of Karaulov’s
death, extol him as a “democrat”, a “fighter”, etc.  

The surprising thing is that Mr. Rubanovich, who re presents the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party, can write in a French socialist organ that
“much will be forgiven this former Socialist-Revolutionary who went over
to the camp of the moderates, because he could strike the proper chord”
(the reference is to the sitting of the Duma at which the Rights called
Karaulov a jail-bird, and he retorted that he was proud of the fact).  

To “forgive” a renegade his career because of an effective
phrase is fully in the spirit of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries. There are renegades from all revolutionary
parties in all countries, and there are always some among them who are past
masters in the art of playing for effect. But it is not often that
revolutionaries, representatives of “revolutionary” parties, openly
declare: “Much will be forgiven” a renegade for clever repartee. For such
things to happen, it is necessary that the “revolutionary” party should
include an enormous proportion of liberals with bombs. For such
things to happen, it is necessary that these liberals, now left with out
bombs, should feel at home in “revolutionary” parties that do not in any
way concern themselves with upholding revolutionary principles,
revolutionary tradition, revolutionary honour and duty.  

There is yet another and more profound lesson to be drawn from “the
career of a Russian terrorist”. It is a lesson of the class struggle; it
shows that in Russia at present only revolutionary classes can
serve as a prop for parties which are to any real extent revolutionary. Not
Karaulov alone, but the mass of the bourgeois intelligentsia,
which until

    

recently was democratic and even revolutionary-minded, has now turned
its back on democracy and the revolution. There is nothing accidental
in this; it is the inevitable result of the development of
class-consciousness on the part of the Russian bourgeoisie which has
realised through experience how close is the moment when the
“camp” of the monarchy and the camp of the revolution will confront each
other and has realised through experience which side it will have
to choose when that moment comes.  

Those who want to learn from the great lessons of the Russian
revolution must realise that only the development of the
class-consciousness of the proletariat, only the organisation of
this class and the exclusion of petty-bourgeois
“fellow-travellers” from its party, and the elimination of the
vacillation, weakness, and lack of principle, characteristic of them,
can again lead, and surely will lead, to new victories of the
people over the monarchy of the Romanovs.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
He apparently refers to the current suspicion that Karaulov “made a
clean breast of it” at the investigation.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Socialist-Revolutionary Party—a petty-bourgeois party in
Russia, which arose at the end of 1901 and beginning of 1902 as a result of
the union of various Narodnik groups and circles. The newspaper
Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revolutionary Russia) (1900–05)
and the magazine Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (Herald of the
Russian Revolution) (1901–05) became its official organs. The
Socialist-Revolutionaries did not recognise the class differences between
the proletariat and petty proprietors, glossed over the class
differentiation

   

and contradictions within the peasantry and rejected the leading role of
the proletariat, in the revolution. The views of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries were an eclectic mixture of the ideas of Narodism
and revisionism, and they tried, as Lenin expressed it, to patch up “the
rents in the Narodnik ideas with bits of fashionable opportunist
‘criticism’ of Marxism” (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 310). The tactics
of individual terrorism advocated by the Socialist-Revolutionaries as the
main form of struggle against the autocracy, did great harm to the
revolutionary movement and hampered the organisation of the masses for
revolutionary struggle.  

The agrarian programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries envisaged the
abolition of private ownership of the land and its transfer to the village
communes on the basis of the “labour principle” and equalitarian land
tenure (i.e., as much land to be given to each peasant household as it
could farm without employing hired labour), and also the development of
co-operatives. This programme, which the Socialist-Revolutionaries called
the “socialisation of the land”, in reality bore no resemblance
whatsoever to socialism. In analysing the programme of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries, Lenin showed that the preservation of commodity
production and private farming on commonly-owned land does not eliminate
the domination of capital, does not relieve the working peasants of
exploitation and ruin. Co-operatives cannot be the means of salvation for
the small peasants under capitalist conditions since they serve to enrich
the village bourgeoisie. At the same time, Lenin pointed out that the
demand for equalitarian land tenure, although not socialist, was of an
historically progressive revolutionary-democratic character, inasmuch as it
was directed against reactionary landed proprietorship.  

The Bolshevik Party exposed the attempts of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries to masquerade as socialists, carried out a deter
mined struggle against the Socialist-Revolutionaries for influence over the
peasantry, and showed the danger to the working-class movement of their
tactics of individual terrorism. At the same time the Bolsheviks were
prepared, on definite conditions, to enter into temporary agreements with
the Socialist-Revolutionaries in the struggle against tsarism.  

The fact that the peasantry is not a homogeneous class deter mined the
political and ideological instability and organisational disunity of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries and their constant waverings between the liberal
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. As early as the first Russian revolution
the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party broke away and formed
the legal Popular Socialist Party, whose outlook was close to that of the
Cadets, and the Left wing formed the semi-anarchist league of
Maximalists. During the Stolypin reaction the Socialist-Revolutionary Party
experienced a complete ideological and organisational break down. The
majority of its members adopted a social-chauvinist position during the
First World War.  

After the victory of the February bourgeois-democratic revolution in
1917, the Socialist-Revolutionaries together with the Mensheviks

   

and Cadets were the mainstay of the counter-revolutionary
bourgeois-landlord Provisional Government of which the Party leaders
(Kerensky, Avksentyev, Chernov) were members. The Socialist-Revolutionaries
refused to support the demands of the peas ants for the abolition of
landlordism, supporting its preservation, and the Socialist-Revolutionary
ministers of the Provisional Government sent punitive detachments against
those peasants who had seized the landlords’ estates.  

At the end of November 1917, Left-wing Socialist-Revolutionaries
founded the independent party of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. Striving
to preserve their influence over the peasant masses, the Left
Socialist-Revolutionaries formally recognised Soviet power and entered into
an agreement with the Bolsheviks, but very soon began to struggle against
Soviet power.  

During the years of foreign military intervention and civil war, the
Socialist-Revolutionaries engaged in counter-revolutionary subversive
activities, actively supported the interventionists and the whiteguard
elements, took part in counter-revolutionary plots, organised terrorist
acts against leaders of the Soviet state and the Communist Party. After the
civil war, the Socialist-Revolutionaries continued their hostile activities
against the Soviet state both within the country and abroad among
whiteguard émigrés.





[3]
L’Humanité—a daily newspaper founded in 1904 by Jean
Jaurès as the organ of the French Socialist Party. Soon after the
split in the Socialist Party at the Tours Congress (December 1920) and the
formation of the Communist Party, the paper became the latter’s organ. It
is now published in Paris as the central organ of the French Communist
Party.





[4]
Narodnaya Volya (People’s Will)—the secret political
organisation of Narodnik-terrorists, formed in August 1879 following the
split in the Narodnik organisation Zemlya i Volya (Land and
Freedom). Narodnaya Volya was headed by an Executive
Committee which included A. I. Zhelyabov, A. A. Kvyatkovsky,
A. D. Mikhailov, N. A. Morozov, Sophia Perovskaya, Vera Figner,
M. F. Frolenko, and others. While still adhering to Narodnik
utopian-socialist ideas, Narodnaya Volya took up the political struggle,
regarding the overthrow of the autocracy and the achievement of political
freedom as a major aim. Its programme envisaged a “permanent popular
representative body” elected by universal suffrage, the proclamation of
democratic liberties, the transfer of the land to the people, and measures
to put the factories in the hands of the workers. “The Narodnaya Volya
members,” wrote Lenin, “made a step forward when they took up the
political struggle, but they failed to connect it with socialism”



Narodnaya Volya fought heroically against the tsarist autocracy; guided
by their erroneous theory of “active” heroes and a “passive” mass, they
planned to remould society without the participation of

   

the people, by their own efforts, through individual terrorism that would
intimidate and disorganise the government. After the assassination of
Alexander II on March 1, 1881, the government was able, by savage
reprisals, death sentences, anti acts of provocation, to crush it out of
existence. Repeated attempts to revive the organisation during the eighties
ended in failure. Thus, in 1886 a group in the Narodnaya Volya tradition
was formed by A. I. Ulyanov (elder brother of Lenin) and P. Y. Shevyryov;
but after an unsuccessful attempt to assassinate Alexander III in 1887, the
group was uncovered and its active members executed.  

While criticising Narodnaya Volya’s erroneous utopian programme, Lenin
expressed great respect for its members’ selfless struggle against tsarism
and valued highly the technique of its underground activities and strictly
centralised organisation.





[5]
Vestnik Narodnoi Voli (Messenger of the People’s
Will) was published in Geneva from 1883 to 1886, as the organ of the
Narodnaya Volya Party. It was edited by P. L. Lavrov and L. A. Tikhomirov;
in all there were five issues.





[6]
Birzheviye Vedomosti or Birzhevka (Stock-Exchange
Recorder)—a daily bourgeois newspaper published in St. Petersburg
from 1880. The name Birzhevka was commonly used to indicate the
lack of principle and corruption of the bourgeois press. The newspaper was
closed down at the end of October 1917.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Lev Tolstoi and His Epoch









Lenin: Lev Tolstoi and His Epoch







V. I.  

      Lenin
Lev Tolstoi and His Epoch




Published:
Zvezda, No. 6, January 22, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 49-53.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The epoch to which Lev Tolstoi belongs and which is
reflected in such bold relief both in his brilliant literary works and in
his teachings began after 1861 and lasted until 1905. True, Tolstoi
commenced his literary career earlier and it ended later, but it was during
this period, whose transitional nature gave rise to all the
distinguishing features of Tolstoi’s works and of Tolstoi-ism, that he
fully matured both as an artist and as a thinker.  

Through Levin, a character in Anna Karenina, Tolstoi very
vividly expressed the nature of the turn in Russia’s history that took
place during this half-century.  


   “Talk about the harvest, hiring labourers, and so
   forth, which, as Levin knew, it was the custom to regard as something
   very low, ... now seemed to Levin to be the only important thing. ‘This,
   perhaps, was unimportant under serfdom, or is unimportant in England. In
   both cases the conditions are definite; but here today, when everything
   has been turned upside down and is only just taking shape again, the
   question of how these conditions will shape is the only important
   question in Russia,’ mused Levin.” (Collected Works, Vol. X,
   p. 137.)  


“Here in Russia everything has now been turned upside down and is only
just taking shape”,—it is difficult to imagine a more apt
characterisation of the period 1861–1905. What “was turned upside down”
is familiar, or at least well known, to every Russian. It was serfdom, and
the whole of the “old order” that went with it. What “is just taking
shape” is totally unknown, alien and incomprehensible to the broad masses
of the population. Tolstoi conceived this bourgeois order which was “only
just taking shape” vaguely, in the form of a bogey—England. Truly, a
bogey, because Tolstoi rejects, on principle, so to speak, any at tempt to
investigate the features of the social system in

    

this “England”, the connection between this system and the domination of
capital, the role played by money, the rise and development of
exchange. Like the

Narodniks,[1] he refuses to see, he shuts his eyes to, and dismisses the
thought that what is “taking shape” in Russia is none other than the
bourgeois system.  

It is true that, if not the “only important” question, then certainly
one of the most important from the stand point of the immediate tasks of
all social and political activities in Russia in the period of 1861–1905
(and in our times, too), was that of “what shape” this system would take,
this bourgeois system that had assumed extremely varied forms in
“England”, Germany, America, France, and so forth. But such a definite,
concretely historical presentation of the question was something absolutely
foreign to Tolstoi. He reasons in the abstract, he recognises only the
stand point of the “eternal” principles of morality, the eternal truths
of religion, failing to realise that this standpoint is merely the
ideological reflection of the old (“turned upside down”) order, the
feudal order, the way of the life of the Oriental peoples.  

In Lucerne (written in 1857), Tolstoi declares that to regard
“civilisation” as a boon is an “imaginary concept” which “destroys in
human nature the instinctive, most blissful primitive need for good”. “We
have only one infallible guide,” exclaims Tolstoi, “the Universal Spirit
that permeates us.” (Collected Works, II, p. 125.)  

In The Slavery of Our Times (written in 1900), Tolstoi,
repeating still more zealously these appeals to the Universal Spirit,
declares that political economy is a “pseudo science” because it takes as
the “pattern” “little England, where conditions are most exceptional”,
instead of taking as a pattern “the conditions of men in the whole world
throughout the whole of history”. What this “whole world” is like is
revealed to us in the article “Progress and the Definition of Education”
(1802). Tolstoi counters the opinion of the “historians” that progress is
“a general law for man kind” by referring to “the whole of what is known
as the Orient” (IV, 162). “There is no general law of human progress,”
says Tolstoi, “and this is proved by the quiescence of the Oriental
peoples.”  
 

Tolstoi-ism, in its real historical content, is an ideology of an
Oriental, an Asiatic order. Hence the asceticism, the non-resistance to
evil, the profound notes of pessimism, the conviction that “everything is
nothing, everything is a material nothing” (“The Meaning of Life”,
p. 52), and faith in the “Spirit”, in “the beginning of everything”,
and that man, in his relation to this beginning, is merely a “labourer ...
allotted the task of saving his own soul”, etc. Tolstoi is true to this
ideology in his Kreutzer Sonata too when he says: “the
emancipation of woman lies not in colleges and not in parliaments, but in
the bedroom”, and in the article written in 1862, in which he says that
universities train only “irritable, debilitated liberals” for whom “the
people have no use at all”, who are “uselessly torn from their former
environment”, “find no place in life”, and so forth (IV, 136-37).  

Pessimism, non-resistance, appeals to the “Spirit” constitute an
ideology inevitable in an epoch when the whole of the old order “has been
turned upside down”, and when the masses, who have been brought up under
this old order, who imbibed with their mother’s milk the principles, the
habits, the traditions and beliefs of this order, do not and cannot see what
kind of a new order is “taking shape”, what social
forces are “shaping” it and how, what social forces are
capable of bringing release from the incalculable and exceptionally
acute distress that is characteristic of epochs of


The period of 1862–1904 was just such a period of upheaval in Russia,
a period in which, before everyone’s eyes the old order collapsed, never to
be restored, in which the new system was only just taking shape; the social
forces shaping the new system first manifested themselves on a broad,
nation-wide scale, in mass public action in the most varied fields only in
1905. And the 1905 events in Russia were followed by analogous events in a
number of countries in that very “Orient” to the “quiescence” of which
Tolstoi referred in 1862. The year 1905 marked the beginning of the end of
“Oriental” quiescence. Precisely for this reason that year marked the
historical end of Tolstoi-ism, the end of an epoch that could give rise to
Tolstoi’s teachings and in which they were inevitable, not as something
individual,

    

not as a caprice or a fad, but as the ideology of the conditions of life
under which millions and millions actually found themselves for a certain
period of time.  

Tolstoi’s doctrine is certainly utopian and in content is reactionary
in the most precise and most profound sense of the word. But that certainly
does nob mean that the doctrine was not socialistic or that it did not
contain critical elements capable of providing valuable material for the
enlightenment of the advanced classes.  

There are various kinds of socialism. In all countries where the
capitalist mode of production prevails there is the socialism which
expresses the ideology of the class that is going to take the place of the
bourgeoisie; and there is the socialism that expresses the ideology of the
classes that are going to be replaced by the bourgeoisie. Feudal socialism,
for example, is socialism of the latter type, and the nature of
this socialism was appraised long ago, over sixty years ago, by
Marx, simultaneously with his appraisal of other types of

socialism.[2] 

Furthermore, critical elements are inherent in Tolstoi’s utopian
doctrine, just as they are inherent in many utopian systems. But we must
not forget Marx’s profound observation to the effect that the value of
critical elements In utopian socialism “bears an inverse relation to
historical development”. The more the activities of the social forces
which are “shaping” the new Russia and bringing release from present-day
social evils develop and assume a definite character, the more rapidly is
critical-utopian socialism “losing all practical value and all theoretical
justification”.  

A quarter of a century ago, the critical elements in Tolstoi’s doctrine
might at times have been of practical value for some sections of the
population in spite of its reactionary and utopian features. This
could not have been the case during, say, the last decade, because
historical development bad made considerable progress between the eighties
and the end of the last century. In our days, since the series of events
mentioned above has put an end to “Oriental” quiescence, in our days,
when the consciously reactionary ideas of Vekhi (reactionary in
the narrow-class, selfishly-class sense) have become so enormously
widespread among the liberal bourgeoisie and when these ideas have infected
even a section of

    

those who were almost Marxists and have created a liquidationist trend—in
our days, the most direct and most profound harm is caused by every attempt
to idealise Tolstoi’s doctrine, to justify or to mitigate his
“non-resistance”, his appeals to the “Spirit”, his exhortations for
“moral self-perfection”, his doctrine of “conscience” and universal
“love”, his preaching of asceticism and quietism, and so forth.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Narodniks—followers of a petty-bourgeois trend, Narodism, in
the Russian revolutionary movement, which arose in the sixties and
seventies of the nineteenth century. The Narodniks stood for the abolition
of the autocracy and the transfer of the landlords’ lands to the
peasantry. At the same time, they believed capitalism in Russia to be a
temporary phenomenon with no prospect of development and they therefore
considered the peasantry, not the proletariat, to be the main revolutionary
force in Russia. They regarded the village commune as the embryo of
socialism. With the object of rousing the peasantry to struggle against the
autocracy, the Narodniks “went among the people”, to the village, but
found no support there.  

In the eighties and nineties the Narodniks adopted a policy of
conciliation to tsarism, expressed the interests of the kulak class, and
waged a bitter fight against Marxism.





[2]
Here and elsewhere, in this article, Lenin refers to The Communist
Manifesto (see Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I,
Moscow, 1958, pp. 21–64).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Marxism and Nasha Zarya









Lenin: Marxism and Nasha Zarya







V. I.  

      Lenin
Marxism and Nasha Zarya[1]




Written: Written after January 22 (February 4), 1911 

Published:

      First published in Sovremennaya Zhizn (Baku), No. 3, April 22, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Sovremennaya Zhizn text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 54-59.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In a review of the press appearing in Zvezda,
No. 4, it was correctly stated that at the present moment all Marxist
circles are interested in the question of liquidationism and in assessing
the problem of the hegemony of the proletariat; and that if the polemics
over this important question are to bear fruit, they must deal with
principles, they must not be the “ad hominem and malicious
polemics carried on by Nasha Zarya”.  

I fully share this opinion and shall, therefore, pass over in complete
silence the tricks resorted to by that magazine to imply that one can
understand only whom the controversy is about, but not
what it is about (Nasha Zarya, No. 11–12, p. 47). I
shall take Nasha Zarya itself for a year—just up to its
first anniversary and try to examine what it is about and what the
magazine has to say on this score.  

The first issue of Nasha Zarya appeared in January 1910. In
the second issue, which appeared in February, Mr. Potresov already declared
that the controversy between the Machians and the Marxists, and the
question of liquidationism were included among the
“trivialities”. “I ask the reader,” wrote Mr. Potresov,
“whether it is possible that there can exist, in this year of 1909, as
something that is actually real and not a figment of a diseased
imagination, a liquidationist tendency, a tendency to liquidate what is
already beyond liquidation and actually no longer exists as an organised
whole” (p. 61).  

By this unsuccessful attempt to evade the issue, Mr. Potresov supplied
the best corroboration, one startling in its Herostratean boldness, of the
view which he intended to refute. In January and February 1910,
Mr. Potresov must

    

have known that his opponents would not agree with his appraisal of the
actual state of affairs. Consequently, it could not be dismissed as
something “which no longer exists” since the non-existent cannot be
appraised. The question is not whether in actual practice one-tenth, or
one-twentieth, or one-hundredth, or any other fraction equals nought, it is
whether there exists a trend which regards that fraction as
superfluous. The question is whether there is a difference in principle as
to the significance of the fraction, what attitude should be taken toward
it, should it be increased, etc. By replying to this question that
there is “nothing”, “nought”, and that “nought is but nought”,
Mr. Potresov fully expressed the liquidationist trend whose existence he
denies. His sally was remarkable only for its particular “malice” (as it
was aptly put in the press review in Zvezda, No. 4), for its lack
of straightforwardness and journalistic clarity. But it is precisely
because it is not a matter of, personalities, but of a trend, that Moscow
rushed to the assistance of St. Petersburg. The Moscow

Vozrozhdeniye,[2] No. 5, of March 30, 1910, quoted Mr. Potresov
approvingly and added on its own behalf: “There is nothing to liquidate
and for ourselves we may add, the dream of resuscitating that hierarchy, in
its old”, etc., “shape is nothing but a harmful, reactionary utopia”
(p. 51).  

It is quite obvious that it is not a question of the old
shape, but of the old substance. It is quite obvious also
that the question of “liquidating” is inseparably connected with the
question of “resuscitating”. Vozrozhdeniye went just one little
step farther than Mr. Potresov; it expressed the same idea a
little more clearly, more straightforwardly and more honestly. It dealt
with trends and not with personalities. Persons may be evasive rather than
straightforward, but trends are certain to reveal themselves in the most
varied circumstances, shapes and forms.  

Take, for instance, Mr. Bazarov, who was a Bolshevik once and perhaps
still considers himself one—all kinds of strange things happen in our
days. In the April issue of Nasha Zarya he refuted Mr. Potresov,
and did this so success fully, so fortunately (for Potresov) that he
declared literally that “the notorious question of hegemony” is “the
biggest and yet most trivial misunderstanding” (p. 87). Note:

    

Mr. Bazarov refers to that question as “notorious”, i.e., one that had
been raised before, that was already known in April 1910! We note this
fact, it is very important. We note that Mr. Bazarov’s statement that
“there will be no question of hegemony” (p. 88) if among the petty
bourgeoisie in town and countryside there is “a sufficiently radical
sentiment against political privileges”, etc., and if it is “permeated
with a strongly nationalistic spirit”, actually amounts to a complete
failure to understand the idea of hegemony and to a renunciation of this
idea. It is precisely the concern of the leader to fight “nationalism”
and to drive it out of those “sentiments” of which Bazarov speaks. The
success of this work cannot be measured by immediate, direct results
achieved today. There are times when the results of the resistance to
nationalism, of resistance to the spirit of decay, and of resistance to
liquidationism—which, incidentally, is as much a manifestation of
bourgeois influence on the proletariat as is the nationalism which at times
affects a section of the workers—there are times when these results begin
to tell only after years, perhaps even after very many years. It happens
that a spark merely smoulders for many years, a spark which the petty
bourgeoisie regard and proclaim as non-existent, liquidated, extinguished,
etc., but which actually lives and feeds the spirit of resistance to
despondency and renunciation, and manifests itself after a protracted
period of time. Everywhere and always, opportunism clutches at the minute,
at the moment, at today, for it is unable to appreciate the connection
between “yesterday” and “tomorrow”. Marxism, on the other hand,
demands a clear awareness of this connection, an awareness that
expresses itself not in words alone but in deeds. That is why Marxism
cannot be reconciled with the liquidationist trend in general, and
particularly with the denial of hegemony.  

St. Petersburg is followed by Moscow. The Menshevik, Mr. Potresov, is
followed by the former Bolshevik, Mr. Bazarov. Bazarov is followed by
Mr. V. Levitsky, who is a more straightforward and honest opponent than
Mr. Potresov. In the July issue of Nasha Zarya, Mr. V. Levitsky
writes:

“Whereas the previous [form of organisation of the class-conscious
workers] was the leadership in the national

    

struggle for political freedom, the coming one will be the class
[Mr. Levitsky’s emphasis] party of the masses who have embarked upon their
historic movement” (p. 103).  

This one sentence represents a remarkably apt and concentrated
expression of the spirit of all the writings of the Levitskys,
Potresovs, Bazarovs, of the whole of Vozrozhdeniye, the whole of
Nasha Zarya, and the whole of Dyelo

Zhizni.[3] The above-quoted passage from Mr. Levitsky could be
supplemented, replaced, enlarged upon and illustrated by hundreds of other
quotations. It is just as “classical” a phrase as Bernstein’s famous:
“The movement is everything, the final aim is nothing”[4]—or like
Prokopovich’s (in the Credo of

1899)[5]: the workers should confine them selves to the economic
struggle, leaving the political struggle to the liberals.  

Mr. Levitsky is theoretically incorrect when he contrasts
hegemony with a class party. This contrast alone furnishes sufficient
grounds for saying that the party which Nasha Zarya is in
actual fact following is not based on Marxism but on liberalism. Only
the theoreticians of liberalism through out the world (recall Sombart and
Brentano) conceive of a class labour party in the way Mr. Levitsky
“conceives” of it. From the standpoint of Marxism the class, so long as
it renounces the idea of hegemony or fails to appreciate it, is not a
class, or not yet a class, but a guild, or the sum total of
various guilds.  

But while Mr. Levitsky is unfaithful to Marxism, he is quite faithful
to Nasha Zarya, i.e., to the liquidationist trend. What he said
about the substance of this trend is the honest truth. In the past
(as far as the followers of this trend are concerned) there was
“hegemony”; in the future there will not be, nor should there be,
any. And what about the present?  At present there is the
amorphous agglomeration which represents the circle of writers and
reader friends of Nasha Zarya, Vozrozhdeniye and Dye to
Zhizni, who are engaged, at present, in this year of 1911, in
advocating the necessity, the inevitability, the usefulness and the logic
of a transition from the past concept of the hegemony of
the proletariat to the idea of a class party in the

Brentano[6] sense (or, for that matter, in the Struve or Izgoyev sense)

    

in the future. The fact that amorphism is one of the principles of
liquidationism was stated by its opponents in so many words as far back as
1908, i.e., a year before Nasha Zarya came into
existence, Since

Mr. Mayevsky[7] asks, in December 1910, what is liquidationism, we can
refer him to the answer given officially exactly two years ago. In that
answer he will find an exact and complete characterisation of Nasha
Zarya, although the latter came into existence a year after that. How
was this possible? It was possible because it was not, nor is it, a
question of personalities, but of a trend, which became apparent in 1907
(see, if you must, the concluding part of the pamphlet by Mr. Cherevanin
himself, where he deals with the events of the spring of

19O7[8]), found patent expression in 1908, was appraised by its
opponents at the end of 1908, and in 1910 founded for itself an open press
organ and organs.  

When you say: in the past there was hegemony, but in the
future there ought to be a “class party”—you thereby glaringly show the
connection between liquidationism and the renunciation of hegemony, and
confirm the fact that this trend has broken with Marxism. Marxism
maintains:

since there was “hegemony” in the past, consequently, the sum of trades,
specialities, guilds gave rise to the class; for it is the consciousness of
the idea of hegemony and its implementation through their own activities
that converts the guilds as a whole into a class. And once they have grown
to the level of a “class”, no external conditions, no burdens, no
reduction of the whole to a fraction, no rejoicing on the part of
Vekhi, and no pusillanimity on the part of the opportunists, can
stifle this young shoot. Even if it is not “seen” on the surface (the
Potresovs do not see it, or pretend not to see it, because they do
not care to see it), it is alive; it lives, preserving the “past” in the,
present, and carrying it into the future. Because there was hegemony in the
past, Marxists are in duty bound—despite all and sundry
renunciators—to uphold its idea in the present and in the future; and
this ideological task fully corresponds to the material conditions which
have created the class out of guilds and which continue to create, extend
and consolidate, it, and which lend strength to its resistance to all
“manifestations of bourgeois influence 
 

The magazine Nasha Zarya, however, in the issues published
during the year, represents, in a concentrated form, that very expression
of bourgeois influence on the proletariat. Liquidationism exists not only
as a trend of people who profess to be the supporters of a given class. It
represents one of the minor streams in that wide torrent of “regression”
which has swept up several classes, is characteristic of the three years
1908-10 and, perhaps, will remain characteristic of a few more years. In
the present article I had to confine myself to a definition of this minor
stream on the basis of quotations from Nasha Zarya, Nos. 2–7. In
future articles I expect to dwell on Nos. 10, 11, and 12 of that magazine,
as well as to prove in greater detail that the minor stream of
liquidationism is but a part of the torrent of Vekhi doctrines.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This article was published in No. 3 of Sovremennaya Zhizn
(Contemporary Life), a Bolshevik legal weekly socio-political
magazine published in Baku from March 26 (April 8) to April 22 (May 5),
1911, under the editorship of S. G. Shahumyan. Three issue appeared,

   

but after the confiscation of the third issue, the magazine was closed down
by the government.





[2]
Vozrozhdeniye (Regeneration)—a legal
Menshevik-liquidator magazine, published in Moscow from December 1908 to
July 1910; it was replaced by the magazines Zhizn (Life)
in 1910 and Dyelo Zhizni (Life’s Cause) in 1911.





[3]
Dyelo Zhizni (Life’s Cause)—a legal magazine of the
Menshevik liquidators, published in St. Petersburg from January to
October 1911.





[4]
This refers to the thesis of Eduard Bernstein, an outspoken exponent of
revisionist ideas, founder of Bernsteinism, the anti-Marxist, opportunist
trend in international Social-Democracy, which arose at the end of the
nineteenth century in Germany.





[5]
The reference is to the thesis of the Economists developed in their
programme Credo, written in 1899 by Y. D. Kuskova.  

Economism was an opportunist trend in Russian Social-Democracy
at the turn of the century, a Russian variety of international
opportunism. The newspaper Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’
Thought) (1897–1902) and the magazine Rabocheye Dyelo
(The Workers’ Cause) (1899–1902) were organs of the Economists.


The Economists limited the tasks of the working-class movement to the
economic struggle for higher wages, better working conditions, etc.,
asserting that the political struggle was the affair of the liberal
bourgeoisie. They denied the leading role of the party of the working
class, considering that it should merely observe the spontaneous
development of the movement and record events. Deferring to the
“spontaneity” of the working-class movement, they belittled the
importance of revolutionary theory and class-consciousness, and claimed
that socialist ideology could develop from the spontaneous working-class
movement; they denied the necessity for bringing socialist consciousness
into the working-class movement from without, by the Marxist party, and
thus, they actually cleared the way for bourgeois ideology. They championed
the existing scattered, isolated study circles with their parochial
amateurish approach, encouraged disunity in the Social-Democratic ranks,
and opposed the creation of a centralised working-class party. Economism
threatened to turn the working class away from the path of class,
revolutionary struggle, and to convert it into a political appendage of the
bourgeoisie.  

Comprehensive criticisms by Lenin of the Economist standpoint are to be
found in a number of his articles. They include “A Protest by Russian
Social-Democrats” (directed against the Credo; written in 1899,
while Lenin was in Siberian exile, and signed by 17 other exiled Marxists),
“A Retrograde Trend in Russian Social-Democracy”, “Apropos of the
Profession de foi” and “A Talk with Defenders of Economism”

Lenin’s What Is To Be Done?
   

brought about the ideological rout of Economism

A major part in the struggle against the Economists was also played by the
newspaper Iskra.





[6]
Lujo Brentano (1844-1931)—the German bourgeois economist,
the author of a variety of bourgeois distortion of Marxism known as
Brentanoism. Brentano advocated “social peace” in capitalist society, the
possibility of overcoming the social contradictions of capitalism without
resorting to the class struggle, maintaining that the solution of the
working-class problem lay in the organisation of reformist trade unions and
the introduction of or legislation and that the interests of workers and
capitalists could be reconciled.  

A theory analogous to that of Brentanoism was propounded in Russia by
the chief representative of “legal Marxism”, P. B. Struve, in an attempt
to use Marxism in the interests of the bourgeoisie. Lenin pointed out that
“Struveism” takes “from Marxism all that is acceptable to the liberal
bourgeoisie” and rejects its “living soul”, its revolutionary
nature. Struve was in complete agreement with the vulgar political economy
preached abroad, and ascribed to capitalism aims which were foreign to it,
namely the fullest satisfaction of man’s needs; he invited people to
“learn from capitalism”, and openly advocated Malthusian ideas. According
to Lenin, Struve was the “great master of renegacy, who, darting with
opportunism, with ‘criticism of Marx’, ended in the ranks of
counter-revolutionary bourgeois national-liberalism”.  

Among Struve’s followers was the bourgeois publicist A. S. Izgoyev whom
Lenin called, as he did Struve, a “hack writer for the landlords and
capitalists”.





[7]
Mayevsky—the Menshevik V. A. Gutovsky.





[8]
Lenin is referring to Cherevanin’s pamphlet The London Congress of
the R.S.D.L.P. in 1907, at the end of which the author criticised the
decision of the Congress on the question of the labour congress and
non-Party workers’ organisations from the liquidationist standpoint.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Those Who Would Liquidate Us









Lenin: Those Who Would Liquidate Us








V. I.  

      Lenin
Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov[1]




Published:
Mysl, Nos. 2 and 3, January and February 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in the journal Mysl.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 60-81.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I
  60



II
  65



III
  67



IV
  72



V
  77

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The article “Those Who Would Liquidate Us” appeared in the
magazine Mysl (Thought), a Bolshevik legal monthly
philosophical and socio-economic magazine published in Moscow from
December 1910. The magazine was started and guided by Lenin from abroad, in
order to counter the journals of the liquidators and struggle against them.


Lenin published six articles in the first four issues of Mysl,
including the major work Strike Statistics in Russia. Closely
connected with the work of the magazine were V.V. Vorovsky, M. S. Olminsky,
I. I. Skvortsov-Stepanov; G. V. Plekhanov and other pro-Party Mensheviks
also collaborated. The magazine was published until April 1911. In all,
five issues appeared, the last being confiscated.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## I









Lenin: 1911/twwliqus: I







V. I.  

      Lenin
Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov



 

We sometimes come across literary efforts whose only
significance lies in their Herostratean nature. A most ordinary literary
work, as, for instance, Eduard Bernstein’s well-known The Premises of
Socialism, assumes outstanding political significance and becomes the
manifesto of a trend amongst Marxists, although it departs from Marxism all
along the line. Similar outstanding significance, by reason of their
Herostratean nature, undoubtedly attaches to Mr. Potresov’s article on
trivialities in last year’s February issue of Nasha Zarya, and
V. Bazarov’s article in reply to it in the April Nasha Zarya. To
be sure, the questions discussed in these articles are far from being so
profound or of such wide scope, and have not the same international
significance, as the questions raised by Bernstein (or, rather, which he
put forward after the bourgeoisie had already done so), but for us
Russians, In the period of 1908–9--10–?, these are questions of
tremendous and cardinal importance. That is why Mr. Potresov’s and
V. Bazarov’s articles are not out of date, and it is necessary, it
is our duty, to deal with them.  
I

Mr. Potresov, who is fond of artificial, flowery and
laboured expressions, devotes his article to “the contemporary drama of
our social and political trends”. Actually, there is not the slightest
trace of the dramatic in what he says, or can say, of the
post-revolutionary evolution of liberalism, Narodism and Marxism, which he
took it upon himself to

    

discuss. But you cannot get away from the comic in Mr. Potresov’s
reflections.  

“It is precisely liberalism as an ideological trend,” writes
Mr. Potresov, “that presents a picture of the greatest degeneration and
the greatest helplessness. We need only consider the widening gulf between
practical liberalism and theorising liberalism”—between the
“empiricism” of Milyukov’s Rech and the theories of
Vekhi.  

Tut, tut, my dear sir! The gulf is widening between what you and
semi-liberals like you said and thought of the Cadets in 1905-6-7 and what
you are compelled to admit, stuttering and contradicting yourself, in
1909–10. The contradiction between the “empiricism” of the practical
liberals and the theories of gentlemen á la Struve was
fully apparent even before 1905. Just recall how the

Osvobozhdeniye[1] of those days blundered in literally every
one of its attempts at “theorising”. Since you are now beginning
to put two and two together, and find that liberalism “seems” to be
“broken up” (this is yet another of your verbal tricks, an empty phrase,
for Vekhi has not broken with Rech, or vice
versa; they have been, are, and will go on living in perfect harmony with
each other), that it is “sterile”, “suspended in mid-air”, and
represents but the “least stable” (sic!) “section of bourgeois
democrats”, who are “not bad as voters”, etc.—your cries about the
“drama” of liberalism merely signify the tragicomedy of the collapse of
your illusions. It is not at the present time, not during the three years
1908–10, but in the preceding three-year period that the liberals
“seemed” to be the least stable section of bourgeois democrats. The
“least stable” are those quasi-socialists who serve mustard to the public
after supper. The distinguishing feature of the previous three-year period
(insofar as the question examined by Mr. Potresov is concerned) was
liberalism “suspended in mid-air”, “sterile”, “voting”, etc.,
liberalism. At that time it was the political duty of the day to
recognise the nature of liberalism for what it was; it was the urgent duty,
not only of socialists, but also of consistent democrats, to warn the
masses of this. March 1906, not February 1910—that was the time when it
was important to sound the warning that the liberalism of the Cadets was
suspended in mid-air, that it was sterile, that the objective

    

conditions reduced it to nothingness, to the farce of being “not bad as
voters”; that the victories of the Cadets represented an unstable zigzag
between the “serious” constitutionalism (read: sham constitutionalism) of
the Shipovs or Guchkovs and the struggle for democracy waged by those
elements that were not suspended in mid-air and did not
confine themselves to the fond contemplation of ballots. Just call to mind,
my dear sir, who it was that spoke the truth about the liberals at the
proper time, in

March 1906.[2] 

The distinguishing feature, the peculiar characteristic of the
three-year period (1908–10) under discussion is by no means the
“sterility” of liberalism “suspended in mid-air”, etc. Quite the
contrary. Nothing has changed in the class impotence of the liberals, in
their dread of democracy, and in their political inanity; but this
impotence reached its height at a time when there were opportunities to
display strength, when conditions made it possible for the liberals to hold
full sway in at least a certain field of action. Thus, for instance, at the
time the Cadets had a majority in the First Duma, they were in a position
to use their majority either to serve democracy or to hamper the cause of
democracy, to render assistance to democracy (even if only in such a small
matter, as, let us say, the organisation of local land committees) or to
stab democracy in the back. And that period was characterised by
the Cadets being “suspended in mid-air”, and those who were “not bad as
voters” proving to be nothing but inventors of instructions for the
subsequent

Octobrist[3] Duma.  

In the three-year period that followed, the Cadets, while remaining
true to themselves, were less “suspended in mid air” than
before. You, Mr. Potresov, resemble that hero of popular lore who loudly
voices his wishes and opinions at inappropriate times. The 1909
Vekhi group is less “suspended in mid-air” than
Muromtsev was in 1906, for it is of real use and renders
practical service to the class which represents a great power in
Russia’s national economy, namely, the landowners and capitalists. The
Vekhi group helps these worthy gentlemen collect an armoury of
weapons for their ideological and political struggle against democracy and
socialism. This is something that cannot be destroyed by
dissolutions of the Duma or, in general, by any political disturbances

    


    

occurring under the existing social and economic system. As long as the
class of landed proprietors and capitalists exists, their hack journalists,
the Izgoyevs, Struves, Franks and Co. will also exist. As far as the
“work” of the Muromtsevs and, in general, of the Cadets in the First Duma
is concerned, it could be “destroyed” by the dissolution of the Duma
(for, in point of fact, they did not do any work; they only indulged in
words which, far from serving the people, corrupted them).  

The Cadets in the Third Duma are the same party, with the same
ideology, the same policy, and to a large degree even the same people, as
those in the First Duma. And that is precisely why the Cadets in the Third
Duma are less “suspended in mid-air” than they were in the First
Duma. Don’t you understand this, my dear Mr. Potresov? You were wrong in
undertaking a discussion of “the contemporary drama of our social and
political trends”! Let me tell you, in strict confidence, that in the
future, too, and probably for quite some time to come, the political
activity of the Cadets will not be “sterile”—not only because of the
reactionary “fecundity” of Vekhi, but also because so long as
there are political minnows in the ranks of democracy, there will be food
for the big fish of liberalism to thrive on. So long as there is the kind
of instability in the ranks of the socialists, the kind of flabbiness among
the representatives of democracy so vividly exemplified by figures like
Potresov, the skill of the “empiricists” of liberalism will always prove
sufficient to catch these minnows. Don’t worry, Cadets: you’ll have plenty
to feed on so long as the Potresovs exist!  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Osvobozhdeniye (Emancipation)—a fortnightly
bourgeois-liberal magazine, published abroad from 1902 to 1905 under the
editorship of P. B. Struve. From January 1904 it became the organ of the
liberal-monarchist Osvobozhdeniye League. Later, the
Osvobozhdeniye group made up the core of the Cadet Party, the
chief bourgeois party in Russia.





[2]
Lenin refers to his article “The Victory of the Cadets and the
Tasks of the Workers’ Party”, written in March 1906, and published as
a pamphlet in April of that year





[3]
Octobrists—members of the Union of October Seventeenth,
founded in November 1905, as a counter-revolutionary party representing the
big industrial and commercial capitalists and the land lords who farmed
their land on capitalist lines. The Octobrists claimed to accept the
Manifesto of October 17, but fully supported the domestic and foreign
policy of the tsarist government. The leaders of the Octobrists were
K. Guchkov, a big industrialist, and M. Rodzyanko, who owned huge landed
estates.



 
  


|

II

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## II









Lenin: 1911/twwliqus: II







V. I.  

      Lenin
Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov



    

II

Mr. Potresov’s arguments dovetail even less when he
discusses Narodism. The Cadets he calls “former democrats” and even
“former liberals”; of the peasantry he says: “By entering political
life, the peasantry [in Mr. Potresov’s opinion, they have not yet entered
political life] would usher in an entirely new chapter in history, that of
peasant democracy, which would spell the end of the old, intellectual,
Narodnik democracy”.  
 

So the Cadets are former democrats and the peasantry are future
democrats. But who, then, are the present democrats? Was there no
democratic, no mass democratic, movement in Russia in 1905–07? Was there
none in 1908-10? Potresov resorts to “round-about” phrases, to phrases
that evade the essence of the matter, in order to throw a veil over the
present. The direct and plain recognition of what indubitably exists at
present flies in the face of the whole liquidationist philosophy of the
Potresovs, for it would mean the plain and direct recognition of the now
indubitable historical fact that the Cadets never represented any
more or less mass democratic movement in Russia, that they never pursued a
democratic policy, whereas the peasantry, the very same “peasant
millions” of whom Mr. Potresov also speaks, did and do represent this
bourgeois democratic movement (with all its limitations). Mr. Potresov
evades this cardinal question precisely in order to save the
liquidationist philosophy. But he cannot save it!  

In trying to ignore the past and the present of the peas ant democratic
movement, Mr. Potresov again misses the mark when he confidently discusses
the future. Late again, my dear sir! You yourself speak of the “possible
consequences of the law of

November 9”[1]; hence, you yourself admit the possibility (purely
abstract, of course) of its success. But as a result of this success the
“new chapter in history” may prove to be a chapter not only in
the history of peasant democracy, but also in the history of
peasant agrarians.  

The development of peasant farming in Russia and, consequently, of
peasant land tenure and peasant politics cannot proceed along any other but
capitalist lines. In its essence, the agrarian programme of the Narodniks,
as formulated, for instance, in the well-known Platform of the

104[2] (in the First and Second Dumas), far from contradicting this
capitalist development, implies the creation of conditions for the most
widespread and most rapid capitalist development. The agrarian programme
now in operation, on the other hand, implies the slowest and most narrow
capitalist development, one most impeded by the survivals of
serfdom. Objective historical and economic conditions have not yet provided
an answer to the question—which

    

of these programmes will, in the final analysis, determine the form
bourgeois agrarian relations will assume in the new Russia.  

Such are the plain facts which the liquidators find it necessary to
confuse.  


   “In face of all the changes,” writes Mr. Potresov, referring to
   the changes in the ranks of the intellectual, Narodnik democratic
   movement, “one thing has remained unchanged: so far [I] the real
   peasantry have not introduced any corrections of their own into
   intellectualist ideology with its peasant trimmings.”  


This is a statement of the purest Vekhi type and it is
absolutely false. In 1905, the “real” peasant masses, the rank and file
themselves, acted in the open historical arena, and introduced quite a
number of “corrections” into the “intellectualist ideology” of the
Narodniks and the Narodnik parties. Not all of these corrections have been
understood by the Narodniks, but the peasantry did
introduce them. In 1906 and in 1907, the very “real” peasantry
created the

Trudovik[3] groups and the Draft Platform of the 104, thereby
introducing a number of corrections, some of which even the
Narodniks noted. It is generally recognised, for example, that the “real”
peasantry revealed their economic aspirations, and approved
private and co-operative land tenure in place of the “commune”.  

The Vekhi people who are purging liberalism of democracy,
systematically converting it into a servant of the money-bags, are properly
performing their mission in his tory when they declare that the movement of
1905–07 was one of intellectuals, and assert that the real peasantry
introduced no corrections of their own into the intellectualist
ideology. The tragicomedy of liquidationism is its failure to notice that
its assertions have been and are simply a rehash of the Vekhi
ideas.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The law of November 9 (22), 1906 on “Additions to Certain
Regulations of the Existing Law on Peasant Land Ownership and Land
Tenure”, and the law of June 14 (27), 1910 on “Amendments and Addenda to
Certain Regulations on Peasant Land Ownership” defined the regulations for
the withdrawal of the peasants from the village communes, and for obtaining
the title to their allotments.





[2]
Platform of the 104—the Land Reform Bill of the Trudovik
deputies to the First and Second Dumas was based on Narodnik principles of
equalitarian land tenure: the creation of a national fund from state, crown
and monastery lands, and also privately-owned lands if the estates exceeded
the established “labour standard” (i.e., the amount of land that can be
tilled by a peasant family without the help of hired labour). Provision was
also made for compensation in respect of alienated land. The implementation
of the land reform was to be the responsibility of local land committees.





[3]
Trudoviks (Trudovik group)—a group of petty-bourgeois
democrats in the Dumas composed of peasants and intellectuals with Narodnik
leanings. The Trudovik group was formed in April 1906 from peasant deputies
to the First Duma.  

The Trudoviks demanded the abolition of all social-estate and national
restrictions, the democratisation of urban and rural local government, and
universal suffrage in elections to the State Duma. Their agrarian programme
was that outlined in Note 49. Owing to the class nature of the small
landowning peasantry the Trudoviks

   

in the State Duma wavered between the Cadets and the
Social-Democrats. Since the Trudoviks to some extent represented the
peasantry, the Bolsheviks in the Duma collaborated with them on certain
questions relating to the general struggle against tsarism and against the
Cadets. In 1917 the Trudovik group merged with the Popular Socialist Party
and actively supported the bourgeois Provisional Government. After the
October Socialist Revolution the Trudoviks supported the bourgeois
counter-revolution.



 
  

I

|

III

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## III









Lenin: 1911/twwliqus: III







V. I.  

      Lenin
Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov



    

III

This transformation becomes even more obvious when
Mr. Potresov proceeds to discuss Marxism. The intelligentsia, he writes,
“... by its organisation of party circles ... overshadowed the
proletariat”. You cannot deny the fact that it is the bourgeoisie that has
widely circulated this idea through

    

Vekhi and through the entire liberal press, and has used it
against the proletariat. In the essay in which he formulated this idea,
Axelrod wrote that “history in a prankish mood” could provide bourgeois
democracy with a leader from the Marxist school. History in a prankish mood
made use of the pit which Axelrod obligingly threatened to dig for the
Bolsheviks, and has put Axelrod himself in it!  

If you turn to the objective facts of history, you will find that
all of them, the entire period of 1905–07, even the elections to
the Second Duma (to cite as an example one of the simplest, though not one
of the most important, facts), proved conclusively that “the
organisation of party circles” did not “overshadow” the proletariat, hut
developed directly into the organisation of the parties and trade
unions of the proletarian masses.  

But let us pass on to the main, or “central”, point of Mr. Potresov’s
Herostratean effort. He claims that Marxist thought “is doping itself with
the hashish of trivialities”—the struggle against Machism and the
struggle against liquidationism, “debating anything and everything
... other than those things that constitute the nerve of a social and
political trend like Marxism, anything but questions of economics and
questions of politics”. And what a host there is of such questions!
exclaims Mr. Potresov. “How is the economic development of Russia
proceeding, what realignments of forces does this development effect under
the cloak of reaction, what is going on in the countryside and in the
cities, what changes does this development introduce in the social
composition of the working class of Russia, etc., etc? Where are the
answers, or even the initial attempts at answers, to these questions, where
is the economic school of Russian Marxism?”  

The answer, or at any rate an initial attempt at an answer, is to be
found in the very “hierarchy”, whose existence Mr. Potresov maliciously
and hypocritically denies. The development of the Russian state system
during the past three centuries shows that its class character has been
changing in one definite direction. The monarchy of the seventeenth century
with the Boyars’ Duma did not resemble the bureaucratic-aristocratic
monarchy of the eighteenth century. The monarchy of the first half of the
nineteenth century was

    

not the same as the monarchy of 1861–1904. In the 1908–10 period a new
phase was clearly outlined, marking one more step in the same
direction, which may be described as the direction leading towards a
bourgeois monarchy. The character of the Third Duma and the present
agrarian policy are closely connected with this step. The new phase, there
fore, is not an accident but represents a specific stage in the capitalist
evolution of the country. This new phase does not solve the old problems,
nor can it do so; consequently, since it is unable to eliminate
them, it calls for the use of new methods of approach to old solutions
of old problems. That is the peculiar feature of this cheerless, gloomy,
difficult period, which, however, has proved to be inevitable. The
particular economic and political characteristics of this period have given
rise to the distinctive features of the ideological alignments in the ranks
of the Marxists. Those who recognise the new methods of approach to the old
solution of old problems are finding a common ground in their present joint
practical tasks, although they are still divided as to how the old
solutions should have been applied or advanced at one juncture or another
during the preceding period. Those who deny (or who do not understand) the
new methods of approach, or that we are confronted with the old problems
and are heading towards the old solution of these problems, are in
fact deserting Marxism, are in fact surrendering to the
liberals (as Potresov, Levitsky, and others have done) or to the idealists
and the syndicalists (as V. Bazarov and others have done).  

Since they have surrendered themselves to alien people and alien ideas,
both Potresov and Bazarov, as well as those who share their views,
inevitably lose their bearings and find themselves in a most comical and
false position. Mr. Potresov beats his breast and shouts: “Where
is the initial attempt at an answer, and what is that
answer?” Martov, who knows the answer just as well, tries to
assure the public that that answer recognises “the bourgeoisie in
power”—a common trick whereby liberals take advantage of the temporary
enforced silence of their opponents! At the same time they ask us with an
offended air: “What do you mean by liquidationism?” This very trick, most
worthy gentlemen, is one of the methods of liquidators (if not of
renegades);

    

people claiming allegiance to a

      “whole”[1]

take advantage of its loss of strength to assure the public that there is
no “answer”, although the answer has already been given by “the whole”.


Liquidationism, writes Mr. Potresov, is “a figment of a diseased
imagination”, for you cannot liquidate “what is already beyond
liquidation and actually no longer exists as an organised whole”.  

I am not in a position fully to convey to the reader my opinion of
these lines; but in order to convey an approximate idea of it, let me ask
the reader: What should we call a person whose closest associates and
colleagues accept proposals favourable to them made by the “whole”
(precisely as a “whole”) and who the following day declares in the press
that there is no “whole”?  

But, enough of that.  

The following question of principle is involved: can the view on the
necessity for the old solution of the old problems change according to the
degree of disintegration of the “whole”? or even, if you like,
with its disappearance? It is obvious to everyone that it cannot. If the
objective conditions, if the fundamental economic and political features of
the present epoch, demand the old solution, then the greater the
disintegration, the less there is left of the “whole”, the more one must
be concerned about, and the more ardently must the publicist speak about
the need for the “whole”. As we have already pointed out, we must
recognise the new method of approach; but who is to apply them? Obviously
the “whole”. Obviously, the tasks of the publicist as seen by those who
understand the importance of the period we are passing through and its
basic political features, are diametrically opposed to the entire
line of the Potresovs. Certainly, no one can even seriously think of
denying the connection between the “answer” which I outlined above (to
the question of the economics and politics of the present period) and anti
liquidationism.  

Let us now turn from the general principles involved in the
presentation of the question to its concrete historical aspect. That trend
in Marxism which advocates the necessity

    

of the old solution and pursues its line accordingly has fully taken shape
in the 1908–10 period. Another trend has also taken shape, one which
during all these three years has opposed the recognition of the
“old solution” and the restoration of the old fundamental forms of the
whole. It would be ridiculous to deny this fact. And a third trend which
has taken shape has failed during all these three years to understand the
new forms of approach, the importance of work in the Third Duma, etc. Such
people have recognised the old solution only in words, as one that has been
learned by rote but not understood, as words repeated by force of habit but
not applied consciously and intelligently to the changed
circumstances (changed at least in the sphere of work in the Duma, but, of
course, not only in that sphere).  

The connection between liquidationism and the general philistine mood
of “weariness” is obvious. The “weary” (particularly those weary as a
result of doing nothing) are making no effort to work out for themselves an
exact answer to the question of the economic and political appraisal of the
current moment: they all disagree with the above appraisal, formally
accepted by all as the appraisal given on behalf of the whole; but
they all fear even to think of opposing to it their own exact
viewpoint, for instance that of the collaborators of the liquidationist
Nasha Zarya,

Zhizn,[3] etc. The “weary” insist: the old no longer exists, it
has lost its vitality, it is lifeless, etc., etc.; but they have not the
slightest intention of racking their brains for an answer, a purely
political and precisely formulated answer, to the unavoidable question
(unavoidable for every honest publicist): what exactly should be
substituted for the old, and whether it is necessary to restore “what is
[allegedly] beyond liquidation, since it is already liquidated” (according
to Potresov). For three years they have been abusing the old, reviling
it—especially from such platforms as are barred to the advocates of the
old—and now, falling into the arms of the

      Izgoyevs,[2]

they exclaim: What nonsense, what a figment of the imagination all that
talk about liquidationism is!  
 

Of such “weary” people, of Mr. Potresov and Co., one
cannot say in the well-known verses of the poet: “... No traitors
they—just weary carrying their cross; the fire of anger and of sorrow,
while mid-way still, they

lost”.[4] 

“Weary” persons of this kind, who ascend the rostrum of the publicist
and from it justify their “weariness” of the old, their unwillingness to
work on the old, belong to the category of people who are not just “weary
but are treacherous as well.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
i.e., the Party.—Tr.  

[2]
See his article in Russkaya

Mysl[5] 1910, on Potresov the sup porter of Vekhi
ideas. From such embraces Potresov will never wash himself clean.
—Lenin
 



[3]
Zhizn (Life)—a magazine published in Moscow by the
Menshevik liquidators. There were two issues, in August and September 1910.





[5]
Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought)—a monthly magazine
of the liberal bourgeoisie published in Moscow from 1880. After the 1905
Revolution it became the organ of the Right wing of the Cadet Party. During
the period of its existence Lenin called it “Black Hundred Thought”. The
magazine was closed down in the middle of 1918.





[4]
Lenin quotes N. A. Nekrasov’s lyrical comedy The Bear Hunt.



 
  

II

|

IV

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## IV









Lenin: 1911/twwliqus: IV







V. I.  

      Lenin
Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov



    

IV

The philosophical struggle of the materialists, the
Marxists, against the Machists, i.e., against the idealists, is also
classed by Mr. Potresov as “triviality”. Mr. Potresov is highly indignant
over the “orgy” of philosophising (“Oh, my friend Arkady Nikolayevich,
spare me your

eloquence!”[2]) and, in this connection mentioning Plekhanov and myself
as representing the materialists, he describes us as “political
figures of yesterday”. I had a good laugh over this expression. There
is so much obvious and amusing boasting in this that our hare really
deserves a bit of the bear’s

 ear.[1]

Plekhanov and others—“political figures of yesterday”! The political
figures of today are apparently Potresov and his
“gang”. Charming and frank.  

Whenever Arkady Nikolayevich accidentally speaks with out eccentricity
or grimaces, he defeats himself superbly. Just make a little effort, Arkady
Nikolayevich, and try to think: you deny the existence of
liquidationism as a political trend, as a trend which
distinguishes, not Menshevism from Bolshevism, but Potresov and
Co. from Plekhanov and the Bolsheviks jointly. And yet, while you
deny this, you at the same time describe Plekhanov and myself as
“political figures of yesterday”. Look how clumsy you are:

Plekhanov and I together may be called political figures of
yesterday, precisely because we think that the organisation of yesterday,
as a form of yesterday’s movement (yesterday’s in its principles)
is necessary today. Plekhanov and

    

I differed sharply, and we still differ on questions of what steps
that organisation of yesterday, working on the basis of
that movement of yesterday, should have taken at one juncture or
another; but we are drawn together by the struggle against those who
today deny the very principles of yesterday’s movement
(this includes also the question of hegemony, of which more later), deny
the very foundations of yesterday’s organisation.  

Well, Arkady Nikolayevich, are you still unable to understand what is
meant by liquidationism? Do you still think that Plekhanov and I have been
drawn together by some Machiavellian plot or by a malicious desire to
substitute a “struggle on two fronts” for the “defeat” of
liquidationism?  

But, to return to the “orgy of philosophising”.  

“We know,” writes Mr. Potresov, “what a deep impression on the
consciousness of German Social-Democracy was made, at the time by Engels’s
struggle against Dühring, and how theses, seemingly most abstract,
were actually of vital and concrete significance to the German
working-class movement....” The most abstract theses were of vital and
concrete significance! Another bit of phrase-mongering and nothing else!
Try to explain, if you “know”, what was the “vital and concrete
significance” of Engels’s thesis that Dühring’s
philosophical reflections on time and space were wrong! The trouble with
you is that, like a schoolboy, you learned by rote, that
“Engels’s controversy with Dühring was of great significance”; but
you have not thought about its meaning, and therefore you repeat
what you have learned by rote in a wrong and utterly distorted form. It is
wrong to say that “the most abstract theses [of Engels against
Dühring] were actually of vital and, concrete significance to the
German working-class movement”. The significance of Engels’s most
abstract theses was that they explained to the ideologists of the working
class what was erroneous in the shift from materialism towards positivism
and idealism. If, instead of high-sounding, but hollow, phrases about “a
deep impression” or the “vital and concrete significance” of “the most
abstract theses”, you had given such an exposition (that is, one more or
less definitive from the philosophical standpoint) of Engels’s views, you
would have seen

    

at once that the reference to Engels’s controversy with Dühring goes
against you.  

“We know,” Mr. Potresov continues, “what part the struggle against
subjective sociology played in the history of the formation of Russian
Marxism.” ... And what about the part played by Lavrov’s and
Mikhailovsky’s positivist and idealist doctrines in the errors of
subjective sociology? Every shot of yours, Arkady Nikolayevich, misses its
mark. If you cite an historical parallel, you must single out and point out
exactly what is similar in the different events; if not, what you get will
not be an historical comparison but words cast to the winds. If we take the
historical parallel you cite, we must ask: would the “formation” of
Russian Marxism have been possible without

Beltov’s[3] explanation of the principles of philosophical materialism
and of their importance in refuting Lavrov and Mikhailovsky? There can only
be one answer to this question, and that answer, if we are to use the
historical parallel in order to draw conclusions with regard to the
controversy with the Machists—goes against Mr. Potresov.  

...“But precisely because we know all this [why, of course! haven’t we
just seen what it amounts to when Mr. Potresov writes: “We know all
this”?], we want to see a living and real connection established at last
between the philosophical controversy we are dealing with, and the Marxist
social and political trend, its problems and
requirements. Meanwhile”—here follows a reference to Kautsky’s letter in
which it was said that Machism is a Privatsache (a private
affair), that the controversy over it is a “fata morgana”, etc.


The reference to Kautsky is typical of philistine judgement. The point
is not that Kautsky is “unprincipled”, as Mr. Potresov remarks
sarcastically (à la Izgoyev), but that Kautsky does not
know, nor does he claim to know, the state of affairs in regard to
Russian Machism. In his letter Kautsky admits that Plekhanov is well versed
in Marxism, and expresses his own conviction that idealism cannot be
reconciled with Marxism, and that Machism is not idealism (or that not
every form of Machism is idealism). It is obvious that Kautsky is
mistaken on the last point, particularly as regards Russian
Machism. But it is a pardonable mistake on his part, for he has never
studied Machism as a whole, and

    

his opinion was expressed in a private letter obviously writ ten as a
warning against exaggerating the differences. But a Russian
Marxist writer, who, under such circumstances, refers to Kautsky, merely
betrays a philistine laziness of mind and cowardice in the fight. In 1908,
when the letter was written, Kautsky may have hoped that in a
certain interpretation Machism could be “reconciled” with
materialism. But to refer to Kautsky in connection with this
question in Russia in 1909–10 means to undertake the task of
reconciling the Russian Machists with the materialists. Does Mr. Potresov
or anybody else really undertake this task in all seriousness?  

Kautsky is not unprincipled; but Potresov and Co., who want to proclaim
Machism “a private affair”, are a model of unprincipledness
among Russian Marxists today. Kautsky was quite sincere and not a bit
unprincipled when, in 1908, never having read the Russian Machists, he
advised them to seek peace with Plekhanov as a man versed in
Marxism, and as a materialist; for Kautsky has always declared in favour of
materialism and against idealism, and he expressed the same opinion in his
letter. But Potresov and Co., who in 1909–10 hide behind Kautsky, have
not a grain of sincerity, not a trace of respect for
principles.  

You say, Mr. Potresov, that you fail to see any living and real
connection between the philosophical controversy and the Marxist trend?
Well, permit me, a political figure of yesterday, most respectfully to
point out to you at least the following circumstances and considerations:

(1) The controversy over the question as to what is philosophical
materialism and why deviations from it are erroneous, dangerous and
reactionary always has “a real and living connection” with “the
Marxist social and political trend”—otherwise the latter would not be
Marxist, would not be social and political, would not be a trend. Only
narrow-minded “realistic politicians” of reformism or anarchism can deny
the “reality” of this connection.

(2) Considering the wealth and many-sidedness of the ideological content of
Marxism, there is nothing surprising in the fact that in Russia, just as in
other countries, various historical periods give prominence now to one, now
to another particular aspect of Marxism. In Germany before 1848, the
philosophical forming

    

of Marxism was the aspect particularly stressed; in 1848 it was the
political ideas of Marxism; in the fifties and sixties it was the economic
doctrine of Marxism. In Russia before the revolution, the aspect that was
particularly stressed was the application of the economic doctrine of
Marxism to Russian reality; during the revolution, it was Marxist politics;
since the revolution it is Marxist philosophy. This does not mean that any
of the aspects of Marxism may at any time be ignored; it only means that
the prevalence of interest in one aspect or another does not
depend on subjective wishes, but on the totality of historical conditions.

(3) It is not by mere chance that the period of social and political
reaction, the period when the rich lessons of the revolution are being
“digested”, is also the period when the fundamental theoretical,
including the philosophical, problems are of prime importance to any
living trend.

(4) The progressive trends of Russian thought cannot fall back upon a great
philosophical tradition, such as that connected with the Encyclopaedists of
the eighteenth century in France, or with the epoch of classical philosophy
from Kant to Hegel and Feuerbach in Germany. That is why it was necessary
for the advanced class of Russia to sort out its philosophy and there is
nothing strange in the fact that the belated “sorting-out” came about
after this advanced class had, during the recent great events, fully
matured for its independent historical role.

(5) This philosophic “sorting out” had been ripening for a long time in
other countries as well, because modern physics, for instance, had posed a
number of new questions which dialectical materialism had to “cope
with”. In this respect, “our” (to use Potresov’s expression)
philosophical controversy is of more than just a certain, i.e., Russian,
significance. Europe provided material for a “freshening” of
philosophical thought; and Russia, which was lagging behind, seized upon
this material with particular “eagerness” during the period of enforced
lull in 1908–10.

(6) Belousov recently said of the Third Duma that it is a sanctimonious
body. He grasped correctly the class characteristic of the Third Duma in
this respect and justly branded the hypocrisy of the Cadets.  

Not accidentally, but of necessity, have our reactionaries in
general, and the liberal (Vekhi, Cadet) reactionaries in

    

particular, “pounced on” religion. The stick and knout alone are not
sufficient to serve the purpose; in any case the stick is
cracked. Vekhi is helping the advanced bourgeoisie to find a new,
ideological stick, a spiritual stick. Machism, as a species of idealism, is
objectively a weapon in the hands of the reactionaries, a vehicle
of reaction. The struggle against Machism “at the bottom” is therefore
not accidental but inevitable in an historical period (1908–10) when “at
the top” we see not only the “sanctimonious Duma” of the Octobrists and
Purishkeviches, but also sanctimonious Cadets and a sanctimonious liberal
bourgeoisie.  

Mr. Potresov made the “reservation” that he was “not at present
touching” upon the subject of

“god-building”.[4] That is precisely what distinguishes the
unprincipled and philistine publicist Potresov from Kautsky. Kautsky
knew nothing either of the god-building of the Machists
or of the god-worshipping Vekhi people, and therefore he
could afford to say that not every type of Machism is
idealism. But Potresov knows all this, and by “not touching”
upon the main thing (the main thing to persons with a narrow
“publicist” approach) acts the hypocrite. By proclaiming the struggle
against Machism “a private affair” Mr. Potresov and his like are abetting
Vekhi in the “social and political” sense.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
The allusion is to I. A. Krylov’s fable “The Hare at the Hunt”, in
which the hare boasts about how “we” killed the bear.—Tr.

 



[2]
Lenin quotes the words of Bazarov from Turgenev’s Fathers and
Sons.





[3]
N. Beltov—G. V. Plekhanov’s pseudonym under which his book
The Development of the Monist View of History was published in
1895.





[4]
God-builders—a religious-philosophical trend hostile to
Marxism, which arose during the period of Stolypin reaction among a section
of the Party intellectuals who had broken with Marxism after the defeat of
the 1905–07 Revolution. The “god-builders” (A. V. Lunacharsky,
V. Bazarov, and others) advocated the creation of a new “socialist”
religion, attempting to reconcile Marxism with religion. At one time Maxim
Gorky was associated with them.  

A meeting of the enlarged Editorial Board of Proletary, held
on June 8–17 (21–30), 1909, condemned the “god-building” trend and in a
special resolution declared that the Bolshevik faction had nothing in
common with such distortion of scientific socialism.  

The reactionary character of god-building was exposed by Lenin in his
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, and in letters to Gorky during
February-April 1908 and November-December 1913.



 
  

III

|

V

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## V









Lenin: 1911/twwliqus: V







V. I.  

      Lenin
Those Who Would Liquidate Us
Re: Mr. Potresov and V. Bazarov



    

V

In passing from Mr. Potresov to Bazarov, we must note, to
begin with, that, as regards the philosophical controversy, our answers to
the former also hold good for the latter. There is only one point to be
added: one can quite under stand V. Bazarov’s tolerant attitude to
Mr. Potresov, his insistence on finding “some truth” in Potresov’s
arguments, for Mr. Potresov (like all the liquidators), while disavowing
Machism formally and in words, yields to it, as a matter of fact,
on the most essential point. The Machists as representatives of a trend,
and as a group with a “platform” of its own, have never really dared to
demand, anything more than that their departure from Marxism be regarded as
“a private affair”! It is therefore not surprising that Potresov and
Bazarov are ogling each other. The group of liquidationist

    

writers and the group of Machist writers are, in our period of
disintegration, indeed at one in defending the “freedom of
disintegration” from the adherents of Marxism, from the champions of the
theoretical foundations of Marxism. And, as even Bazarov has
proved by his article, this solidarity is not confined to
questions of philosophy.  

I say “even”, for Bazarov, in particular, has always been
distinguished for his very thoughtful attitude to serious political
problems. This fact must be mentioned if we are to appreciate the meaning
of the incredible vacillations of this man, and not merely for the purpose
of stressing the very useful past activity of a writer who is now out to
earn the laurels of Herostratus.  

Bazarov, for instance, made the following statement of a Herostratean
nature: “In my opinion, the biggest and yet most trivial misunderstanding
of our times is the notorious question of the hegemony of the working
class”. There seems to be some fate pursuing the Machists in our
midst. Some of them defend the “freedom of disintegration”, declaring
that otzovism is a legal shade of opinion; others, who see the folly and
harm of otzovism, frankly hold out their hands to the liquidators in the
sphere of politics. It is the liquidators in Nasha Zarya, and in
Zhizn, and in The Social

Movement,[1] who are waging a direct and indirect struggle against
the idea of this hegemony. We are sorry to state that Bazarov has
joined their camp.  

What are his arguments on the substance of the matter? Five years ago
such hegemony was a fact. “At present, for quite obvious reasons, that
hegemony has disappeared. More—it has turned into its direct opposite.”
The proof:

“In our days, in order to become popular in democratic circles of society,
it has become a necessity to kick at Marxism”. Example: Chukovsky.  

You read these lines and you can hardly believe your eyes. Bazarov,
who claimed to be a Marxist, has turned into a has-been, into one capable
of flirting with the Potresovs.  

You have no fear of God in you, V. A. Bazarov. Chukovsky and
other liberals, as well as a host of Trudovik democrats, have always
“kicked” at Marxism, and particularly ever since 1906; but was not
“hegemony” a fact in 1906? Get out of your liberal-journalistic
cubby-hole, consider at least

    

the attitude of the peasant deputies in the Third Duma to the working-class
deputies. The mere juxtaposition of the unquestionable facts of their
political behaviour during the past three years, even a mere comparison
between their formulations of motions for next business and the cadet
formulations, to say nothing of a comparison between the political
declarations made in the Duma and the conditions under Which the large
masses of the population have been living during this period, proves
incontrovertibly that even today hegemony is a fact. The hegemony of the
working class is the political influence which that class (and its
representatives) exercises upon other sections of the population by helping
them to purge their democracy (where there is democracy) of undemocratic
admixtures, by criticising the narrowness and short-sightedness of all
bourgeois democracy, by carrying on the struggle against “Cadetism”
(meaning the corrupting ideological content of the speeches and policy of
the liberals), etc., etc. There is nothing more characteristic of our
present times than the fact that Bazarov could write such
incredible things, and that a group of journalists who also consider
themselves friends of the workers and adherents of Marxism patted him
indulgently on the back for this!  


   “It is absolutely impossible to foretell what will be the state of
   affairs at the moment of the coming revival,” Bazarov assures the
   readers of the liquidationist magazine. “If the spiritual character of
   urban and rural democracy is approximately the same as it was five years
   ago, then the hegemony of Marxism will again become a fact.... But there
   is absolutely nothing out of the way in the supposition that the
   character of democracy will undergo a substantial change. Imagine, for
   instance, that among the petty bourgeoisie of the Russian villages and
   cities a sufficiently radical sentiment exists against the political
   privileges of the ruling classes, that it is sufficiently united and
   active, but is permeated with a strongly nationalistic spirit. Since
   Marxists, cannot think of any compromises with nationalism or
   anti-Semitism, it is obvious that under such circumstances there will
   not be even a trace of hegemony.”  


In addition to being wrong, all this is monstrously absurd. If certain
sections of the population combine hostility to privilege with nationalist
sentiments, surely it is the duty of the leader to explain to them that
such a combination hinders the abolition of privilege. Can the struggle
against privilege be waged unless it is combined with the struggle

    

of the petty bourgeois who suffer from nationalism, against the petty
bourgeois who gain from it? Every struggle of every petty bourgeois against
every kind of privilege always pears the imprint of
petty-bourgeois narrow-mindedness and half-heartedness, and it is the
business of the “leader” to combat these qualities. Bazarov argues like
the Cadets, like the Vekhi writers. Or, more correctly, Bazarov
has joined the camp of Potresov and Co., who already have been arguing this
way for a long time.  

What cannot be seen on the surface does not exist. What the Chukovskys
and Potresovs do not see is not real. Such are the premises of Bazarov’s
arguments, which fly in the face of Marxism. Marxism teaches us that so
long as capitalism exists the petty-bourgeois masses must inevitably suffer
from undemocratic privileges (theoretically, such privileges are “not
indispensable” under pure capitalism, but the
purification of capitalism will continue until its death), that
they must suffer from economic oppression. Therefore, so long as capitalism
exists it will always be the duty of the “leader” to explain the
source of these privileges and this oppression, to expose their class
roots, to provide an example of struggle against them, expose the falsity
of the liberal methods of struggle, etc., etc.  

That is how Marxists think. That is how they regard the duties of the
“leader” in the camp of those whose condition does not permit any
reconciliation with privilege, in the camp, not only of the proletarians,
but also of the semi-proletarian and petty-bourgeois masses. The
Chukovskys, however, think that once that camp has suffered reverses, has
been hard-pressed and driven underground, “hegemony has disappeared”, and
the “question of hegemony has become a most trivial misunderstanding”.


When I see Bazarov, who says such disgraceful things, marching hand in
hand with the Potresovs, Levitskys and Co., with those who assure the
working class that what it needs is not the leadership, but a
class party; when, on the other hand, I see Plekhanov starting (to use the
contemptuous expression of the magnificent Potresov) “a row” at the
slightest indications of serious vacillation in the question of leadership,
I say to myself, the Bolsheviks would indeed be the wild fanatics obsessed
by factionalism their enemies

    

represent them to be, if, the circumstances being as they are, they wavered
even for a moment, if they doubted even for one second that their duty, the
duty emanating from all the traditions of Bolshevism, from the very spirit
of its teachings and policies, is to hold out their hands to Plekhanov and
to express their full comradely sympathy with him. We differed, and still
differ, on the questions as to how the leading classes (“hegemons”)
should have acted at one time or another in the past. But in the present
period of disintegration, we are comrades in the struggle against those to
whom the question of hegemony is nothing but “a most trivial
misunderstanding”. As for the Potresovs, Bazarovs, etc., they are
strangers to us, no less strangers than the Chukovskys.  

Let this be taken note of by those good fellows who think that the
policy of rapprochement with Plekhanov is a narrow policy that “smacks of
factionalism”; who would like to “extend” the policy to include a
reconciliation with the Potresovs, Bazarovs, etc.; and who absolutely
refuse to understand why we regard such “conciliationism” as either
hopeless stupidity or abject intrigue-mongering.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Social Movement in Russia at the Beginning of the Twentieth
Century—a five-volume Menshevik publication (four volumes were
published) under the editorship of L. Martov, P. Maslov,
A. N. Potresov. Plekhanov, who was a member of the original editorial
board, left it at the end of 1908 because he disagreed with the inclusion
of a liquidationist article by A. N. Potresov in the first volume.



 
  

IV

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadets on “Two Camps” and “Sensible Compromise”









Lenin: The Cadets on 'Two Camps' and 'Sensible Compromise'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadets on “Two Camps” and “Sensible Compromise”




Published:
Zvezda, No. 8, February 5, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 82-86.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The answer given by Rech to the semi-official
organ of the Cabinet on the question of the “slogan” for the elections to
the Fourth Duma and on the present-day political alignment represents an
interesting and significant phenomenon.  

Rech agrees with Russkiye

Vedomosti[1] that “the elections to the Fourth Duma will be a
contest between two camps only: the Progressists and the Rights”. “Votes
will have to be cast not for parties, nor for individual candidates, but
for or against the consolidation of the constitutional system in
Russia. [“Consolidation” is a very charming way of putting it!] The
political meaning of this slogan ... is an objective acknowledgement of the
indisputable fact that the line pursued by the government has again united
the entire opposition, both to the right and to the left of the Cadets.”
The Cadets will constitute “the centre of this politically heterogeneous
group”, and, although they form part of it, “will renounce their former
programme and tactics just as little as did the Social-Democrats when they
joined the pre-October alliances” (the editorial, January 21).  

“Gentlemen, we can say in reply to the semi-official and official
press, it is you yourselves who have been instrumental in uniting us.... At
present political trends in Russia are merging to an ever greater extent in
two big camps—for and against the Constitution.... Our task at present is
the same, again the same, just as it was before October 17...” (ibid.).


In assessing these observations we must distinguish between the
conditions attending the elections to the Fourth Duma and the social and
political meaning of the changes under discussion (the “slogan” and the
alignments). The

    

circumstances of the elections in general, in the provinces in particular,
will certainly compel the “opposition” to resort to the vague non-party
term

“Progressists”[2] on an even wider scale than before. The refusal to
legalise even such parties as the Cadets will inevitably lead to this, and
the bewilderment of the semi-official organ of the Cabinet on this score
is, of course, nothing but sheer hypocrisy. In the big cities, for
instance, as the Cadets themselves admit in that very same editorial,
independent candidates of “groups more to the left” (to use the
expression of Russkiye Vedomosti) will stand for election. This
alone shows that there can be no question of just two camps.  

Further, Rech thought it best completely to forget the
existence of a worker curia, as provided by the present election
laws. Finally, with regard to the elections in the villages (the peasant
curia) it must be said that here even the word “Progressists”
will undoubtedly be avoided; but it will probably not be the Cadets who
will constitute the actual “centre” of the “politically
heterogeneous” or politically undefinable groups.  

What, then, does the talk about two camps amount to? To the
fact that it pleases the Cadets, in speaking of the present political
situation, to narrow down their field of vision to include only
those elements that constitute the majority in the Third Duma. The Cadet
gentlemen are willing to recognise as political “camps” only that
insignificant section of the population represented by these
elements. Hitherto the main division in this small corner created
by the coup d’état of June 3 has been: the Rights, the Octobrists,
the Cadets. (It is well known that the character of the Third Duma was
determined, in the final analysis, by two majorities: the Rights with the
Octobrists and the Octobrists with the Cadets.) Now (according to the
forecast of Russkiye Vedomosti, with which Rech is in
agreement) these three elements will be divided into two
“camps”: the Rights and Progressists.  

We fully admit that these predictions of the liberals are based not on
the wishes of the liberals alone, but on objective facts as well—on the
changes in the political situation and in the political sentiments of the
Russian bourgeoisie. It would be impermissible, however, to forget that

    

one can speak of two camps only when the field of observation is
limited to the majority in the Third Duma. It would be impermissible to
forget that the actual meaning of all this talk is nothing more
than the tendency on the part of the Octobrist and the Cadet “camps” to
draw closer together, merge and unite in the Progressist “camp” (with the
tacit understanding, of course, that a more or less consider able section
of the Octobrist camp will defect to the camp of the Rights). When the
Cadets say: “we” have been united, again “we” have one task, etc.,
these words “we”, “us”, “our” actually mean nothing more
than the Octobrists and the Cadets.  

Now, what has united “them”? What is “their” task? What is
“their” slogan for the elections to the Fourth Duma? “The consolidation
of the Constitution”, reply Russkiye Vedomosti and
Rech. This reply is only seemingly definite; actually, it defines
absolutely nothing; it amounts to the same, absolutely meaningless,
reference to some indefinite “mean” between the Octobrists and the
Cadets. For both Milyukov and Guchkov agree that “Thank God, we have a
Constitution”, but when they dream of making common cause, it is for the
purpose of “consolidating”, not what “we” have, but what we
have not. It is also a dream, and not a very sensible one at that, that
Milyukov and Guchkov, the Cadets and the Octobrists of today, and the
“Progressists” of tomorrow, could agree on a definition of what should be
included in the desired Constitution. They would be unable to agree either
on the legal formulations expressing the Constitution, or on defining what
real interests of what actual classes this Constitution should meet and
safeguard. Hence, the real meaning of this joint slogan amounts to
this: while they are being drawn more closely together by “a
negative aim—that of the struggle against the common enemy” (as
Rech puts it in the same editorial), the Octobrists and the Cadets
cannot define their positive tasks, cannot find in their camps the forces
that would be capable of emerging from the deadlock.  

The observations of Rech on the subject of a “sensible
compromise” in connection with another matter ore a very clearly expressed
admission that they are indeed in a state of deadlock, that it is necessary
to emerge from this state,

    

that this is necessary for both the Octobrists and the Cadets, and that,
after they have emerged, both will be absolutely impotent by themselves.


“During the debate in the Duma on the St. Petersburg sewerage
system,” we read in an editorial in Rech of January 20, “the
unhealthy undercurrent of the controversy was somewhat lessened, and even
the Centre [i.e., the Octobrists] found it possible to accept the sensible
compromise which the people’s freedom group proposed and the municipality
accepted; but the interference of P. A. Stolypin rudely tore away the veil
[you, Messrs. Cadets, would like vexed questions to remain hidden under a
veil, wouldn’t you?] and revealed the same old background, with which
everyone has been disgusted for some time—that of the political
struggle of the state against the municipality.”  

The liberal bourgeoisie in the guise of an innocent—oh, how
innocent!—person dreaming of “sensible compromises” on a businesslike,
non-political basis, and the representatives of the old,
“non-constitutional”, principles in the role of political educators who
tear down the veils and reveal the class background! A sensible compromise,
the liberal muses, means that what the Cadets, the Octobrists and the
non-party bigwigs of capital (the St. Petersburg municipality) have agreed
upon may be conceded. There is nothing sensible in the idea of our yielding
to you, the government replies; the only sensible thing is that you yield
to us.  

The minor question of the sanitation of St. Petersburg, of the
distribution of the responsibilities and rights between local
self-government and autocratic government, became the occasion for the
elucidation of truths of no mean importance. What, indeed, is more
“sensible”—the wishes, dreams and demands of the whole bourgeoisie, or
the power of, say, the Council of the United

Nobility[3]?  

In the eyes of Rech, as well as of the whole Cadet Party, the
criterion of the “wisdom” of a compromise is in its approval by men of
affairs, businessmen, bigwigs, the Octobrists themselves, the wire-pullers
of the St. Petersburg municipality themselves. But the actual
state of affairs—no matter how it is furbished up with phrases like
“Thank God, we have a Constitution”—unmasks these compromises and tears
away these veils rather rudely.  
 

To sum up: “You have been instrumental in uniting us”, Rech
says to the semi-official organ of the Cabinet. Who do they mean by “us”?
It appears that they mean the Octobrists and the Cadets. What have they
united for? For a common task, the consolidation of the Constitution. And
what are we to understand by the Constitution and its consolidation? A
sensible compromise between the Octobrists and the Cadets. What is the
criterion of the wisdom of compromises of this kind? Their approval by the
worst representatives of Russian “Kolupayev”

capitalism,[4] such as the St. Petersburg municipal councillors. And
what is the practical result of these sensible compromises? The result is
that P. A. Stolypin, or the Council of State, or

Tolmachov,[5] etc., “rudely unmask” these compromises.... Oh, these
practical politicians!  

But will there not be a third camp at the elections to the Fourth
Duma—one that realises how senseless, ridiculous and naïve is the
Cadet policy of “sensible compromise”?  What do you think of that,
gentlemen of Rech and Russkiye Vedomosti? 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder)—a daily
newspaper published in Moscow from 1863 by liberal professors of the Moscow
University and Zemstvo personalities; it expressed the views of the liberal
landlords and bourgeoisie. From 1905 it was an organ of the Right Cadets,
and was closed down after the 1917 October Revolution.





[2]
Progressists—chiefly representatives of the urban petty
bourgeoisie, and to some extent of the peasantry, who stood for election to
the Second and Third Dumas.





[3]
Council of the United Nobility—a counter-revolutionary
landlord organisation formed in May 1906, which exercised great influence
on government policy. During the period of the Third State Duma a
considerable number of its members were in the Council of State and leading
centres of the Black-Hundred organisations.





[4]

“Kolupayev” capitalism. Kolupayev is the name of a
kulak in M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s The Mon Repos Retreat. Lenin
described this type of capitalism in “The Agrarian Programme of
Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905–07”





[5]
Tolmachov, I. N.—Governor of Odessa, an extreme reactionary.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Fall of Serfdom









Lenin: The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Fall of Serfdom







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Fiftieth Anniversary of the Fall of Serfdom




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 3, February 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Gazeta text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 87-91.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

February 19, 1911, marks the fiftieth anniversary of the
fall of serfdom in Russia. Everywhere preparations are under way to
celebrate this jubilee. The tsarist government is taking every precaution
to ensure that only the most reactionary views regarding the so-called
“emancipation” of the peasants are put forward in the churches and
schools, in the barracks and at public lectures. Circular letters are being
rushed from St. Petersburg to all parts of Russia, instructing all and
sundry institutions not to order for distribution among the people any
books and pamphlets other than those published by the National Club, i.e.,
by one of the most reactionary parties in the Third Duma. In some places
overzealous governors have even gone so far as to dissolve committees
organised without police “guidance” (for instance, by the

Zemstvos[2]) for the celebration of the anniversary of the Peasant
“Reform”; they are being dissolved for showing insufficient willingness
to conduct the celebrations along the lines demanded by the Black-Hundred
government.  

The government is worried. It sees that no matter how downtrodden,
intimidated, backward and ignorant a worker or a peasant may be, the mere
mention of the fact that fifty years ago the abolition of serfdom was
proclaimed nevertheless stirs and agitates people repressed by the Duma of
the landlords, of the nobility, people who are suffering more than ever
before from the petty tyrannies, violence and oppression of the
feudal-minded landowners and of their police and bureaucrats.  

In Western Europe the last survivals of serfdom were abolished by the
Revolution of 1789 in France and by the

    

revolutions of 1848 in most of the other countries. In Russia, in 1861, the
people, who had for centuries been kept in slavery by the landowners, were
unable to launch a wide spread, open and conscious struggle for
freedom. The peas ant revolts of those days remained isolated, scattered,
spontaneous “riots”, which were easily suppressed. The abolition of
serfdom was effected, not by an insurrectionary people, but by the
government, which realised after its defeat in the Crimean

War[3] that it was no longer possible to maintain the system of serfdom.


It was the landowners themselves, the landowning government of the
autocratic tsar and his officials, that “emancipated” the peasants in
Russia. And these “emancipators” manipulated matters in such a
way that the peasants entered “freedom” stripped to the point of
pauperism; they were released from, slavery to the landowners to fall into
bondage to the very same landowners and their flunkeys.  

The noble landowners “emancipated” the Russian peas ants in such a
way that more than a fifth of all the peasant land was cut off and
taken away by the landlords. The peas ants were compelled to pay
redemption money, i.e., tribute to the former
slaveholders, for their own peasant land drenched with their sweat and
blood. The peasants paid hundreds of millions of rubles in such tribute to
the feudal lords, thus lapsing into ever greater poverty. Not content with
grabbing peasant land and leaving to the peasants the worst and sometimes
entirely worthless land, the landowners frequently laid traps for
them—they divided up the land in such a way as to leave the peasants
either without pastures, or without meadows, forests, or water for their
animals. In most of the

      gubernias[1]

of Russia proper the peasants, after the abolition of serfdom, remained in
the same old state of hopeless bondage to the landowners. After their
“emancipation” the peasants still remained the “lower” social-estate,
tax-paying cattle, the common herd over whom

    

the authorities set up by the landowners lorded it at will, from whom they
exacted taxes, whom they flogged with birches, manhandled, and humiliated.


In no other country in the world has the peasantry, after its
“emancipation”, experienced such ruination, such poverty, such
humiliations and such outrageous treatment as in Russia.  

But the fall of serfdom stirred up the whole people, awakened it from
age-long slumber, taught it to seek its own way out, to wage its own fight
for complete freedom.  

The fall of serfdom in Russia was followed by an increasingly rapid
development of cities, and factories, mills and railways were
built. Capitalist Russia was advancing to replace feudal Russia. The
settled, downtrodden serf peas ant who stuck firmly to his village, had
implicit faith in the priests and stood in awe of the “authorities” was
gradually giving way to a new generation of peasants, peasants who had
worked as seasonal labourers in the cities and had learned something from
their bitter experience of a life of wandering and wage-labour. The number
of workers in the big towns, in the factories, was constantly on the
increase. Gradually the workers began to form associations for their common
struggle against the capitalists and the government. By waging this
struggle the Russian working class helped the peasant millions to rise,
straighten their backs and cast off serf habits.  

In 1861 the peasants were only capable of “riots”. In the decades
that followed the Russian revolutionaries who made heroic efforts to rouse
the people to struggle remained isolated figures and perished under the
blows of the autocracy. By 1905 the Russian working class had gained
strength and had matured as a result of the years of strike struggles and
the years of propaganda, agitation and organisation carried on by the
Social-Democratic Party. And the Russian working class led the whole
people, the millions of peasants, into revolution.  

The Revolution of 1905 undermined the tsarist autocracy. Out of a mob
of muzhiks repressed by feudal slavery of accursed memory, this revolution
created, for the first time in Russia, a people beginning to understand its
rights, beginning to realise its strength, For the first time, the

    

Revolution of 1905 showed the tsarist government, the Russian landowners
and the Russian bourgeoisie that mil lions and tens of millions of people
were becoming citizens, were becoming fighters who would
no longer permit anyone to treat them like cattle, treat them as a mob. The
real emancipation of the masses from oppression and tyranny has nowhere in
the world ever been effected by any other means than the independent,
heroic, conscious struggle of the masses themselves.  

The Revolution of 1905 only undermined the autocracy; it did not
destroy it. Now the autocracy is venting its rage on the people. The
landowners’ Duma serves only to oppress and repress the people all the
more. Discontent and anger are again rife everywhere. That first step will
be followed by a second. The beginning of the struggle will have its
continuation. The Revolution of 1905 will he followed by a new, a second,
revolution. The anniversary of the fall of serfdom serves as a reminder of,
and a call for, this second revolution.  

The liberals whine: we need “another February 19”. That is not
true. This kind of talk is worthy only of bourgeois cowards. No second
“February 19” is possible after 1905. There can be no “emancipation from
above” of a people which has learned (and is learning—from the
experience of the landowners’ Third Duma) to fight from below. There can be
no “emancipation from above” of a people which has been led, even if but
once, by the revolutionary proletariat.  

The Black Hundreds understand this, and that is why they are afraid of
the anniversary of 1861. As Menshikov, that faithful watchdog of the tsar’s
Black Hundreds, wrote in Novoye Vremya: “The year 1861 failed
to prevent 1905”.  

The Black-Hundred Duma and the fury with which the tsarist government
is persecuting its enemies is not preventing but hastening the new
revolution. The grim experience of 1908–10 has taught the people to take
up the fight again. The workers’ summer strikes (in 1910) have been
followed by the students’ winter strikes. The new struggle is gaining
momentum perhaps more slowly than we would wish, but surely and inevitably.

 

The revolutionary Social-Democratic movement, while purging itself of
the sceptics who have turned their backs on the revolution and the illegal
party of the working class, is mustering its ranks and welding its forces
for the impending great battles.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Gubernia, uyezd, volost—Russian
administrative-territorial units. The largest of these was the gubernia,
which had its subdivisions in uyezds, which in turn were subdivided into
volosts. This system of districting continued under the Soviet power until
the introduction of the new system of administrative-territorial division
of the country in 1929–30.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Zemstvos—local government bodies introduced in the central
gubernias of tsarist Russia in 1864. Nobility played the leading part in
them. Their functions were limited to purely local economic problems
(hospitals and road-building, statistics, insurance, etc.). Their
activities were controlled by the gubernia governors and the Minister of
the Interior, who could overrule any of their decisions disapproved by the
government.





[3]
The war between Russia and the coalition of England, France, Turkey,
and Sardinia in 1853–56.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Paul Singer









Lenin: Paul Singer







V. I.  

      Lenin
Paul Singer
Died January 18 (31), 1911




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 3, February 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Gazeta text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 92-95.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On February 5, this year, the German Social-Democratic Party buried Paul Singer,
one of its oldest leaders. The entire working-class population of Berlin, many
hundreds of thousands of people, responded to the call of the Party and marched
in the funeral procession; they came to honour the memory of a man who had
devoted all his strength and all his life to the cause of the emancipation of
the working class. Berlin, with its three-million population, had never seen
such a multitude—at least a million people marched in or watched the
procession. Never had any of the mighty of this world been honoured with such a
funeral. Tens of thousands of soldiers can be ordered to line the streets during
the funeral of some monarch or a general famous for the slaughter of external
and internal enemies; but if the working people in their millions were not
attached heart and soul to their leader, to the cause of the
revolutionary struggle of these very masses against the oppression of
the government and the bourgeoisie, it would be impossible to rouse the
population of a huge city.


Paul Singer came of bourgeois stock, from a family of merchants, and
for quite a long time was a wealthy manufacturer. At the beginning of his
political career he was associated with the bourgeois democrats. But,
unlike the bulk of bourgeois democrats and liberals, who very soon forget
their love of liberty out of fear of the successes of the labour movement,
Singer was an ardent and sincere democrat, fearless and consistent to the
end. He was not caught up by the vacillations, cowardice and treachery of
the bourgeois democrats which aroused in him only a feeling of

    

repulsion and strengthened his conviction that only the party of the
revolutionary working class is capable of pursuing the great struggle for
liberty to its consummation.  

In the sixties of the past century, when the cowardly German liberal
bourgeoisie turned its back on the growing revolution in their country, was
bargaining with the government of the landowners and becoming reconciled to
the unlimited power of the monarchy, Singer turned resolutely toward
socialism. In 1870, when the entire bourgeoisie was intoxicated by the
victories over France, and when the broad masses of the population fell
under the spell of the vile, misanthropic, “liberal” propaganda of
nationalism and chauvinism, Singer signed a protest against the annexation
of Alsace and Lorraine from France. In 1878, when the bourgeoisie helped
Bismarck, that reactionary, landlords’ (“Junkers’”, as the
Germans say) minister, to promulgate the Anti-Socialist

Law,[1] to dissolve the workers’ unions, ban working-class newspapers,
and shower persecution upon the class-conscious proletariat, Singer finally
joined the Social-Democratic Party.  

Since then the history of Singer’s life is inseparably bound up with
that of the German Social-Democratic Party. He devoted himself heart and
soul to the difficult task of building up the revolutionary
organisation. He gave the Party all his energy, all his wealth, all his
remarkable abilities as an organiser, all his talent as a practical worker
and leader. Singer was one of those few, we might say, one of the extremely
rare cases of socialists of bourgeois origin whom the long history of
liberalism, the history of the treachery, cowardice, deals with the
government, and sycophancy of the bourgeois politicians does not enervate
and corrupt; but it steels and converts them into stalwart
revolutionaries. There are few such socialists of
bourgeois origin, and the proletariat should trust only these rare
people, people who have been tested in the course of many years of
struggle, if it desires to forge for itself a working-class party capable
of overthrowing contemporary bourgeois slavery. Singer was a ruthless enemy
of opportunism in the ranks of the German workers’ party, and to the end of
his days remained undeviatingly faithful to the uncompromising policy of
revolutionary Social-Democracy.  
 

Singer was not a theoretician, or a writer, or a brilliant orator. He
was first and foremost a practical organiser of the
illegal party during the period of the Anti-Socialist Law, and a
member of the Berlin Municipal Council and, after the repeal of that law,
of the Reichstag. And this practical organiser, who spent most of his time
in minor, everyday, technical parliamentary and every kind of “executive”
activity was great for the reason that he did not make a fetish of details,
he did not yield to the quite usual and quite philistine tendency to keep
out of any sharp struggle on questions of principle, allegedly for the sake
of this “executive” or “positive” activity. On the contrary, every time
a question arose concerning the fundamental nature of the revolutionary
party of the working class, its ultimate aims, blocs (alliances) with the
bourgeoisie, concessions to monarchism, etc., Singer, who devoted all his
life to this practical activity, was always to be found at the head of the
staunchest and most resolute fighters against every manifestation of
opportunism. During the operation of the Anti-Socialist Law, Singer
together with Engels, Liebknecht and Bebel was in the fight on two fronts:
against the

“young”,[2] the semi-anarchists, who repudiated the parliamentary
struggle, and against the moderate “legalists at any price”. In later
years, Singer fought just as resolutely against the revisionists.  

He earned the hatred of the bourgeoisie, and it followed him to the
grave. Singer’s bourgeois enemies (the German liberals and our Cadets) now
point out with malicious glee that his death means the passing away of one
of the last representatives of the “heroic” period of German
Social-Democracy, that is to say, the period when its leaders were imbued
with a strong, fresh, unqualified faith in revolution and championed a
principled revolutionary policy. According to these liberals, the rising
generation of leaders, those who are coming to replace Singer, are
moderate, punctilious “revisionists”, men of modest pretensions and petty
calculations. It is true that the growth of the workers’ party often
attracts many opportunists to its ranks. It is also true that in our day
socialists of bourgeois origin most often bring to the proletariat their
timidity, narrow-mindedness and love of phrase-mongering rather than
firmness of revolutionary convictions. But the rejoicing of the enemies is

    

premature! The masses of workers in Germany, as well as in other
countries, are becoming welded ever more strongly into an army of
revolution, and this army will deploy its forces in the not far
distant future—for the revolution is gaining momentum both in Germany and
in other countries.  

The old revolutionary leaders are passing away; but the young army of
the revolutionary proletariat is growing and gaining strength.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Anti-Socialist Law (Exceptional Law Against the
Socialists) was promulgated in Germany in 1878. Under this law all
organisations of the Social-Democratic Party and all workers’ mass
organisations were forbidden; the working-class press was proscribed and
socialist literature forbidden; repressions against Social-Democrats
began. The law was annulled in 1890 under pressure of the working-class
movement.





[2]
The “young”—the petty-bourgeois semi-anarchist
opposition in the German Social-Democratic Party; emerged in 1890. Its
central group consisted of young writers and students (hence the name) who
claimed the role of theoreticians and leaders in the party. This opposition
did not understand the changes that took place

   

after the rescinding of the Anti-Socialist Law (1878–90) and denied the
need for making use of legal forms of struggle; they opposed the
participation of Social-Democrats in Parliament and accused the party of
defending the interests of the petty bourgeoisie and of opportunism. Engels
engaged in struggle against the “young”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Comments









Lenin: Comments







V. I.  

      Lenin
Comments
Menshikov, Gromoboi, Izgoyev[2]




Published:
Zvezda, No. 11, February 26, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 96-105.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The

statement[3] made by sixty-six Moscow industrialists—who, according to
the calculations of a certain Moscow newspaper, represent capital amounting
to five hundred million rubles—has given rise to a number of extremely
valuable and characteristic articles in various newspapers. In addition to
casting an uncommonly glaring light on the present political situation,
these articles furnish interesting material on many fundamental questions
of principle relating to the entire evolution in twentieth-century Russia.


Here is Mr. Menshikov of Novoye Vremya, setting forth the
views of the Right parties and of the government: 

“How is it that all these Ryabushinskys, Morozovs, et al., fail to
understand that should there be a revolution they will all hang or, at
best, become paupers?”  

Mr. Menshikov says (Novoye Vremya, No. 12549) that he quotes
“these vigorous words” “from the letter of a student of a very
revolutionary institute”. And to this Mr. Menshikov adds his own
observations: 

“Despite the grim warning of the year 1905, the upper classes of
Russia, including the merchant class, are extremely hazy about the
impending catastrophe.... Yes, Messrs. Ryabushinsky, Morozov, and all
others like you!  Despite the fact that you are flirting with the
revolution, and despite all the testimonials of liberalism which you are
hastening to earn, it is you who are going to be the first victims of the
revolution now brewing. You will be the first to hang, not for any crimes
you may have committed, but for something which you consider a virtue,
merely for possessing those five hundred million rubles you brag so much
about.... The liberal bourgeoisie, with the middle sections

    

of the nobility, the civil service, and the merchant class together with
their titles, ranks and capital are heedlessly heading towards the brink of
the revolutionary precipice. If the liberal instigators of revolution live
to see the day at last when they are dragged to the gallows, let them then
recall their indulgent treatment by the old state power, how considerately
it listened to them, how it humoured them, and how few were the claims it
made upon their empty heads. On that very day, which will be a black day
for them, let them compare the blessings of the radical regime with the
old, patriarchal order.”  

That is what the unofficially semi-official organ of the government
wrote on February 17—the very same day that Rossiya, the
officially semi-official organ of the government, was doing its utmost to
prove, with the assistance of Golos

Moskvy,[4] that the “escapade” of the sixty-six “cannot be
considered as expressing the opinion of the Moscow merchants”.

“The Congress of the Nobility,” Rossiya says, “is an
organisation; whereas the sixty-six merchants who say that they acted as
private individuals are not an organisation.”  

It is embarrassing to have two semi-official organs! One refutes the
other. One is trying to prove that the “escapade” of the sixty-six cannot
be regarded as the expression of the opinion even of the Moscow merchants
alone. At the same time the other is trying to prove that the “escapade”
is of much wider significance, since it expresses the opinion, not only of
the Moscow merchants, and of the merchant class, but of the whole of
Russia’s liberal bourgeoisie in general. On behalf of “the old
state power”, Mr. Menshikov has undertaken to caution this liberal
bourgeoisie: it’s your interests we have at heart!  

There is probably not a single country in Europe in which this call
“not to instigate” addressed to the liberal bourgeoisie by the “old
state power”, the nobility and the reactionary publicists, did not resound
hundreds of times in the course of the nineteenth century.... And never
were these calls of any avail, even though the “liberal bourgeoisie”,
far from wanting to “instigate”, fought against the
“instigators” with the same energy and sincerity with which the sixty-six
merchants condemn strikes. Both condemnations and calls are powerless when
all the conditions of social life

    

make one class or another feel that the situation is intolerable, and
compel it to voice its feeling. Mr. Menshikov correctly expresses the
interests and the point of view of the government and the nobility when he
tries to frighten the liberal bourgeoisie with revolution and accuses it of
being frivolous. The sixty-six merchants correctly express the interests
and the point of view of the liberal bourgeoisie when they accuse the
government and condemn the “strikers”. But these mutual accusations are
only a sure symptom testifying to serious deficiencies in the mechanism”,
to the fact that, despite all the willingness of “the old state power” to
satisfy the bourgeoisie, to meet it half-way and to reserve for it a very
influential place in the Duma, and despite the very strong and sincere
desire on the part of the bourgeoisie to settle down, establish good
relations, come to terms and adjust itself, despite all this, the
“adjustment” does not make any headway! This is the substance of the
matter, this is the background; the mutual accusations are nothing but
trimmings.  

Mr. Gromoboi, writing in Golos Moskvy, addresses “a necessary
warning” to “the government” (Golos Moskvy, No. 38, of
February 17, in an article entitled “A Necessary Warning”). “No displays
of ‘firm’ rule,” he writes, “no volitional impulses will give the country
peace unless they go hand in hand with reforms which are long overdue.”
(Mr. Gromoboi is not very literate in his writings, but the meaning of his
words is nevertheless quite clear.)  “And the unrest caused by the
protracted crisis cannot be given as a force majeure reason for
not honouring promissory notes.” (This is an awkward comparison,
Mr. Publicist of the Octobrist merchants. In the first place, the notes
happen to be unsigned; secondly, even if they were signed, where is the
commercial court to which you could appeal and where is the sheriff, etc.,
who would enforce the judgement? Think it over, Mr. Gromoboi—you will see
that not only the Octobrists, but the Cadets too, are a party of spurious
promissory notes in politics.) “In such a case unrest will only increase
... the student riots will be followed by much that has been experienced
before. If you turn the ship round you are bound to see its wake.... The
bet on the weak was lost; now it may turn out that the bet on the strong
will also be

    

lost. The government will have nothing to show. Its hopes that the unrest
will subside may vanish like smoke no matter what kind of elections take
place.” (Mr. Gromoboi is referring to the elections to the Fourth Duma.)
“If the caravans of the opposition begin to move over those cliffs where
only the mists of government hovered before, if the government alienates
the moderate elements and remains in isolation, the elections will turn
into bitter defeat, and the entire system will be shaken because it is not
a system based on law.”  

Menshikov accuses the bourgeoisie of “instigating” “revolution”;
the bourgeoisie accuses the Menshikovs of leading to an increase of
unrest”. “It is an old story, but ever new.”  

In dealing with the same subject in the Cadet Rech the
renegade Izgoyev attempts to draw some sociological conclusions—not
realising what a rash thing it is for Cadets in general, and renegades in
particular, to undertake such a task. In an article entitled
“Juxtaposition” (in the issue of February 14), he draws a comparison
between the Congress of the United Nobility and the statement of the
sixty-six Moscow merchants. “The United Nobility,” he says, “have sunk
to the level of Purishkevich; the Moscow industrialists have begun to talk
the language of statesmen.” In the past, Mr. Izgoyev goes on to tell us,
“the nobility rendered the people great services in the cultural field”,
but “only a minority engaged in cultural activity, while the majority kept
the people down.... But such, in general, is the law of history that only
the minority of a given class acts in a progressive way.”  

Very, very fine. “Such, in general, is the law of history.” This is
what the Cadet Rech says through the mouth of Mr. Izgoyev. On
closer examination, however, we discover to our amazement that the
“general laws of history” do not hold good beyond the confines of the
feudal nobility and the liberal bourgeoisie. Indeed, let us recall
Vekhi, to which the same Mr. Izgoyev contributed, and against
which the most prominent Cadets carried on a polemic, but in such a way as
to deal only with details, without touching upon fundamentals, principles,
essentials. The essential view set forth in Vekhi—one shared by
all the Cadets and expressed a thousand times by Messrs. Milyukov and
Co.—is that,

    

except for the reactionary nobility and the liberal bourgeoisie, each class
in Russia has revealed itself (in the first decade of the present century)
by the actions of a minority who succumbed to the “intoxication”, were
swept along by “intellectual leaders”, and are unable to rise to a
“statesmanlike” view of things. “We must have the courage to admit,”
wrote Mr. Izgoyev in Vekhi, “that the vast majority of members of
our State Dumas, with the exception of thirty or forty Cadets and
Octobrists, have not shown themselves to possess the knowledge required to
undertake the job of governing and reconstructing Russia.”  Everybody will
understand that this refers to the peasant deputies, the Trudoviks, and the
workers’ deputies.  

Consequently, it is “in general, the law of history” that “only the
minority of a given class acts in a progressive way”, If it is the
minority of the bourgeoisie that acts, then it is a progressive minority,
justified by the “general law of history”. “Once the minority obtains an
opportunity to act, moral prestige extends to the entire class,”
Mr. Izgoyev informs us. But if it is a minority of peasants or of workers
that acts, then this by no means corresponds to “the law of history”,
this is by no means “the progressive minority of the given class”, this
minority by no means possesses the “moral prestige” enabling it to speak
on behalf of the “entire” class—no, nothing of the kind: this is a
minority led astray by “intellectuals”, it is not, according to
Vekhi, statesmanlike, it is anti-historic, has no roots, etc.


It is a risky business for Cadets in general and for Vekhi
writers in particular to indulge in generalisations, because every attempt
they make at generalisations inevitably exposes the inherent affinity
between the arguments of the Cadets and those of Menshikov.  

Rossiya and

Zemshchina[5] argue: the sixty-six merchants are a minority by
no means representing the class, they have not shown themselves to possess
either the knowledge or the ability “to govern and reconstruct Russia”;
moreover, they are not even merchants, but “intellectuals” who have been
led astray, etc., etc.  

The Izgoyevs and the Milyukovs argue: the Trudoviks and the workers’
deputies in our State Dumas, for example, are minorities which by no means
represent their classes

    

(i. e., nine-tenths of the population); they have been led astray by
“intellectuals”, have not shown themselves to possess either the
knowledge or the ability to “govern and reconstruct Russia”, etc., etc.


How is this inherent affinity between the arguments of Rossiya
and Zemshchina, on the one hand, and those of Rech and
Russkiye Vedomosti on the other, to be accounted for? The reason
is this: despite the differences in the classes represented by these two
groups of newspapers, neither class is any longer capable of any
material, independent, creative and decisive historical action that is
progressive. Not merely the first but the second group of
newspapers, not only the reactionaries, but the liberals, too, represent a
class that is afraid of historical, independent action on the part
of other, broader, sections, groups or masses of the population, of other
numerically stronger classes.  

Mr. Izgoyev, as a renegade “Marxist”, will certainly see a crying
contradiction in this: on the one hand, we recognise Russia’s capitalist
development and, consequently, its inherent tendency towards the fullest
possible and purest possible rule of the bourgeoisie both in the economic
and in the political sphere; on the other hand, we declare that the liberal
bourgeoisie is no longer capable of independent, creative
historical action!  

This “contradiction” exists in real life, and is not the result of
faulty reasoning. The inevitability of bourgeois rule does not in the least
imply that the liberal bourgeoisie is capable of such displays of
historical independent activity as might free it from its “enslavement”
to the Purishkeviches. In the first place, history does not move along a
smooth and easy road, such as would imply that every historically ripe
change means ipso facto that precisely the class which stands to
profit most by it, is mature and strong enough to carry this change into
effect. Secondly, in addition to the liberal bourgeoisie, there is yet
another bourgeoisie; for instance, the entire peasantry, taken in the mass,
is nothing but the democratic bourgeoisie. Thirdly, the history of Europe
shows us that some changes, bourgeois in their social sub stance, were
accomplished by elements whose background was by no means
bourgeois. Fourthly, we see the same thing in the history of Russia during
the past half-century.  
 

When the ideologists and leaders of the liberals begin to argue the way
the Karaulovs, the Maklakovs, the Milyukovs and the Vekhi writers
do, that means that a number of historical factors have caused the
liberal bourgeoisie to exhibit such a pronounced tendency to “beat a
retreat” and to show such dread of moving forward, that this forward
movement will pass them by, will go beyond them, in spite of their
fears. And an altercation such as mutual accusations of being responsible
for “increasing unrest” hurled by Gromoboi at Menshikov and by Menshikov
at

      Gromoboi,[1]

is but a sign that this historical movement forward is beginning to be felt
by all....  

“Contemporary society,” says Mr. Izgoyev in the same article, “based
on the principle of private property, is a class society, and for the time
being it cannot be anything else. Whenever one class is tottering another
class is always striving to step into its place.”  

“What a clever chap,” Mr. Milyukov must think when he reads such
tirades in his Rech. It is rather pleasant to have a Cadet who was
a Social-Democrat at the age of twenty-five and by the time he reached
thirty-five had “come to his senses” and repented of his errors.  

It is rash on your part, Mr. Izgoyev, to dabble in
generalisations. Contemporary society is admittedly a class society. Can
there be a party in a class society which does not represent a class? You
have probably guessed that there cannot be. Then why make such a faux
pas, why do you prate about a “class society” in the organ of a
party which prides itself on, and sees its merit in calling itself a
non-class party? (Other people who, not only in words, not merely for the
sake of journalistic prattle, recognise contemporary society as a class
society, regard such talk as hypocrisy or short-sightedness.)  

When you turn your face to the United Nobility or to the liberal Moscow
merchants you shout that contemporary society is a class society. But when
you have to, when unpleasant (ah, how terribly unpleasant!) events compel
you to turn around, even if for a brief moment, to face the peasants

    

or the workers, you begin to rail at the narrow, lifeless, fossilised,
immoral, materialist, godless and unscientific “doctrine” of the class
struggle. You would surely do better, Mr. Izgoyev, not to tackle any
sociological generalisations! Don’t ask for trouble.  


   “Whenever one class is tottering another class is always striving
   to step into its place.”  


Not always, Mr. Izgoyev. It happens at times that the two classes, the
one that is tottering and the one that “is striving”, are both in an
advanced stage of decay—one more, the other less, of course, but both are
in an advanced stage of decay. It happens that, feeling its decay, the
class that “is striving” forward is afraid of taking a step
forward, and when it does take such a step it is sure to lose no time in
taking two steps back. It happens that the liberal bourgeoisie (as was the
case in Germany, for instance, and particularly in Prussia) is afraid to
“step into the place” of the tottering class, but exerts every
effort to “share the place” or, rather, to obtain any kind of place, even
if it be in the servants’ hall—anything rather than step
into the place of the “tottering”, anything rather than bring
matters to the point where the tottering would “fall”. Such things
happen, Mr. Izgoyev.  

In historical periods when such things do happen, the liberals, if they
succeed in passing themselves off as democrats, are liable to bring (and
they do bring) the greatest harm to the entire cause of social development;
for the difference between the liberals and the democrats is precisely that
the former are afraid “to step into the place”, while the latter are
not. Both the former and the latter are engaged in accomplishing the
historically ripe bourgeois change; but the former are afraid to accomplish
it, are hindering it by their fear, while the latter, although they often
share many illusions on the results that will derive from the bourgeois
change, put all their strength and their very soul into its accomplishment.


In illustration of these general sociological reflections, I shall take
the liberty of citing one example of a liberal who does not strive, but is
afraid to “step into the place” of the tottering class, and who is,
therefore (consciously or

    

unconsciously, that makes no difference), most flagrantly deceiving the
population when he calls himself a “democrat”. This liberal is the
landlord A. Y. Berezovsky the First, Member of the Third Duma, a
Cadet. During the debate in the Duma on the agrarian question (in 1908) he
delivered the following speech, which was approved of by the leader of the
Party, Mr. Milyukov, who described it as “splendid”. In view of the
forthcoming elections, we make bold to think that it will not be amiss to
recall that speech.  

“... It is my profound conviction,” Mr. Berezovsky said in defending
the Agrarian Bill before the State Duma on October 27, 1908, “that this
Bill is much more advantageous to the landowners, too, and I am saying
this, gentlemen, as one who knows farming, since I own land and have en
gaged in it all my life.... You must not seize upon the bare fact of
compulsory alienation, wax indignant over it and declare that it would be
an act of violence; you must examine what this proposition amounts to,
what, for instance, the Bill of the 42 members of the First State Duma
proposed. That Bill contained only the recognition of the necessity of
alienating in the first place the land that is not exploited by the owners
themselves, that is cultivated by peasants using their own implements and
animals, and, finally, land that is let out to tenants. Further, the party
of people’s freedom supported the proposal that committees be organised in
the localities, which, after working for some time, perhaps even for a
number of years, were to ascertain which land was subject to alienation,
which was not, and how much land was needed to satisfy the peasants. The
committees were to be so constituted that half their membership would have
been made up of peasants, and the other half of non-peasants; and it seems
to me that in the general actual situation which would thus have been
created in the localities, it would have been possible to ascertain
properly both how much land there was that could be alienated and how much
land was needed for the peasants; and, finally, the peasants would have
seen for themselves to what extent their just demands could be satisfied
and to what extent their desire to get a lot of land was often wrong and
unjustified. Then this material would have been referred to the Duma for
further elaboration, after which it would have been referred to

    

the Council of

State,[6] and, finally, it would have been submitted to the tsar for his
sanction. That,properly speaking, was the method of procedure at which, for
some unknown reason, the government took fright, dissolved the Duma, and
thus brought about the present state of affairs. This systematic work would
undoubtedly have had as its result, the satisfaction of the true needs of
the population and consequently, its pacification, and the preservation of
the efficiently run estates, which the party of people’s freedom never
intended to destroy unless there was an extreme need for this.” (Verbatim
Reports, p. 398.)  

When Mr. Izgoyev, who belongs to the same party as Mr. Berezovsky,
writes in his article “Juxtaposition” that “Russia is a democratic
country and will not tolerate any oligarchy, either new or old”, we can
see quite clearly what this kind of talk really means. Russia is by no
means a democratic country, nor will she ever become one so long as fairly
large sections of the population regard a party like the Cadets as a
democratic party. This bitter truth is a thou sand times more vital to the
people than the honeyed lies dispensed by the representatives of the
half-hearted, spine less, and unprincipled liberal oligarchy, the
Cadets. The more such “altercations” as those between the Menshikovs and
the sixty-six and Gromoboi become the order of the day the more necessary
it is to remind people of this bitter truth.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
By the liberal merchants at the nobility and by the nobility at the
liberal merchants.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Gromoboi—contributor to Golos Moskvy (Voice of
Moscow).  

Izgoyev—a Cadet publicist, contributor to Vekhi
(Landmarks) and Rech (Speech) collaborator.





[3]
The statement made by 66 representatives of Moscow commercial and
industrial capital, was printed in Russkiye Vedomosti, No. 33,
February 11(24), 1911. While recognising the need to combat the students’
strikes, the authors of the statement also condemned the government action
on the grounds that its measures against the participants in student
disturbances jeopardised the existence of the higher school.





[4]
Golos Moskvy (Voice of Moscow)—a daily newspaper,
organ of the Octobrists, the counter-revolutionary party of the big
industrial bourgeoisie and the landlords; published in Moscow from
December 1906 to June 1915.





[5]
Zemshchina (Land Affairs)—a daily Black-Hundred
newspaper, published in St. Petersburg from July 1909 to February 1917;
organ of the extreme Right deputies to the State Duma.





[6]
Council of State—one of the highest state bodies in tsarist
Russia. Formed in 1810, according to M. M. Speransky’s plan, as a
legislative-consultative body whose members were appointed and con firmed
by the tsar. It was a reactionary body which voted down even the most
moderate bills adopted by the State Duma.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Russian Collegium of the C.C.









Lenin: To the Russian Collegium of the C.C.







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Russian Collegium of the C.C.




Written: Written in February 1911 

Published:

      First published in 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVIII.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 106-109.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In view of the possibility and likelihood of the Central
Committee being convened in Russia, we consider it our duty to outline our
views on several important questions affecting our position as people
responsible to the Party.  

(1) At the January 1910 Plenary Meeting, we, responsible
representatives of the Bolshevik trend, concluded an agreement with the
Central Committee, published in the Central Organ, No. 11. Our application,
submitted by three officials, with power of attorney from

Meshkovsky,[2] is a formal cancellation of this agreement owing to the
non-fulfilment of its clearly-defined conditions by the
Golos and Vperyod groups. Naturally, it is understood
that we, although compelled to submit this application because no
functioning Central Committee actually exists and there is the beginning of
a split abroad, will willingly withdraw it, or agree to a review of the
agreement, if the Central Committee succeeds in meeting and in
re-establishing Party work and the Party line violated by the
afore-mentioned factions.  

(2) The Party line was clearly defined by the Plenary Meeting, and it
is useless for the Golos group and Trotsky and Co. to try to
confuse the issue. The line consists in recognising that both
liquidationism and otzovism are bourgeois theories having a fatal
influence on the proletariat. After the Plenary Meeting, in violation of
its decisions, these two trends have developed and taken shape in
anti-Party factions—the Potresov and Golos groups on the one
hand, and the Vperyod group on the other. Among the Mensheviks,
support for the Party line laid down by the Meeting was forthcoming from
only the so-called pro-Party or Plekhanov

    

group, those who have been and still are resolutely conducting a
struggle against the Potresov and Golos trends.  

(3) For this reason, as representatives of the Bolshevik trend, we
emphatically protest against the Golos group’s attack on

Innokenty[3] for having refused, in the summer of 1910, to
recognise as candidates for co-option those Mensheviks who remained true to
Golos or whose actions were not fully indicative of their Party
affiliation. In doing so, Innokenty , the chief representative of
a trend in Bolshevism differing from ours, acted correctly, and we have
written proof that precisely as its representative he defined the
Party principle uniting all Bolsheviks, before witnesses from the

       P.S.D.,[1]

in the manner shown.  

(4) The attempt of the Golos group, in the name of the
splitting faction of émigrés, to propose from abroad “their
own” candidates for co-option to the C.C. cannot be regarded as anything
but an unheard-of affront. While at the Plenary Meeting there may have been
people who sincerely believed the pledges of the Mensheviks to struggle
against the liquidators, now, a year later, it is quite clear that the
Golos people cannot be trusted on this question. We protest
resolutely against candidates being put forward for election by the
émigré faction of liquidators, and demand that Plekhanov’s
followers in Russia be circularised, they can undoubtedly
provide canididates from among the pro-Party Mensheviks.  

(5) The splitting moves of the Golos and Vperyod
groups and of Trotsky are now fully recognised, not only by the Bolsheviks
and the Poles (in the Central Organ), but also by Plekhanov’s group (see
the Paris resolution of Plekhanov’s group). We assert that the
first decisive step towards a split was the announcement made by
Trotsky on November 27, 1910, without the knowledge of the C.C., of the
convening of a conference and of the “fund” for it. Our application
(December 5, 1910) was the reply we were forced to make to that
announcement. The Vperyod school has become one of the centres of
this split; Trotsky took part in it in defiance of the clear
decision of the Party School Commission. We were blamed in print
by Golos for “disorganising” this

    

school. Considering it our duty to disorganise anti-Party
émigré factions, we demand the appointment of a commission to
investigate the “funds” of this school and the help given it
by Trotsky and Golos. By shouting about expropriation, which we put an
end to once and for all at the Plenary Meeting, the Golos group
are not only blackmailing, but are covering up their
moral (and not only moral) support of the violators of
the resolution of the Meeting.  

(6)

Olgin,[4] a follower of Plekhanov, has disclosed that Dan frankly
explained the desire of the Golos group to transfer the C.C. to
Russia as being due to the probability (or inevitability) of its
failure. The Party tribunal will have to make a pronouncement on
this. Anyone who has followed the Golos group’s policy over the
past year will have no doubt that in actual fact they have been
splitting the C.C. and hampering its work. The London candidates of
Golos are not only alive, but carry out political work in
an anti-Party spirit both in the workers’ unions and in the
press. By absenting themselves from the C.C. meeting, they con firm
their liquidationism. For this reason we are in duty bound to warn the
comrades on the C.C. in Russia, who are working under desperately difficult
conditions (since they are all known to the police), that they are
also threatened by an internal enemy inside the Party. We cannot manage
without some sort of base abroad unless we are prepared to run the risk of
a single failure on our part freeing the hands of the disruptive
Potresovs. The Central Committee Bureau Abroad, which is now
carrying out a policy of aid to the Vperyod and
Golos groups and to Trotsky, cannot be allowed to remain
abroad. We cannot rely on the pledged word or the “signing” of a
resolution. We must, if we wish to be realistic politicians who
are not deluded by mere formalities, study the ideological-political
trends emanating from the working-class movement and from the counter
revolutionary influence on it.  

These trends have grown and developed since 1908. They have brought
Plekhanov’s group and the Bolsheviks closer together, and have created a
bloc between the Golos and Vperyod groups and Trotsky,
who support the split while endeavouring to hide its existence. The
immediate future of our Party (and it is useless closing our eyes to this)
will inevitably

    

be determined by the struggle along these lines; not the desires of
individuals or groups, but the objective conditions of the epoch, as shown
in the resolution of the Plenary Meeting, give rise to the struggle.  

The representatives of the Bolshevik trend, signatories to
the agreement with the C.C. in January 1910 (three, and on the authority of
the fourth,

Meshkovsky).[5] 

 
Notes
 

[1]
Polish Social-Democrats.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Meshkovsky (I. P. Goldenberg)—member of the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., a Bolshevik-conciliator.





[3]
Innokenty (Innokentiev, Inok)—I. F. Dubrovinsky, member of
the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., a Bolshevik; in 1910-11 he became
a conciliator.





[4]
Olgin—V. P. Fomin, a pro-Party Menshevik.





[5]
Lenin’s signature and those of two other members of the Central
Committee follow.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Apropos of an Anniversary









Lenin: Apropos of an Anniversary







V. I.  

      Lenin
Apropos of an Anniversary




Published:
Mysl, No. 3, February 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Mysl text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 110-118.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The fiftieth anniversary of the so-called Peasant Reform
raises many interesting questions. Here we can touch only upon some of the
economic and historical issues, deferring publicist topics in the narrower
sense of the term to another occasion.  

About ten or fifteen years ago, when the controversies between the
Narodniks and the Marxists were first brought before the general public,
the difference in the appraisal of the so-called Peasant Reform emerged
time and again as one of the most important issues of that controversy. The
theoreticians of Narodism, for instance, the well-known Mr. V. V., or

Nikolai—on,[3] regarded the basic features of the Peasant Reform of
1861 as something fundamentally different from, and hostile to,
capitalism. They said that the Regulations of

February 19[4] legalised the “endowment of the producer with means of
production” and sanctioned “people’s production” as distinct
from capitalist production. They regarded the Regulations of February 19 as
an earnest of the non-capitalist evolution of Russia.  

Even then the Marxists opposed a fundamentally different view to this
theory. The Regulations of February 19 were one of the episodes in
the replacement of the serf (or feudal) mode of production by the bourgeois
(or capitalist) mode. According to this view, the Regulations contain
no other historico-economic elements. “The endowment of the
producer with means of production” is an empty, sentimental phrase which
glosses over the plain fact that the peasants, who are small producers in
agriculture, were being converted from producers engaged primarily in
natural economy into producers of commodities. The precise extent to which
commodity production had developed in peasant economy in

    

various parts of Russia during that epoch is another question. But it is
beyond doubt that the “emancipated” peasant was entering the sphere of
commodity production and none other. “Free labour”

  in place[1]

of serf labour thus meant nothing more than the free labour of the
wage-worker or small independent producer under the conditions of commodity
production, i.e., of bourgeois social and economic relations. The land
redemption payments brought out this nature of the Reform in even
bolder relief, for they lent a stimulus to monetary economy, i.e., they
increased the peasant’s dependence on the market.  

The Narodniks saw in the emancipation of the peasants with the
provision of land allotments a non-capitalist principle, the “genesis” of
what they called “people’s production”. In the emancipation of the
peasants without land they saw the capitalist principle. The Narodniks
(particularly Mr. Nikolai–on) based this view on the teachings of
Marx, citing in its justification that the freeing of the worker from
the means of production is a fundamental condition of the capitalist mode
of production. A singular phenomenon: beginning with the eighties (if not
still earlier) Marxism was already such an indisputable, actually
dominating force among the progressive social doctrines in Western Europe,
that for a long time in Russia theories hostile to Marxism could not be
openly expressed. These theories made sophistry of Marxism and falsified it
(sometimes unconsciously); they appeared to be Marxist and, “by referring
to Marx”, tried to deny the application of Marx’s theory to Russia!

The Narodnik theory of Mr. Nikolai–on claimed to be “Marxist” (in the
1880s and 1890s); subsequently the liberal-bourgeois theory of
Messrs. Struve, Tugan-Baranovsky and Co. began by “almost” fully
accepting Marxism, these gentlemen developed their views and preached their
liberalism under the guise of “the further critical development” of
Marxism. We shall probably have more than one occasion to return to this
singular feature of the development of Russian social theories since the
end of the nineteenth century (up to and including contemporary
opportunism—liquidationism,

    

which clings to Marxist terminology in order to cover up its
anti-Marxist substance).  

What interests us at the present moment is the Narodnik appraisal of
the “great Reform”. It is a radical mistake to think that the striving to
deprive the peasants of land in 1861 represented a capitalist tendency,
whereas the striving to endow them with land was anti-capitalist, socialist
(the best among the Narodniks saw in the term “people’s production” a
pseudonym for socialism, a pseudonym imposed by censorship
restrictions). This view is a great sin against historical truth; it
transfers Marx’s “ready-made” formula (a “formula” which is applicable
only to highly developed commodity production) to the conditions of
serfdom. Depriving the peasants of land in 1861 in most cases
actually meant the creation, not of a free labourer in capitalist
production, but of a bonded (i. e., in fact a semi-serf or even
almost serf) tenant on the same land that belonged to the
“master”, the landowner. Actually, the “allotments” of 1861 meant in
most cases the creation, not of a free and independent farmer, but of a
tenant bound to the land and in fact compelled to perform
the same old corvée by cultivating the landlord’s land with his own
farm equipment, in payment for pasture, for meadows, for the necessary
arable land, etc.  

The peasant entered the sphere of bourgeois social relations to the
extent to which he was actually, and not merely nominally, emancipated from
serf relations (the essence of these relations was “labour-rent”, i. e.,
the labour performed for the landowner by a peasant endowed with an
allotment of land). But this real emancipation from feudal
relations was much more complicated than the Narodniks thought. At that
time the struggle between those who were in favour of depriving the
peasants of land and those in favour of “endowing” them, often expressed
merely a struggle between two feudalist camps, a dispute over the
question as to whether it was more advantageous to the landowner to have a
tenant (or a peasant rendering labour service) without any land or
with an “allotment”, i. e., one bound to the locality, bound by a patch
of land insufficient to provide for his living and therefore compelling him
to hire himself out for a “livelihood” (selling himself into bondage to
the landowner).  
 

On the other hand, there is no doubt that the greater the amount of
land the peasants received upon their emancipation, and the cheaper the
price they had to pay for it, the more rapidly, fully and freely would
capitalism have developed in Russia, and the sooner would the survivals of
serfdom and bondage have disappeared, the larger the home market would have
become, and the more certain would the development of towns, industry and
trade have been.  

The Narodniks made the mistake of dealing with the problem in a utopian
manner, in the abstract, unrelated to the, actual historic
circumstances. They declared that the “allotment” was the basis for
independent small-scale farming. Insofar as this was true, the
peasant “endowed with land” became a commodity producer and found himself
in the conditions of bourgeois society. Actually, however, the
“allotment” was too often so small, so burdened with excessive payments,
situated so unfavourably for the peasant and so “fortunately” for the
landlord, that the “allotment” peasant inevitably found himself in a
position of unredeemable bondage, his status remained, in fact, the same as
under the relations of serfdom; he performed the same old corvée
service (in the form of labour-service, etc.).  

Thus, two tendencies were latent in Narodism, which the Marxists
defined even then, when they referred to the liberal-Narodnik views, the
liberal-Narodnik appraisal, etc. Insofar as the Narodniks painted the
Reform of 1861 in bright colours, forgetting that in the majority of cases
“endowment” actually meant that the landlords’ estates were ensured a
supply of cheap slave labour, a supply of cheap hands tied to the place of
residence, they descended (often without being aware of it) to the point of
view of liberalism, the point of view of the liberal bourgeois, or even of
the liberal landowner; objectively they became the advocates of the type of
capitalist evolution which is most burdened with landowner traditions, is
most bound up with the feudal past, of which it is ridding itself most
slowly and with the greatest difficulty.  

The Narodniks, however, were bourgeois democrats to the extent that
they did not idealise the Reform of 1861, but fought ardently and sincerely
for the smallest payments and the largest “allotments”, for
“allotments” without any
    

restrictions, with the utmost cultural, legal, etc., independence for the
peasant. Their only shortcoming was that their democracy was by no means
always consistent and determined and that, moreover, they failed to realise
that it was of a bourgeois nature. Incidentally, it may be said that the
most “Left” of our Social-Narodniks even to this day often conceive of
the word “bourgeois” in this connotation as smacking of “politics”,
whereas, in point of fact, the term bourgeois democracy represents the only
exact scientific definition from the Marxist point of view.  

These two tendencies in Narodism—the liberal and the
democratic—were already quite clearly indicated at the time of
the Reform of 1861. We cannot dwell here in greater detail on an analysis
of these tendencies, particularly on the connection between utopian
socialism and the second of these tendencies. We shall merely mention the
difference between the ideological and political trends of, say, Kavelin,
on the one hand, and Chernyshevsky, on the other.  

When we contemplate, in a general way, the change in the entire system
of the Russian state in 1861, we are bound to admit that that change was a
step in the transformation of feudal monarchy into a bourgeois
monarchy. This is true not only from the economic, but also from the
political point of view. We need only recall the nature of the reforms in
the sphere of the judiciary, administration, local self-government, etc.,
which followed the Peasant Reform of 1861, to see the correctness of this
statement. One may argue whether this “step” was a great or a small one,
whether it was quick or slow, but the direction in which this step
was taken is so clear, it has been made so clear by all the subsequent
events, that there can hardly be two opinions about it. It is, however, all
the more necessary to stress this direction because of the more
frequent half-baked opinions we hear nowadays to the effect that “steps”
in the transformation into a bourgeois monarchy in Russia have been taken
only in very recent years.  

Of the two Narodnik tendencies, referred to, the democratic tendency,
the tendency not based on the intelligence and initiative of landowning,
bureaucratic and bourgeois circles, was extremely weak in 1861. That is why
matters went no further than a very small “step” in the transformation

    

into a bourgeois monarchy. Still, this weak tendency existed even then. It
showed itself subsequently too, sometimes more strongly and sometimes more
feebly, both in the sphere of social ideas and in the sphere of the social
movement characteristic of the entire post-Reform period. This
tendency grew with each decade of the period, nurtured by each step in the
economic evolution of the country and, consequently, also by the
combination of social, juridical and cultural conditions.  

These two tendencies, which were only just beginning to emerge in 1861,
found a fairly full and open expression forty-four years after the Peasant
Reform, in the most varied spheres of social life, in the various twists
and turns of the social movement, in the activity of large masses of the
population and of important political parties. The Cadets and the
Trudoviks—taking each of these terms in its broadest meaning—are the
direct descendants and successors, the actual vehicles of the two
tendencies which were already taking shape half a century ago. The
connection between 1861 and the events that took place forty-four years
later is in disputable and obvious. And the fact that both tendencies have
survived during half a century, that they have grown stronger, developed
and expanded, unquestionably testifies to their strength; it shows that
they are deeply rooted in the entire economic structure of Russia.  

Menshikov, the Novoye Vremya writer, expressed this connection
between the Peasant Reform and the events of the recent past in the
following singular tirade: “The year 1861 failed to prevent 1905—hence,
why shout about the greatness of a reform which has failed so
miserably?”  (Novoye

Vremya[5] No. 12512, of January 11, “An Unnecessary Jubilee”.)


With these words Menshikov inadvertently touched upon extremely
interesting scientific problems of history; first, the interrelation
between reform and revolution in general, and, secondly, the connection,
interdependence, and affinity between the socio-historical trends,
strivings and tendencies of 1861 and the 1905–07 period.  

The concept “reform”, is undoubtedly the opposite of the concept
“revolution”. Failure to remember this contrast, failure to remember the
line that divides these two

    

concepts, constantly leads to very serious mistakes in all historical
discussions. But this contrast is not something absolute, this line is not
something dead, but alive and changing, and one must be able to define it
in each particular case. The Reform of 1861 remained but a reform owing to
the extreme feebleness, ignorance and lack of cohesion between the social
elements for whom change was essential.  

That is the reason for such marked feudal features in this reform, that
is why it was so full of bureaucratic monstrosities and brought the
peasants such untold misfortunes. Our peasantry has suffered much more from
the inadequate development of capitalism than it has from capitalism
itself.  

Although this reform remained nothing but a reform because of the
weakness of certain social elements, it created, despite all obstacles and
hindrances, conditions for the further development of those elements; these
conditions expanded the area in which the old contradictions came into play
and extended the number of groups, strata and classes of the population
that took a conscious part in “the play” of contradictions. That is why
the followers of the democratic tendency that was hostile to liberalism at
the time of the 1861 Reform, those who then (and for a long time after)
appeared to be mere individuals with no ground under their feet—that is
why those people proved actually to be on incomparably more solid
ground when the conditions that had been little more than embryonic in 1861
grew to maturity. Those participants in the Reform of 1861 who regarded it
as nothing more than a

reform[2]

proved to be on more solid ground than the liberal reformists. The former
will forever be remembered in history as the advanced representatives of
their epoch; whereas the latter will be remembered as people who were
irresolute, weak-willed and impotent in face of the forces of the old and
obsolete.  

In their theories, the Narodniks, beginning with 1861 (and their
forerunners even prior to 1861), have, through out more than half a
century, always advocated a different, i. e.,
non-capitalist, path for Russia. History has fully

    

refuted their error. History has fully proved and the events of 1905-07,
the action of the various classes of Russian society at that time, have
graphically confirmed that Russia is developing along capitalist lines, and
that there can be no other path for her development. But he would be a poor
Marxist indeed who to this day failed to learn from the history of this
half-century the real meaning of aspirations expressed in the
course of half a century and embodied in an erroneous ideology, in an
endeavour to plot a “different” path for the fatherland to travel.  

A comparison between 1861 and 1905–07 makes it perfectly clear that
the real historical meaning of the Narodnik ideology consisted in
contrasting two paths of capitalist development: one path
involving the adaptation of the new, capitalist Russia to the old, the
subordination of the for mer to the latter, thus impeding the course of
development; the other—the path of supplanting the old by the new, of
entirely removing the obsolete that is obstructing the new; of accelerating
the course of development. The programmes of the Cadets and the
Trudoviks—the former liberal, and the latter democratic—while
inconsistent and at times confused and betraying a lack of understanding,
represent a vivid expression of the actual paths of this
development—both within the framework of capitalism—which have
been steadfastly pursued for more than half a century.  

The present period imperatively demands of us that we have a clear
understanding of the conditions of these two paths, that we have a clear
idea of the two tendencies of 1861 and of their subsequent evolution. We
are witnessing a further change in the entire system of the Russian state,
one more step in its transformation into a bourgeois
monarchy. This new step, which is just as hesitant, just as vacillating,
just as ill-chosen and just as unsound as the previous one, confronts us
with the old problems. History has not yet decided which of the two paths
of Russia’s capitalist development will finally determine her bourgeois
system: the objective forces on which the decision depends are not yet
exhausted. We cannot tell beforehand what the decision will be, before we
have the experience of all the friction, clashes and conflicts that make up
the life of society.

    

We cannot tell beforehand what will be the resultant of the two tendencies
that have been making themselves felt ever since 1861. But we can, and
must, insist on a clear understanding of both tendencies, insist that
Marxists (and this is one of their duties, in their capacity of
“leaders”, in the period of disintegration, confusion, scepticism and
worship of momentary success) should contribute their activity to this
resultant—not in a negative form (like liquidationism or, in general,
helpless drifting after one decadent mood or another), but in a positive
form, in the form of up holding the interests of evolution in its entirety,
its fundamental and most essential interests.  

The representatives of the democratic tendency, while marching toward
their goal, continually waver and are subject to the influence of
liberalism. To prevent these waverings and to end this subjection is one of
the most important historical tasks of Marxism in Russia.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Insofar as this replacement was going on in actual
facts we shall see further that it was a more complicated process than
would appear on the surface.  —Lenin

[2]
It is probably a printer’s error in Russian. According to the sense, it
should read: “as something more than a reform”.—Ed.  
 



[3]
V. V. (pseudonym of V. P. Vorontsov) and N –on, or
Nikolai –on (pseudonym of N. F. Danielson)—ideologists of
liberal Narodism in the 1880s and 1890s.




[4]
Regulations of February 19, 1861—the law abolishing serfdom
in Russia.





[5]
Novoye Vremya (New Times)—a daily newspaper
appearing in St. Petersburg from 1868 to October 1917. At first it was
moderately liberal, but towards the end of the 1870s it became an organ of
reactionary circles among the aristocracy and bureaucracy. It conducted a
struggle, not only against the revolutionary, but also against the
liberal-bourgeois movement. From 1905 it became an organ of the Black
Hundreds. Lenin called Novoye Vremya a typical example of the
venal press.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “The Peasant Reform” and the Proletarian-Peasant Revolution









Lenin: 'The Peasant Reform' and the Proletarian-Peasant Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
“The Peasant Reform” and the Proletarian-Peasant Revolution




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 21–22. March 19 (April 1), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 119-128.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The celebration of the jubilee, so much feared by the
Romanov monarchy, and over which the Russian liberals have gushed so
sentimentally, is over. The tsar’s government celebrated it by assiduously
circulating “among the people” the Black-Hundred jubilee pamphlets issued
by the “National Club”, by wholesale arrests of all “suspects”, by
banning meetings at which speeches of even the slightest democratic tinge
might be expected, by fining and suppressing news papers, and by
persecuting “subversive” cinemas.  

The liberals celebrated the jubilee by weeping buckets of tears about
the necessity of “a second February 19” (Vestnik

Yevropy[1]), by expressing their allegiance (the tsar’s picture
appearing prominently in Rech), and by indulging in talk about
their civic despondency, the fragility of the native “Constitution”, the
devastating “break-up” of the “time honoured principles of land tenure”
by Stolypin’s agrarian policy, and so on, and so forth.  

In an edict addressed to Stolypin, Nicholas II declared that Stolypin’s
agrarian policy was the final stage of “the great Reform” of February 19,
1861, i. e., the surrender of peasant land to be plundered by a handful of
bloodsuckers, kulaks, and well-to-do peasants, and the surrender of the
countryside to the rule of the feudal landowners.  

It must be admitted that Nicholas the Bloody, Russia’s premier
landowner, is nearer to the historical truth than our amiable liberals. The
biggest landowner and the chief feudal lord is aware of, or rather has
learned from the exhortation of the Council of the United Nobility, the
maxim of the class struggle according to which “reforms” that are carried
out by feudal lords must of necessity be

    

feudal in every aspect, must of necessity be accompanied by a regime of out
and out violence. Our Cadets, and our liberals in general, fear the
revolutionary movement of the masses, which alone is capable of wiping the
feudal land owners and their unlimited power in the Russian state from the
face of the earth; and this fear prevents them from appreciating the truth
that so long as the feudal landowners have not been overthrown, every
reform—and, particularly, every agrarian reform—is bound to be feudal
in its aspect and nature, and in its mode of application. To fear
revolution, to dream of reform, and to snivel because in practice
“reforms” are applied by the feudal lords in a feudal way, is the height
of baseness and stupidity. Nicholas II is much more straightforward and
does more to teach the Russian people sense when he clearly “offers” them
the plain choice:

either feudal “reforms” or the overthrow of the feudal land owners by a
people’s revolution.  

The Reform of February 19, 1861, was a feudal reform which our liberals
are able to dress up and represent as a “peaceful” reform only because at
that time the revolutionary movement in Russia was so weak as to
amount to nothing, and, as for a revolutionary class, there
existed none among the oppressed masses of those days. The decree of
November 9, 1906, and the law of June 14, 1910, are feudal reforms with as
much bourgeois content as the Reform of 1861; but the liberals
cannot represent these as “peaceful” reforms, they cannot dress
them up so easily (although they are already beginning to do so, as for
instance, in Russkaya Mysl), for the few isolated revolutionaries
of 1861 may be forgotten, but the Revolution of 1905 cannot be
forgotten. The year 1905 saw the birth of a revolutionary class in
Russia, the proletariat, which succeeded in rousing the peasant masses to
the revolutionary struggle. And once a revolutionary class has been born in
any country it cannot be suppressed by any amount of persecution; it can
only perish if the whole country perishes, it can only die, after it has
attained victory.  


Let us call to mind the basic features of the Peasant Reform of
1861. The notorious “emancipation” meant the

    

unscrupulous robbery of the peasants and their subjection to an endless
succession of tyrannies and insults. “Emancipation” was seized upon as a
pretext to cut off part of the peasants’ land. In the black-earth gubernias
these cut-off lands amounted to more than one-fifth of the total
held by peasants; in some gubernias the land that was cut off, taken away
from the peasants, amounted to one-third or even two-fifths of all the
peasants’ land. As a result of “emancipation” the peasants’ land was so
divided from the landed estates as to compel the peasants to settle on
“bad land”, and the landed estates were wedged into the peasants’ land to
make it easier for the noble lords to enslave the peasants and to lease
land to them on usurious terms. As a result of “emancipation”, the
peasants were forced to “redeem” their own land, moreover, they were
forced to pay double or treble its real price. The overall result
of the whole “epoch of reforms” which marked the 1860s was that the
peasants remained poverty-stricken, downtrodden, ignorant, and subject to
the feudal landowners in the courts, in the organs of administration, in
the schools, and in the Zemstvos.  

The “great Reform” was a feudal reform; nor could it be anything
else, for it was carried out by the feudal landowners. But what was the
force that compelled them to resort to reform? It was the force of economic
development which was drawing Russia on to the path of capitalism. The
feudal landowners could not prevent the growth of trade between Russia and
Europe; they could not bolster up the old, tottering forms of economic
life. The Crimean war demonstrated the rottenness and impotence of feudal
Russia. The peasant “riots”, which had been growing in number and
intensity in the decades prior to emancipation, compelled Alexander II, the
country’s biggest landowner, to admit that it would be better to emancipate
from above than to wait until he was overthrown from
below.  

“The Peasant Reform” was a bourgeois reform carried out by feudal
landowners. It was a step in the transformation of Russia into a bourgeois
monarchy. In substance the Peasant Reform was a bourgeois measure. The
less the amount of land cut off from the peasants’ holdings, the
more fully peasant lands were separated from the landed estates,
the lower the tribute paid to the feudal landowners

    

by the peasants (i. e., the lower the “redemption” payments) and the
greater the extent the peasants in any locality were able to
escape the influence and pressure of the feudal landowners—the more
obvious was the bourgeois essence of the Reform. To the extent
that the peasant extricated himself from the clutches of the feudal
landowner, he became a slave to the power of money, found himself living in
the conditions of commodity production and dependent on rising
capitalism. After 1861 capitalism developed in Russia at such a rapid rate
that in a few decades it wrought a transformation that had taken centuries
in some of the old countries of Europe.  

The celebrated struggle between the feudal landowners and the liberals,
which our liberal and liberal-Narodnik historians have praised and made so
much of, was a struggle waged within the ruling classes, a
struggle waged for the most part within the ranks of the landowner
class, a struggle waged exclusively over the extent and the
forms of the proposed concessions. The liberals, like the feudal
landowners, upheld the property rights and rule of the landowners, and
indignantly denounced all revolutionary ideas about abolishing
those property rights, about completely overthrowing that rule,


Such revolutionary ideas could not but ferment in the minds of the serf
peasants. The peasant masses, however, were so crushed and stupefied by
centuries of slavery that at the time of the Reform they were incapable of
anything more than scattered, isolated rebellions, or rather “riots”,
devoid of any political purpose. Nevertheless, even then there were
revolutionaries in Russia who took the side of the peasantry, who saw how
limited, how poverty-stricken was the over-advertised “Peasant Reform”,
and who recognised its true feudal nature. These revolutionaries of whom
there were extremely few at that time were headed by N.G. Chernyshevsky.


February 19, 1861, heralded the birth of the new, bourgeois, Russia
which had been growing out of the era of serfdom. The liberals of the
1860s, on the one hand, and Chernyshevsky, on the other, were the
representatives of two historical tendencies, of two historical forces
which to this day have been determining the issue of the struggle

    

for the new Russia. That is why on the occasion of the fiftieth anniversary
of February 19, it is necessary for the class-conscious proletariat to form
as clear an idea as possible of the substance and interrelation of these
two tendencies.  

The liberals wanted to “emancipate” Russia “from, above”, taking
care not to destroy either the monarchy of the tsars, or the property
rights and the rule of the landowners, prevailing upon them only to make
“concessions” to the spirit of the times. The liberals were, and still
are, the ideologists of the bourgeoisie, which cannot reconcile itself to
serfdom, but is afraid of revolution, is afraid of the mass movement which
would be capable of overthrowing the monarchy and abolishing the rule of
the landowners. That is why the liberals confine themselves to a “struggle
for reforms”, a “struggle for rights”, that is to say, a struggle for a
division of power between the feudal landowners and the bourgeoisie. As
long as that is the relation of forces, there can be no
“reforms” save those carried out by the feudal landowners, and
no “rights” save those limited by the tyranny of the feudal
landowners.  

Chernyshevsky was a utopian socialist, who dreamed of a transition to
socialism through the old, semi-feudal peasant village

commune.[2] He did not see, nor could he see in the sixties of the past
century, that only the development of capitalism and of the proletariat
could create the material conditions and the social force for the
achievement of socialism. But Chernyshevsky was not only a utopian
socialist; he was also a revolutionary democrat, he approached all the
political events of his times in a revolutionary spirit and was able to
exercise a revolutionary influence by advocating, in spite of all the
barriers and obstacles placed in his way by the censorship, the idea of a
peasant revolution, the idea of the struggle of the masses for the
overthrow of all the old authorities. In speaking of the “Peasant Reform”
of 1861, which the liberals at first tried to whitewash and subsequently
even glorified, he described it as vile, for he clearly saw its
feudal nature, he clearly saw that the liberal emancipators were robbing
the peasants of their last shirt. Chernyshevsky spoke of the liberals of
the sixties as “windbags, braggarts and

fools”,[3] for he clearly saw their

    

dread of revolution, their spinelessness and their servility before the
powers that be.  

These two historical tendencies have continued developing in the course
of the half-century that has elapsed since February 19, 1861, diverging
ever more clearly, definitely and decisively. The forces of the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, who preached that “educational” activity
was all that was needed, and who fought shy of the revolutionary
underground, grew stronger. On the other hand, the forces of democracy and
socialism also became stronger, at first merging into one in utopian
ideology and in the intellectualist struggles of the Narodnaya Volya and
the revolutionary Narodniks. However, since the early nineties, with the
transition from the revolutionary struggle of terrorists and individual
propagandists to the struggle of the revolutionary classes themselves,
these forces diverged.  

The decade preceding the Revolution—from 1895 to 1904—was marked by
open action of the proletarian masses and by their steady growth, by the
growth of the strike struggle, of Social-Democratic working-class
propaganda and organisation, and of the Social-Democratic Labour
Party. Following the lead of the socialist vanguard of the proletariat, the
revolutionary-democratic peasantry has also embarked upon mass struggle,
particularly since 1902.  

The two tendencies, which in 1861 had just emerged and had begun to
appear in literature in bare outline, developed and grew in the Revolution
of 1905, and found reflection in the movement of the masses and
the struggle carried on by political parties in the most varied
fields of activity, in the press, at mass meetings, in unions, in strikes,
in uprisings, and in the State Dumas.  

The liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie established the Cadet and Octobrist
parties that at first (until the summer of 1905) worked together in one
liberal Zemstvo movement, and subsequently split into two separate parties
fiercely competing with each other (and still doing so), the one putting
forward primarily its liberal, the other primarily its monarchist,
“face”—but always agreeing on the most essential issues; they
both denounce the revolutionaries, disparage the December uprising, and
honour as their flag the “constitutional” fig-leaf of absolutism. Both
parties

    

have professed and still profess “strictly constitutional” principles,
that is to say, they confine themselves to the limited field of activity
which the Black-Hundred tsar and the feudal landowners could concede
without giving up power, without relinquishing their autocratic rule,
without sacrificing a single kopek of revenues, “sanctified” by ages of
slave-holding, or parting with the least of their “justly acquired”
privileges.  

The democratic and the socialist trends separated from the liberal
trend, and drew a line of demarcation between themselves. The proletariat
organised and acted independently of the peasantry, rallying around its
own, working-class, Social-Democratic, party. The organisation of the
peasantry in the revolution was incomparably weaker, its actions were
infinitely more scattered and feeble, the level of its class-consciousness
was much lower, and monarchist illusions (as well as constitutional
illusions, which are closely connected with them) often paralysed its
energy, made it dependent upon the liberals, and sometimes upon the Black
Hundreds and gave rise to empty day-dreams about “God-given land” which
prevented it from launching an assault upon the landowning nobility with
the object of completely abolishing that class. By and large, the peasantry
taken as a mass, nevertheless fought the landowners, acted in a
revolutionary spirit, and in all the Dumas—even in the Third Duma which
was elected on the basis of representation specifically favouring the
feudal landowners—they created Trudovik groups that represented a
genuinely democratic movement despite their frequent vacillations. In the
mass movement of 1905–07, the Cadets and Trudoviks represented and
politically formulated the position and trends of the liberal-monarchist
and the revolutionary-democratic bourgeoisie respectively.  

The year 1861 begot the year 1905. The feudal character of the first
“great” bourgeois reform impeded the course of development, condemned the
peasants to a thousand still worse and more bitter torments, but it did not
change the course of development, did not avert the bourgeois revolution of
1905. The Reform of 1861 delayed the issue by opening a valve, as it were,
by permitting some growth of capitalism; but it did not prevent the
inevitable issue, which

    

in 1905 was fought out in an incomparably wider field, in the onslaught of
the masses upon the tsar’s autocracy and the feudal landowners. The Reform,
which the feudal land owners granted at a time when the oppressed masses
were completely undeveloped, begot the revolution by the time the
revolutionary elements among those masses had reached maturity.  

The Third State Duma and Stolypin’s agrarian policy represent the
second bourgeois reform carried out by the feudal landowners. February 19,
1861, was the first step taken in the transformation of the purely
feudal autocracy into a bourgeois monarchy; the period of 1908–10
represents the second step, an even more serious one, along the same
road. Nearly four and a half years have elapsed since the promulgation
of the decree of November 9, 1900; more than three and a half years have
elapsed since June 3,

1907[4]; yet today the Cadet bourgeoisie, and to a large extent the
Octobrist bourgeoisie, are becoming convinced that the “Constitution” of
June 3 and the agrarian policy of June 3 have proved
“unsuccessful”. “The most Right among the Cadets”, as Mr. Maklakov,
that semi-Octobrist, has been justly dubbed, was fully justified in
declaring in the State Duma on February 25, on behalf both of the Cadets
and of the Octobrists, that “today it is the pivotal elements of the
country who are dissatisfied, those who are most anxious for durable peace,
who dread a new rise of the tide of revolution”. There is one common
slogan: “It is the general opinion,” Mr. Maklakov went on to say, “that
if we continue on the road along which they are taking us they will lead us
to a second revolution 

The common slogan of the Cadet and the Octobrist bourgeoisie in the
spring of 1911 confirms that the appraisal of the state of affairs given by
our Party in the resolution adopted at its conference in December 1908 was
correct. “The principal factors of economic and political life,” that
resolution stated, “which gave rise to the Revolution of 1905 continue to
operate, and, the economic and political situation being what it is, a new
revolutionary crisis is inevitably maturing.”  

Menshikov, the paid hack of the tsarist Black-Hundred government,
recently declared in Novoye Vremya that the

    

Reform of February 19 “was a miserable failure”, because “the year 1861
failed to prevent 1905”. Now the hired lawyers and parliamentarians of the
liberal bourgeoisie declare that the “reforms” of November 9, 1906, and
of June 3, 1907, are a failure because these “reforms” lead to a
second revolution.  

The two statements, as well as the entire history of the liberal and
revolutionary movements in the period 1861–1905, provide extremely
interesting material for an elucidation of the very important question of
the relation between reform and revolution and the role of reformists and
revolutionaries in the social struggle.  

The opponents of revolution, some of them with hatred and a gnashing of
teeth, others in a spirit of dejection and despondency, admit that the
“reforms” of 1861 and of 1907–10 have failed in their purpose, because
they do not prevent revolution. Social-Democrats, the representatives of
the only consistently revolutionary class of our times, reply:

revolutionaries have played an immense historical role in the social
struggle and in all social crises even when the immediate result
of those crises has been half-hearted reforms. Revolutionaries are the
leaders of those forces of society that effect all change; reforms are the
by-product of the revolutionary struggle.  

The revolutionaries of 1861 remained isolated and, on the face of it,
suffered complete defeat. Actually, they were the great figures of the day,
and the further that day recedes, the more clearly do we see their
greatness and the more obvious is the insignificance and paltriness of the
liberal reformists of those days.  

The revolutionary class of 1905–07, the socialist proletariat, on the
face of it, also suffered complete defeat. Both the liberal monarchists and
the liquidators among the pseudo-Marxists have been shouting from the
house-tops that the proletariat went “too far” and resorted to
“excesses”, that it succumbed to the attraction of “the spontaneous
class struggle”, that it let itself be seduced by the pernicious idea of
the “hegemony of the proletariat”, and so on, and so forth. Actually, the
“sin” of the proletariat was that it did not go far enough, but that
“sin” is accounted for by the state of its forces at that time and is
being atoned for by unremitting

    

activity, even in times of blackest reaction, on the part of revolutionary
Social-Democrats, by their steadfast struggle against all manifestations of
reformism and opportunism. Actually, everything that has been won from the
enemies, and everything that is enduring in these gains, has been won and
is maintained only to the extent that the revolutionary struggle is strong
and alive in all spheres of proletarian activity. Actually, the proletariat
alone has championed consistent democracy to the end, exposing all the
instability of the liberals, freeing the peasantry from their influence,
and rising with heroic courage in insurrection.  

No one is in a position to foretell to what extent really democratic
changes will be effected in Russia in the era of her bourgeois revolutions,
but there can be no shadow of doubt that only the revolutionary
struggle of the proletariat will determine the extent and the success of
the changes. Between feudal “reforms” in the bourgeois spirit and the
democratic revolution led by the proletariat there can only be the
vacillations of liberalism and opportunist reformism—impotent, spineless,
and devoid of ideals.  

When we look at the history of the last half-century in Russia, when we
cast a glance at 1861 and 1905, we can only repeat the words of our Party
resolution with even greater conviction: “As before, the aim of our
struggle is to overthrow tsarism and bring about the conquest of power by
the proletariat relying on the revolutionary sections of the peasantry and
accomplishing the bourgeois-democratic revolution by means of the convening
of a popular constituent assembly and the establishment of a democratic
republic”.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Vestnik Yevropy (European Messenger)—a monthly
historico-political and literary magazine, of bourgeois-liberal trend,
published in St. Petersburg from 1866 to 1918. The magazine printed
articles directed against the revolutionary Marxists. Until 1908 its editor
and publisher was M. M. Stasyulevich.





[2]
The village (land) commune (Russ. obshchina
or mir)—the communal form of peasant use of the land
characterised by compulsory crop rotation and undivided woods and
pastures. Its principal features were collective liability (the compulsory
collective responsibility of the peasants for timely and full payments, and
the fulfilment of all kinds of services to the state and the landlords) and
the periodical redistribution of the land, with no right to refuse the
allotment given. The sale of the allotment was also forbidden.  

The landlords and the tsarist government used the village commune to
intensify feudal oppression and to squeeze land redemption payments and
taxes out of the people.





[3]
These are the words of Volgin, the hero of N.G. Chernyshevsky’s novel
Prologue.





[4]
This refers to the government coup of June 3 (16), 1907,
reactionary coup, whereby the Second Duma was dissolved and the law on Duma
elections changed. The new law greatly increased land lord and
commercial-industrial bourgeois representation, and greatly reduced the
already small representation of peasants and workers. A large proportion of
the population of Asiatic Russia was denied electoral rights, and the
representation from Poland and the Caucasus was reduced by half. The
composition of the 1907 Third Duma was, therefore, representative of the
Black Hundreds and Cadets.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Wreckers of the Party in the Role of “Wreckers of Legends”









Lenin: Wreckers of the Party in the Role of 'Wreckers of Legends'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Wreckers of the Party in the Role of “Wreckers of Legends”




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 21–22, March 19 (April 1), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 129-133.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Exactly a year ago the Central Organ of our Party published
the following extremely important letter from the Central Committee Bureau
in Russia to the Central Committee Bureau Abroad: 

“We [i. e., the Bureau of the C. C. in Russia]
approached Comrades Mikhail, Roman, and Yuri, suggesting that they
should start work, but we received a reply which states that, in their
opinion, not only are the decisions of the Plenary Meeting harmful, but
that the very existence of the Central Committee is harmful. On these
grounds, they refuse to at tend even a single meeting for

 co-optation.”[1]


Things could not be clearer. In the persons of Mikhail, Roman, and Yuri
we are dealing with open renegades who deem it unnecessary to resort to
“diplomacy” and wriggling in the spirit of Golos, and who
declare frankly that they have broken with our Party. Here we have
a clash of two “tactics”:

one, that of Martov, Dan and Co., representing an effort to disintegrate
the “old” Party from within, to keep the old Party in a sickly condition
until the Stolypin brand of “Social-Democrats”, the liquidators, gain a
firm foothold; the other, that of Potresov, Levitsky, Mikhail, Roman,
Yuri, and Co., proceeds from the fact that the game of sap ping the
strength of the old Party from within by intrigues is not worth the candle
and that it is necessary to effect an open break with the R.S.D.L.P. at
once.  

The publication of the statement by Mikhail, Roman, and Yuri has
badly upset the game of their friends and patrons

    

of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata. But the damage has been done: Dan,
Martov and Co. have been obliged to go on covering up their tracks, and
while, “on the one hand”, they take the part of the three mentioned
renegades, “on the other”, they make a slight attempt to “disavow”
them. Martov even mustered up courage—in the last but one, i. e., in the
23rd, issue of Golos, ten months after the publication of the fact
that his three friends had renounced the Party—to chide the three
gentlemen for their “thoughtlessness”....  

But now the wheel of “history” (the history of liquidationism) has
turned once again. A number of circumstances—primarily the rebuff
administered to liquidationism by some Social-Democratic groups engaged in
open activities—has caused Potresov, Levitsky, Mikhail, Roman, and Co. to
slow down a bit and to get closer to the “wise” and more cautious
“tactic” of covering up their tracks à la Dan and
Martov. This has made it possible for a “rebuttal” of the document quoted
above to appear—a year later.  

Obviously, the “rebuttal” which appeared in Golos under the
pompous heading “A Wrecked Legend” is false from be ginning to
end. It seems that in “officially” refusing to join the Central
Committee or to attend even one meeting for the purpose of co-opting new
members the above-mentioned three renegades were actuated by “motives of a
personal nature”. And only “later, in a private [strictly
“private”, of course] conversation with him [i. e., the representative of
the C. C.] we referred to a number of considerations [in this case, of a
political nature] which compel us [i. e., Roman, Mikhail, and Yuri] to view
with disfavour the proposition made to us”.  

Hence, Point 1 in the “rebuttal”: the statement referred to by the
Central Organ was made in “a private conversation” after official
uniforms had been laid aside. This extremely “extenuating circumstance”
radically alters matters, doesn’t it?  

But what, according to their own testimony, did Mikhail,
Roman, and Yuri say in that “private conversation”? They did not say that
the decisions of the Central Committee were harmful; all they did, you see,
was to take the liberty to observe that “the road dictated by the
Plenary Meeting does not strengthen but weakens the position of the
C. C.”;

    

that the recommendation made by the Central Committee to the Party about
taking advantage of legal opportunities “has meant and means the
wrecking of the legal workers’ organisations”; that the very first
step taken by the C. C. along this road (the publication of the resolution
dealing with a conference of the Party) “has supplied the government
with a pretext” for wrecking workers’ organisations. Well, don’t you
think that this is entirely different from what was stated by the
representative of the Central Committee, according to whom the three
liquidators from the candidates appointed in London “deem the interference
of the C. C. in the spontaneous process of the Social-Democratic forces
grouping themselves in legal organisations, as being tantamount to
performing an abortion in the second month of pregnancy”? And that’s what
they call a “rebuttal”!  

Further it seems that they did not say that the existence of the
C. C. is harmful, God forbid! All they did was to express the opinion,
strictly “privately” of course, that it would be much better if, instead
of the C. C., there exist ed an “organising group” which “would not be
requested to show a mandate” (i. e., a Party mandate), just as,
in their time, the Iskra and Zarya group was never
requested to show one (i. e., a

    “mandate”).[2]

The main accusation has thus been “rebutted” by Mikhail, Roman, and Yuri
almost as successfully as their colleague Igorev recently “rebutted” the
charges of plotting against the Central Committee and the Party which the
Menshevik pro-Party comrades, Plekhanov and

A. Moskovsky,[4] preferred against him.... What is needed, you see, is
not a Central Committee, but an “organising group”, such as the
“Iskra and Zarya group”. To be sure, the Iskra
and Zarya group was a revolutionary Social-Democratic group,
whereas Messrs. Mikhail, Roman, and Yuri need a liquidationist organising
group. But that is not the point at the moment. The point is that
according to their own testimony, Martov’s and Dan’s three allies
proposed to replace the C. C. by a private organising group, whom nobody
could request to show a despised “mandate” and which could do all the
“liquidating” it liked. A fine “rebuttal” indeed!...  
 

One of the “pivots” of the “rebuttal” published by Roman, Mikhail,
and Yuri is the story that the representative of the C. C., who invited
them to attend “at least one meeting” of the collegium, tried to persuade
them by saying that he (i. e., the representative of the C. C.) and other
“Bolsheviks in Russia” were bent on “freeing themselves from the guiding
influence of Lenin’s circle”. This statement made by a Bolshevik in
Russia, for which we have the evidence of three liquidators, is
particularly relished by the editors of Golos, who think they can
use it to justify somebody and something. It is obvious, however, that the
Golos crowd have become entangled in their own snares and speak
against themselves. Just use your brains, esteemed editors of
Golos. Let us assume that the Bolshevik who approached
your friends on be half of the Central Committee was opposed to what you
call “Lenin’s circle”. So much the worse for you. For it was the
very same Bolshevik who wrote the letter reporting the repudiation of the
Party by your three friends, which we printed in No. 12 of the Central
Organ. If that Bolshevik is not a follower of what you call “Lenin’s
circle”, then you must consider his evidence to be all the more
unbiased. Let us assume that the members of the Central Committee
who invited you were opposed to. “Lenin’s

       circle”[3]

—from

your own standpoint that should only aggravate the guilt of the three
liquidators who refused to join the Central Commit tee even under
conditions so favourable for them. What has come over the Golos
gentlemen? They are generally more clever ... at covering up their
tracks. You have made a very clumsy job of it, gentlemen! More stupid even
than the “rebuttals” published by Stolypin’s “Information Bureau”.

 

You have had ill luck with your “rebuttal”, gentlemen of
Golos, just as you have had ill luck with your recent scurrilous
leaflets. You wanted “to prove too much”, you wanted to prove that all
Social-Democrats are pro-Party—and that’s why you have proved
nothing. Just reflect a little:

one day you publish the leaflet of the

fifty-eight[5] (how many of the fifty-eight are hypocrites and how many
have been hoodwinked?), in which you represent your opponents (“Lenin’s
circle”) as arch-monsters, as a “gang”, etc. And the very next day you
(the editors of Golos) issue a leaflet containing a “programme of
reforms”, in which you declare:

everything will be perfect if we (the Golos group) are allowed
representation in all central Party institutions on a basis of equality
with these monsters, with people who are guilty of a number of “crimes”,
etc., etc. Well, when are you acting “for the benefit of the Party”, and
when are you looking after your own interests, gentlemen—in the first or
in the second case? Those fragrant-smelling Golos bulletins as
well as its supplements, in which “everything has been made use of”,
including the Geneva otzovists who style themselves an “ideological circle
of Bolsheviks”, would not be worth, mentioning, if not for the
fact that they shed such glaring light on the entire policy of
Golos....  

Try hard, you “wreckers of legends”, do your utmost! There is one
legend which you are indeed helping us to wreck—the legend that you still
have something in common with revolutionary Social-Democracy.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 16, “Golos (Voice) of the
Liquidators Against the Party”.—Ed.  

[2]
See Golos, supplement to No. 24, p. 3.  —Lenin

[3]
Another member of the Central Committee, one of the “Bolsheviks in
Russia”, is reproached by Golos with having, you see, placed
“obstacles in the way of co-opting Golos people as members of the
Central Committee, since he declared that the Bolshevik members of the
C.C. ... would permit the co-option only of such candidates as will first
sign a statement renouncing ‘liquidationism’”. The member of the
C.C. whom the Golos crowd accuse of so terrible a crime is at
present not in a position to answer the liquidationist gentlemen

himself.[6] That is why we shall say on his behalf: if what you
report of him were true, it would only mean that from the standpoint of the
Party he was absolutely right and that he acted fully in the spirit of the
decisions of the Plenary Meeting.  —Lenin
 



[4]
A. Moskovsky—Menshevik G. I. Khundadze.





[6]
The Bolshevik member of the C.C. was I. F. Dubrovinsky who was
arrested in June 1910 (see Note 73).





[5]
Leaflet of the fifty-eight—a leaflet published in Paris in
1911 under the title “To All Members of the Party from the Meeting of
Mensheviks in Paris”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadets and the Octobrists









Lenin: The Cadets and the Octobrists







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadets and the Octobrists




Published:
Zvezda, No. 16, April 2, 1911.

      Signed: V.Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 134-138.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The notorious “Cabinet crisis” and the election of a new
Chairman of the State

Duma[1] have provided additional material on the social nature and
political significance of the Cadet and the Octobrist parties. For the
hundredth or the thousandth time the Russian liberal (save the mark!)
bourgeoisie has shown its true colours. From the daily press and from the
preceding issue of Zvezda, the reader knows what these colours
are. It may not be superfluous, however, to sum up some of the conclusions,
in view of the fact that the Cadet press, which is the most widely
circulated, willingly “thunders” against the Octobrists, but is very
loath to deal with the results of the Cadets’ own actions.  

Let us recall the behaviour of the party of “people’s freedom” during
the elections of the new Chairman of the State Duma. On March 21,
Rech hastened to report: “The people’s freedom group has decided
to vote for M. Alexeyenko if he is nominated for the post of Chairman of
the State Duma. If, however, Rodzyanko is nominated, the group will vote
against him”. The Constitutional-“Democrats” offer their services to the
“Left” Octobrists. But that is not all. The leading article in
Rech of the same date declares that Alexeyenko is “universally
respected”, and tries to deal with the matter from the standpoint of the
entire State Duma: if, it says, the Rights support the nominee of
the majority of the Octobrists (i. e., Alexeyenko’s candidacy), then the
State Duma may, perhaps, “regain the unanimity” with which the nomination
of Khomyakov was once accepted. “This unanimity would show that the
entire Duma realises the exceptional gravity of the situation.”


Thus wrote Rech. “The entire Duma”, nothing more nor
less. This should be recalled as often as possible during the elections to
the Fourth Duma!  
 

The Cadets are perfectly well aware that the Rights, on principle, are
for a Duma without rights; that the Nationalists justify and defend
Stolypin and the violation of Article 87. And yet, merely for the sake of
voting for Alexeyenko, the Cadets are prepared to forget everything and to
pro claim the unanimity of “the entire Duma”, although they too
are fully aware that the workers’ deputies will under no
circumstances allow themselves to be duped by the “unanimity” of the
Third Duma, any more than they did at the time of Khomyakov’s election.


It is obvious that, as far as the Cadets are concerned, the workers’
deputies and the Trudoviks do not count. The Third Duma without them, but
with the Rights, with Markov the Second and Purishkevich, is “the
entire Duma”. That is what the statement of Rech
amounts to. And this reasoning of Rech correctly draws
the line which many have so often interpreted wrongly—namely, the line
between the feudal landowners and the bourgeoisie (even the most
“liberal”, i. e., the Cadet variety), on the one hand, and the workers
and the peasants, i. e., the forces of democracy, on the other. Without the
forces of democracy, but with the Rights, “we”, say the Cadets, are “the
entire Duma”. That means that when they lay claim to the title of
democrats the, Cadets are deceiving the people. That means that, as far as
the Cadets are concerned, “we” implies the feudal landowners and the
bourgeoisie; the rest do not count.  

The minor question of the election of a new Chairman of the State Duma
has served to remind us once again of the essential truth that the Cadets
are not democrats, but moderate liberal bourgeois, who long for
“the unanimity” of “the entire” parliament of diehard reactionaries and
Octobrists. Competition with the Octobrists—is all that the
“struggle” the Cadets are waging against them amounts to. The Cadets are
fighting the Octobrists—there is no doubt of that. But they are not
fighting them as representatives of a class, as representatives of larger
sections of the population, and the aim of their fight is not to remove the
old regime to which the Octobrists are adapting themselves; they are
fighting them as competitors who are anxious to adapt them selves
to the same regime, to serve the interests of the same
class, and to protect it from the too exacting demands

    

of the wider sections of the population (the democratic elements in general
and of the proletariat in particular). All that the Cadets are after is to
adapt themselves to the same regime, but in a slightly different way; that
is the sub stance of their policy, the policy of the liberal bourgeois. And
it is this competition with the Octobrists, the struggle to step into
their shoes, that lends the fight of the Cadets its peculiar
“pungency”. This explains the special hostility of the Rights
and the Octobrists towards the Cadets; it is a hostility of a special kind:
“those fellows” (the democrats) are out to annihilate them, while “these
fellows” (the Cadets) want to force them down one rung of the ladder; the
first prospect calls for an irreconcilable struggle as a matter of
principle, it calls for a life and death struggle; the second prospect
implies a fight for the top jobs, a contest in the sphere of
intrigue, rivalry as regards the methods of winning the very same
landowning and bourgeois majority, or of earning the confidence of the very
same old regime.  

The picture which the Third Duma presented on the day of the election
of the new Chairman clearly showed this difference.  

The Cadet recorder of events “in parliamentary circles” continued to
sing the praises of Alexeyenko in Rech of March 23, describing him
as “a man quite independent and with a strong sense of dignity”, and so
on and so forth. This is said of an Octobrist who delighted in the coup of
June 3!  

Such is the Cadet gauge for strict legality: not to protest against
June 3, but to protest against March 14. It reminds one of the American
saying: “If you steal a loaf of bread you’ll surely go to jail, but if you
steal a railroad you’ll be made a senator”.  

Mr. Litovtsev, who is responsible for the “In Parliamentary Circles”
column in Rech, on March 23 wrote that the Left Octobrists and the
Cadets “spent a good half of the day worrying: what if he decides to
accept” (meaning Rodzyanko who pretended that he was declining
nomination).  

How could the struggle between the Cadets and their opponents help
being sharp when the matter revolves around a question so close to
and so directly affecting the entire
    

Third Duma, namely, “What if Rodzyanko decides to accept?”!  

Rodzyanko did decide to accept. What happened at the elections was that
the Rights and the Nationalists roared with laughter and applauded for all
they were worth; while the “Left” Octobrists and the Cadets
maintained a stubborn, systematic silence: they were beaten at their own
game; they could not rejoice; they were forced to maintain
silence. “By way of protest”, the Cadets cast their vote for the
Nationalist Volkonsky. The democrats alone declared loudly, unequivocally,
and clearly that they would take no part in the election of the new
Chairman of the Third Duma, and that they declined any
responsibility for “the entire activity of the Third Duma”
(Voiloshnikov’s words).  

On the day of the elections, at the 86th sitting of the Duma, the only
ones who spoke in the contest between the competitors were
Rodzyanko, the head of the Third Duma, Bulat, and Voiloshnikov. The rest
were silent.  

Voiloshnikov, speaking on behalf of all the members of his group,
correctly pointed out that the Cadets, “due to the peculiar nature of
their political position, have always placed all their hopes in alliances
inside the Duma”, and he ridiculed them as gullible liberals.  

The Cadets’ political position and its peculiar nature are to be
explained by the class character of this party. It is an anti-democratic
bourgeois-liberal party. That is why they “always place all their hopes in
alliances inside the Duma”. This is true in two senses: first, in the
sense of contrasting what is going on inside the Duma with what is going on
outside it; and, secondly, in the sense that it refers to “alliances”
among those social elements, those classes, which represent the “entire”
Third Duma.  

In connection with the election of Rodzyanko, which signified a victory
for the Nationalists, only the workers’ deputies and the Trudoviks came out
with statements which were not meant to promote any alliances
“inside the Duma”; with statements which explained the attitude of the
forces of democracy in general and of the proletarian forces of democracy
in particular, toward the entire Third Duma, toward the coup of
June 3, and toward the Octobrists and the Cadets jointly. These statements
represented a proper

    

notice served on Rodzyanko and the whole of “his” majority, a proper
warning to the “responsible” liberal “opposition” (responsible to the
Third Duma and to the men of June 3) by political parties “responsible”
to certain other forces.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
In March 1911 the Council of State turned down the Bill on the
establishment of Zemstvos in the Western Gubernias, which had been
introduced by the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, P. A. Stolypin.


As a result of this attitude, Stolypin handed in his resignation which
Nicholas II refused to accept. Stolypin then succeeded in having the State
Duma and the Council of State prorogued for three days (from March 12 to 14
[25 to 27]) and passed the law on Zemstvos in the Western Gubernias by
invoking Article 87 which empowered the government to adopt laws by-passing
the legislative organs when they were not functioning “if extraordinary
circumstances make such action essential”.  

This invoking of Article 87 to by-pass the legislative organs lead to
the demonstrative resignation of A. I. Guchkov, Chairman of the State Duma,
and the election of a new Chairman, the Right Octobrist M. V. Rodzyanko.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Memory of the Commune









Lenin: In Memory of the Commune







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Memory of the Commune




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 4–5, April 15 (28), 1911.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Gazeta text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 139-143.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Forty years have passed since the proclamation of the Paris
Commune. In accordance with tradition, the French workers paid homage to
the memory of the men and women of the revolution of March 18, 1871, by
meetings and demonstrations. At the end of May they will again place
wreaths on the graves of the Communards who were shot, the victims of the
terrible “May Week”, and over their graves they will once more vow to
fight untiringly until their ideas have triumphed and the cause they
bequeathed has been fully achieved.  

Why does the proletariat, not only in France but through out the entire
world, honour the men and women of the Paris Commune as their predecessors?
And what is the heritage of the Commune?  

The Commune sprang up spontaneously. No one consciously prepared it in
an organised way. The unsuccessful war with Germany, the privations
suffered during the siege, the unemployment among the proletariat and the
ruin among the lower middle classes; the indignation of the masses against
the upper classes and against authorities who had displayed utter
incompetence, the vague unrest among the working class, which was
discontented with its lot and was striving for a different social system;
the reactionary composition of the National Assembly, which roused
apprehensions as to the fate of the republic—all this and many other
factors combined to drive the population of Paris to revolution on
March 18, which unexpectedly placed power in the hands of the National
Guard, in the hands of the working class and the petty bourgeoisie which
had sided with it.  

It was an event unprecedented in history. Up to that time power had, as
a rule, been in the hands of landowners

    

and capitalists, i. e., in the hands of their trusted agents who made up
the so-called government. After the revolution of March 18, when M. Thiers’
government had fled from Paris with its troops, its police and its
officials, the people became masters of the situation and power passed into
the hands of the proletariat. But in modern society, the proletariat,
economically enslaved by capital, cannot dominate politically unless it
breaks the chains which fetter it to capital. That is why the movement of
the Commune was bound to take on a socialist tinge, i. e., to strive to
over throw the rule of the bourgeoisie, the rule of capital, and to destroy
the very foundations of the contemporary social order.  

At first this movement was extremely indefinite and confused. It was
joined by patriots who hoped that the Commune would renew the war with the
Germans and bring it to a successful conclusion. It enjoyed the support of
the small shopkeepers who were threatened with ruin unless there was a
postponement of payments on debts and rent (the government refused to grant
this postponement, but they obtained it from the Commune). Finally, it
enjoyed, at first, the sympathy of bourgeois republicans who feared that
the reactionary National Assembly (the “rustics”, the savage landlords)
would restore the monarchy. But it was of course the workers (especially
the artisans of Paris), among whom active socialist propaganda had been
carried on during the last years of the Second Empire and many of whom even
belonged to the International, who played the principal part in this
movement.  

Only the workers remained loyal to the Commune to the end. The
bourgeois republicans and the petty bourgeoisie soon broke away from it:
the former were frightened off by the revolutionary-socialist, proletarian
character of the movement; the latter broke away when they saw that it was
doomed to inevitable defeat. Only the French proletarians supported
their government fearlessly and untiringly, they alone fought and
died for it—that is to say, for the cause of the emancipation of the
working class, for a better future for all toilers.  

Deserted by its former allies and left without support, the Commune was
doomed to defeat. The entire bourgeoisie

    

of France, all the landlords, stockbrokers, factory owners, all the
robbers, great and small, all the exploiters joined forces against it. This
bourgeois coalition, supported by Bismarck (who released a hundred thousand
French prisoners of war to help crush revolutionary Paris), succeeded in
rousing the ignorant peasants and the petty bourgeoisie of the provinces
against the proletariat of Paris, and forming a ring of steel around half
of Paris (the other half was besieged by the German army). In some of the
larger cities in France (Marseilles, Lyons, St. Étienne, Dijon,
etc.) the workers also attempted to seize power, to proclaim the Commune
and come to the help of Paris; but these attempts were short-lived. Paris,
which had first raised the banner of proletarian revolt, was left to its
own resources and doomed to certain destruction.  

Two conditions, at least, are necessary for a victorious social
revolution—highly developed productive forces and a proletariat
adequately prepared for it. But in 1871 both of these conditions were
lacking. French capitalism was still poorly developed, and France was at
that time mainly a petty-bourgeois country (artisans, peasants,
shopkeepers, etc). On the other hand, there was no workers’ party; the
working class had not gone through a long school of struggle and was
unprepared, and for the most part did not even clearly visualise its tasks
and the methods of fulfilling them. There was no serious political
organisation of the proletariat, nor were there strong trade unions and
co-operative societies....  

But the chief thing which the Commune lacked was time—an opportunity
to take stock of the situation and to embark upon the fulfilment of its
programme. It had scarcely had time to start work, when the government
entrenched in Versailles and supported by the entire bourgeoisie began
hostilities against Paris. The Commune had to concentrate primarily on
self-defence. Right up to the very end, May 21-28, it had no time to think
seriously of anything else.  

However, in spite of these unfavourable conditions, in spite of its
brief existence, the Commune managed to promulgate a few measures which
sufficiently characterise its real significance and aims. The Commune did
away with the standing army, that blind weapon in the hands of the

    

ruling classes, and armed the whole people. It proclaimed the separation of
church and state, abolished state payments to religious bodies (i. e.,
state salaries for priests), made popular, education purely secular, and in
this way struck a severe blow at the gendarmes in cassocks. In the purely
social sphere the Commune accomplished very little, but this little
nevertheless clearly reveals its character as a popular, workers’
government. Night-work in bakeries was forbidden; the system of fines,
which represented legalised robbery of the workers, was abolished. Finally,
there was the famous decree that all factories and workshops abandoned or
shut down by their owners were to be turned over to associations of workers
that were to resume production. And, as if to emphasise its character as a
truly democratic, proletarian government, the Commune decreed that the
salaries of all administrative and government officials, irrespective of
rank, should not exceed the normal wages of a worker, and in no case amount
to more than 6,000 francs a year (less than 200 rubles a month).  

All these measures showed clearly enough that the Commune was a deadly
menace to the old world founded on the enslavement and exploitation of the
people. That was why bourgeois society could not feel at ease so long as
the Red Flag of the proletariat waved over the H&ohattel de Ville
in Paris. And when the organised forces of the government finally succeeded
in gaining the upper hand over the poorly organised forces of the
revolution, the Bonapartist generals, who had been beaten by the Germans
and who showed courage only in fighting their defeated countrymen, those
French Rennenkampfs and

Meller-Zakomelskys,[1] organised such a slaughter as Paris had never
known. About 30,000 Parisians were shot down by the bestial soldiery, and
about 45,000 were arrested, many of whom were afterwards executed, while
thousands were transported or exiled. In all, Paris lost about 100,000 of
its best people, including some of the finest workers in all trades.  

The bourgeoisie were satisfied. “Now we have finished with socialism for a
long time,” said their leader, the blood thirsty dwarf, Thiers, after he
and his generals had drowned the proletariat of Paris in blood. But these
bourgeois crows croaked in vain. Less than six years after the suppression

    

of the Commune, when many of its champions were still pining in prison or
in exile, a new working-class movement arose in France. A new socialist
generation, enriched by the experience of their predecessors and no whit
discouraged by their defeat, picked up the flag which had fallen from the
hands of the fighters in the cause of the Commune and bore it boldly and
confidently forward. Their battle-cry was: “Long live the social
revolution! Long live the Commune!”  And in another few years, the new
workers’ party and the agitational work launched by it throughout the
country compelled the ruling classes to release Communards who were still
kept in prison by the government.  

The memory of the fighters of the Commune is honoured not only by the
workers of France but by the proletariat of the whole world. For the
Commune fought, not for some local or narrow national aim, but for the
emancipation of all toiling humanity, of all the downtrodden and
oppressed. As a foremost fighter for the social revolution, the Commune has
won sympathy wherever there is a proletariat suffering and engaged in
struggle. The epic of its life and death, the sight of a workers’
government which seized the capital of the world and held it for over two
months, the spectacle of the heroic struggle of the proletariat and the
torments it underwent after its defeat—all this raised the spirit of
millions of workers, aroused their hopes and enlisted their sympathy for
the cause of socialism. The thunder of the cannon in Paris awakened the
most backward sections of the proletariat from their deep slumber, and
everywhere gave impetus to the growth of revolutionary socialist
propaganda. That is why the cause of the Commune is not dead. It lives to
the present day in every one of us.  

The cause of the Commune is the cause of the social revolution, the
cause of the complete political and economic emancipation of the
toilers. It is the cause of the proletariat of the whole world. And in this
sense it is immortal.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Rennenkampf and Meller-Zakomelsky—tsarist generals,
notorious for their brutal punitive actions during the 1905-07 Revolution.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Social Structure of State Power, the Prospects and Liquidationism









Lenin: The Social Structure of State Power, the Prospects and Liquidationism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Social Structure of State Power, the Prospects and Liquidationism




Published:
Mysl, No. 4, March 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Mysl text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 144-163.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The questions indicated above occupy, from the point of view of their
importance, one of the foremost, if not the foremost place in the
system of views of a Marxist who wishes to understand the realities surrounding
him. The period 1908–10 undoubtedly bears a distinctive character. The social
structure of society and of state power is characterised by changes, and unless
these changes are understood not a single step can be taken in any sphere of
social activity. The understanding of these changes determines the prospects for
the future, by which we mean, of course, not idle guessing about things unknown,
but the basic trends of economic and political development—those trends,
the resultant of which determines the immediate future of the country, those
trends which determine the tasks, direction and character of the activity of
every intelligent public man. And this last question of the tasks, direction and
character of activity is most closely connected with the question of
liquidationism.


No wonder then that as far back as 1908, as soon as it had become—or was
beginning to become—clear that we were confronted with a new, distinctive
period in Russian history, the Marxists paid particular attention to the questions of the social structure of state power, prospects for the future, and
liquidationism; they pointed to the inseparable connection between these
questions and systematically discussed them. Furthermore, they did not confine
themselves to mere discussion, for that would have been “literary
scribbling” in the worst sense of the word; that would have been possible
only in a discussion group of intellectuals not conscious of their
responsibility and not troubled by politics. No, they worked out an exact
formulation of the

    

results of the discussion, a formulation that could serve as a guide, not only
for a member of the given literary circle, not only for a person connected in
one way or another with a definite intellectualist category, but for any and
every conscious representative of the class who regards the ideology of Marxism
as his own. This necessary work was completed by the end of 1908.


I have already pointed out the principal results of this work in No. 2 of our
journal. I take the liberty of quoting a few lines in order to make further
exposition more intelligible.


“The development of the Russian state system during the past three
centuries shows that its class character has been changing in one
definite direction. The monarchy of the seventeenth century with the Boyars’
Duma did not resemble the bureaucratic-aristocratic monarchy of the eighteenth
century. The monarchy of the first half of the nineteenth century was not the
same as the monarchy of 1861–1904. In the 1908–10 period a new phase was clearly
outlined, marking one more step in the same direction, which may be
described as the direction leading towards a bourgeois monarchy. The character
of the Third Duma and the present agrarian policy are closely connected with
this step. The new phase, therefore, is not, an accident but represents a
specific stage in the capitalist, evolution of the country. This new phase does
not solve the old problems, nor can it do so; consequently, since it is
unable to eliminate them, it calls for the use of new methods of approach
to old solutions of old problems” (No. 2, p. 43). And a few lines further:
“Those who deny (or who do not understand) ... that we are confront ed
with the old problems and are heading towards the old solution of these
problems, are in fact deserting Marxism, are in fact
surrendering to the liberals (as Potresov, Levitsky and others have done)”

       (p. 44).[1]


Whatever attitude one may adopt towards the set of ideas expressed in these
propositions, it would hardly be possible to deny the very close connection and
interrelation existing between the separate parts of this appraisal of the given
period. Take, for instance, the decree of November 9,

    

1906 (the law of June 14, 1910). There can be no disputing the fact that each of
them bears a clearly expressed bourgeois character which marks a change of
principle in the agrarian policy long pursued by the “upper” strata
towards the village commune and allotment ownership. But so far, not even the
most unprincipled weathercocks such as the Cadets, have ventured to assert that
this change of principle has already settled the question, has
already created new foundations of capitalist peasant economy, or has
already eliminated the old problems. The connection between the law of
June 14, 1910, and the system of elections to the Third Duma, as well as the
social composition of the latter is obvious; it would have been impossible to
carry out this law, to take a series of measures to put it into practice other
than by establishing an alliance between the central government and the feudal
(let us use this not very exact, general European expression) landowners and
the upper strata of the commercial-industrial bourgeoisie. We are thus faced
with a distinctive stage in the entire process of capitalist evolution
of the country. Does this stage do away with the retention of “power and
revenue” (speaking in a sociological sense) in the hands of the landowners
of the feudal type? No, it does not. The changes that took place in this, as in
all the other spheres, do not remove the fundamental traits of the old
regime, of the old relation of social forces. Hence the fundamental task of a
politically conscious public man is clear; he must evaluate these new changes,
“make use” of them, grasp them, if we may use that expression, and
at the same time, he must not allow himself to drift helplessly with the stream,
he must not throw out the old baggage, he must preserve the essentials in the
forms of activity and not merely in theory, in the programme, in the principles
of policy.


How then did Potresov and Martov, Dan and Axelrod, Levitsky and Martynov, the
“ideological leaders “who group themselves round publications of the
Vozrozhdeniye, Zhizn, Dyelo Zhizni, Nasha
Zarya, etc., type, react to
this definitely formulated answer to the “vexed questions”, to this
direct and clear exposition of definite views? The fact is that they did not
react like politicians, “ideological leaders”, responsible
publicists, but like a literary group,

    

like a circle of intellectuals, like free lances of free groups of the writing
fraternity. Like men who knew how to appreciate the fashion and the spirit of
the times as accepted in liberal parlours, they tittered condescendingly over
this antiquated, out-of-date, eccentric striving to formulate answers to vexed
questions. Why such exactitude, when one can write wherever one pleases, about
anything one pleases, whatever one pleases, and in any way one pleases, when the
Milyukovs and Struves furnish excellent examples of all the advantages,
conveniences and privileges that follow from the evasion of direct answers, of
an exact enunciation of views, of formulated professions de foi, etc.,
when Forgetful Ivans (and especially the Ivans who do not like to recall the
exact formulations of the past) are being honoured and respected in the broadest
circles of “society”?


Thus, throughout the past three years, we have not observed the slightest
attempt on the part of this entire literary fraternity to present their
own formulated answer to the “vexed questions”. There have been
many metaphors and idle hypotheses, but not a single straight answer. The
distinguishing, characteristic feature of the fraternity under consideration was
their love of amorphism, i. e., of that symptom which was recognised in
the most definite, precise and unequivocal terms to be an integral part of
liquidationism at the very time the direct reply to the vexed
questions was given. To drift aimlessly with the stream, to delight in
one’s amorphism, to “put paid” to that which is contrasted to
the amorphous present—this is one of the main features of
liquidationism. Opportunists always and everywhere passively abandon themselves
to the stream, rest content with answers “from event to event”, from
congress (drunks) to congress

(factory),[4] they are satisfied to transfer their
affiliation from one “association” (albeit the most respectable and
useful—trade unions, consumers’ societies, cultural societies, temperance
societies, etc.) to another, etc. Liquidationism is the sum total of the
tendencies that are peculiar to all opportunism in general, and reveal
themselves in definite forms in one of our social-political trends in a certain
period of Russian history.


History has preserved only two definite opinions of the liquidators on the above
“direct answer” (to the vexed questions).

    

The first opinion: the adjective “bourgeois” ought to be replaced by the
adjective “plutocratic”. Such a substitution, however, would be utterly
incorrect. The epoch of 1861–1904 reveals to us the growth of the
influence (and often the preponderating influence) of the plutocracy in the
most varied spheres of life. What we see in the 1908-10 period is no longer
plutocracy, but something different—the result of the
bourgeoisie having recognised itself as a class. It is mindful of the
lessons received during the preceding three years and is creating an
ideology which in principle is hostile to socialism (not to European
socialism, not to socialism in general, but specifically to Russian
socialism) and to democracy. Moreover, the bourgeoisie is organised
nationally, that is, as a class, a definite section of which is permanently
represented (and in a very influential way, too) in the Third
Duma. Finally, in the agrarian policy of 1908–10, too, there is a system
which carries out the definite plan of a bourgeois agrarian regime. To be
sure, this plan does not “work” yet; but this failure is the failure of
one of the bourgeois systems, while the plutocracy has
undoubtedly been “successful” in the villages, i. e., the village
plutocracy is certainly gaining in consequence of the agrarian policy of
1908–10, whereas the bourgeois regime, for which so many sacrifices are
made, is still unable to “fit in”. In a word, the proposed term
“plutocratic” is inept in every respect, so much so that the liquidators
themselves apparently prefer to forget this proposal.  

Another opinion: the answer outlined above is incorrect because it is
equal to the advice to “shove in where we once met with

...”[5] bad luck. This brief but energetic opinion is valuable because
it expresses in a striking form the results of all the literary productions
of the liquidators from Potresov’s The Social Movement down to
Mr. Levitsky in Nasha Zarya. This opinion is a purely negative
one; it confines itself to condemning “shoving” without giving any
positive indication as to where one should “shove”. Swim, they
seem to say, as best you can, like “everybody else”, but do not consider
it worth while to indulge in generalisations as to where you will or should
emerge.  

However much the opportunists would like to avoid being worried by
generalisations, to avoid all “unpleasant” talk

    

about giving a direct answer to the “vexed questions”—this is
impossible. Drive Nature out of the door and she will fly in through the
window. By the irony of history the very same liquidators who like to pose
as “progressives”, as alien to “conservatism”, and who in 1908
scornfully turned up their noses at the suggestions that there was need for
a direct answer, were forced, almost a year and a half later, in
the summer of 1910, to reckon with these suggestions. And they were forced
to do so by events in their own camp. They had almost completely evaded the
direct answer demanded in certain contemptible, out-of-date, atrophied,
useless, pernicious, “hopeless quarters”, when suddenly, a year and a
half later, a “trend” arises among the liquidators themselves, which also
demands a direct answer and which challengingly gives a direct answer!


As was to be expected, the role of “challenger” was assumed by
Y. Larin; but this time he was not alone. Larin, we know, is the enfant
terrible of opportunism. He is distinguished by a great fault (from
the point of view of the opportunists); he takes the trends that appear
among them seriously, sincerely and thoughtfully, tries to link them up
into a consistent whole, to think them out to the end, to obtain direct
answers, to draw practical conclusions. Those who are familiar with Larin’s
book on a broad workers’ party (it appeared three or four years ago) will
certainly remember how he crushed in his fervent embraces Axelrod’s
notorious idea of a labour congress.  

In March 1910, Larin began to publish a series of articles in
Vozrozhdeniye on this very question of the social structure of
state power, the prospects for the future, and liquidationism. He was
joined by Mr. Piletsky. Both writers tackled these questions, to which they
vainly sought a direct answer in their liquidationist camp, with the zeal
of neophytes, and they began to hit out right and left: no use talking of
serfdom in present-day Russia, the government has already evolved
into a bourgeois government. “Both the first and the second “elements,”
says Larin singling out the notorious “third

element”,[6] “may sleep in peace; October 1905 is not on the order of
the day” (Vozrozhdeniye, No. 9–10, p. 20). “If the Duma were
abolished, it would be restored more rapidly than in post revolutionary
Austria, which

    

abolished the Constitution in 1851 only to recognise it again in 1860, nine
years later, without any revolution, simply because it was in the interests
of the most influential section of the ruling classes, the section whose
economy was run on capitalist lines. Eventually, the struggle of the
various sections of the ruling classes amongst themselves, after the social
system of bourgeois relations has been extended, will force them in our
country, as elsewhere, to expand the framework of the electoral system”
(ibid., p. 26). “The process of bringing Russia into the capitalist world
... is being completed in the political sphere as well. This means that at
the present stage a nation-wide revolutionary movement like that
of 1905 is impossible” (p. 27).  

“Thus, since power [according to Larin’s conclusions] is not vested
‘almost entirely’ in the hands of the feudal landowners, the struggle for
power by the ‘capitalists of land and factory’ against the feudal
landowners cannot be transformed into a nation-wide struggle against the
existing government” (No. 11, p. 9). “... To base one’s tactical line on
the expectation of an approaching ‘nation-wide revival’ would mean
condemning oneself to fruitless waiting” (ibid., p. 11). “One must not
sit between two stools. If nothing has changed in the social nature of the
government, then the tasks and the forms of activity will
necessarily prove to be the old ones, and the only thing left to do is
‘fight the liquidators’. But if anyone wants to go further, to build
the new to replace, to continue and to raise up the old that is in
ruins and has become useless, then let him be consistent and realise what
the conditions for construction are” (ibid., p. 14).  

Well, isn’t that Larin naïve? He demands that the opportunists be
“consistent”, that they should not try “to sit between two stools”.


The editors of Vozrozhdentye were taken aback. In No. 9–10
they announced that they disagreed with Larin and wrote that while he
revealed “freshness of thought”, “Y. Larin’s articles failed to convince
us”. In No. 11, apparently on behalf of the editors, V. Mirov wrote
disagreeing with Larin, and acknowledged that Larin and Piletsky
represented “a definite trend which theoretically has not yet
been definitely established, but which speaks in very clear language” (the
greatest defect from the standpoint of the opportunists!).

    

Mr. Mirov wrote: “Larin has touched on another question of liquidationism
incidentally and unexpectedly [just like that! this restless Larin with his
“very clear language” is always causing annoyance to his friends!]. It
seems to us that there is no close connection between the way in which the
Party is to be built up and the nature of the Russian Government, and we
reserve to ourselves the right to deal separately with this matter” (issue
of July 7, 1910, p. 22).  

It was L. Martov in Zhizn, No. 1, of August 30, 1910, who
“dealt separately” with the matter on behalf of that “we”. He declared
(p. 4) that “he could only join” with V. Mirov and the editors against
Larin. Thus the last word in this entire discussion among the liquidators
has been uttered by L. Martov.  

Let us take a close look at this last word of the liquidators.  

As usual, Martov tackles the matter in a very lively manner and very
... “dexterously”. He begins by saying that “a careful search was made
for the bourgeoisie in power, or for the ruling bourgeoisie, immediately
after the coup d’état of June 3, 1907”. “The June Third regime is
that of the domination of the Russian trading and industrial
bourgeoisie. This conception was accepted equally by the above-mentioned
group of Menshevik writers (Larin, Piletsky) and by their opposites, the
orthodox Bolsheviks, who in 1908” wrote “about the birth of a bourgeois
monarchy in Russia”.  

Isn’t this a priceless gem of “dexterity”? Larin reproaches Martov
for trying to sit between two stools and bluntly admits, without
subterfuges and stratagems, that it is necessary to fight the liquidators
if the answer to the vexed questions given by the “orthodox” is not to be
redrafted.  

But Martov “dexterously” turns somersaults in mid-air and attempts to
persuade the readers (who in August 1910 had no opportunity whatever of
hearing the other side) that “this scheme” “was equally
acceptable” to both Larin and the “orthodox”!!  

This dexterity smacks of that of Burenin or

Menshikov[7] for it is impossible to imagine a more shameless ...
deviation from the truth.  

Among other things, Martov writes in the same article:

“In literary discussions people usually forget who really

    

‘started it’”. True, that happens in discussions among
literary men in which there is no question of working out an exact,
properly formulated answer to vexed questions. But it is precisely
not a discussion among literary men and not just a
literary “discussion” with which we are
dealing. L. Martov is fully aware of the fact hut deliberately
misleads the readers of Zhizn. Martov knows perfectly well the
nature of the formulated answer given and supported by the
“orthodox”. Martov knows perfectly well that it is precisely this answer
that Larin is fighting, calling it “ossified routine”, “building castles
in the air”, etc. Martov knows perfectly well that he himself
and all his adherents and colleagues rejected the formulated answer given
by the “orthodox”. Martov knows perfectly well “who really started
it”, who began (and finished) the framing of the precise answer, and who
confined himself to sniggering and expressing dissent, without giving
any answer at all.  

It is impossible to imagine a more disgusting, a more dishonest trick
than the one played by L. Martov! Larin by his straightforwardness and
outspokenness painfully hurt the diplomats of liquidationism when-he
admitted (though only after a year and a half) that it was quite impossible
to dispense with a definite answer. They cannot face the truth. And
L. Martov tries to deceive the reader by making it appear that Larin
accepts a scheme that is identical” with that of the orthodox, although in
reality the two schemes are opposed to each other; Larin’s scheme
implies the justification of liquidationism, that of the
“orthodox” implies the condemnation of liquidationism.  

In order to cover up his trick, Martov picks out from the “scheme”
one little word and distorts its connection with the context (a
method worked out to perfection by Burenin and Menshikov). Martov asserts
that the “orthodox” wrote about the “birth of a bourgeois monarchy in
Russia”—and since Larin writes that there can be no talk of feudalism in
Russia, that the government is already bourgeois—“ergo” the
schemes of Larin and of the “orthodox” are “identical”!! The
trick is done; and the reader who believes Martov is fooled.  

In reality, however, the “scheme”, or, to be more precise, the answer
of the orthodox, is that the old power in Russia

    

is, “taking another step in the transformation into a bourgeois
monarchy”; and that the path of capitalist development should be such as
would “preserve their power and their revenue for precisely
the feudal type of landowners” and that as a result of this state of
affairs “the basic factors of economic and political life which
called forth” the first crisis in the beginning of the twentieth century
“continue to operate”.  

Larin says that the government is already bourgeois, therefore
only partisans of “ossified routine” speak of the “preservation of
power” by the feudal landowners, therefore the “basic factors” of the
former upsurge no longer operate, therefore it is necessary to
build something new “in place of ‘the old that has become
useless’”.  

The “orthodox” say that the government is taking another
step along the path of transformation into a bourgeois (not
government in general, but) monarchy, while the real power remains and is
preserved in the hands of the feudal land owners, so that the “basic
factors” of former tendencies, of the former type of evolution “continue
to operate”, and therefore those who talk of “the old that has become
useless” are liquidators who in reality are captives of the
liberals.  

The contrast between the two schemes, between the two answers is
obvious. We have before us two different complete answers, which
lead to different conclusions.  

Martov is juggling à la Burenin, alleging that
both answers “speak of” the “birth of a bourgeois
monarchy”. One might with equal justice refer to the fact that both
answers recognise the continuing capitalist development of Russia! On
the basis of the common recognition (by all Marxists and by all those
who wish to be Marxists) of capitalist development, a dispute is
proceeding as to the degree, forms and conditions of that
development. Martov confuses the issue in order to represent what is
beyond dispute as the point at issue. It is on the basis of the
common recognition (by all Marxists and by all those who wish to
be Marxists) of the development of the old power along the path of
transformation into a bourgeois monarchy that the dispute is
proceeding as to the degree, forms, conditions and course of this
transformation; and Martov confuses the issue (do the former factors
continue to operate, is it admissible to renounce the old forms, etc.?) in
order to represent what is beyond dispute as the point at issue!  
 

That the government, of Russia in the nineteenth and twentieth
centuries has been generally evolving “along the path of transformation
into a bourgeois monarchy” is not denied by Larin, just as hitherto it has
never been denied by any sane man wishing to be a Marxist. The
proposal to substitute the word “plutocratic” for the adjective
“bourgeois” incorrectly appraises the degree of this
transformation, but it dares not dispute in principle the fact
that the actual “path”, the path of real evolution, lies
precisely in this transformation. Let him try to assert that the monarchy
of 1861–1904 (i. e., undoubtedly a less capitalistic monarchy than the
present one) does not represent one of the steps “in the
transformation into a bourgeois monarchy” when it is compared with the
period of serfdom under Nicholas I!  

Martov does not try to assert this, but on the contrary, “joins”
V. Mirov, who, in refutation of Larin, refers to the bourgeois character of
the Witte reforms and of the reforms of the

sixties![8] 

Now let the reader judge of the “dexterity” of Mirov and Martov. At
first, in opposition to Larin, they repeat the arguments which a year
and a half ago were used by the “orthodox” against the closest
friends, adherents and colleagues of Martov and Mirov, and then they assure
the reader that the “schemes” of Larin and of the “orthodox” are
identical.  

This is not only an example of “literary scribbling” versus politics
(for politics demands definite and direct answers, whereas literary men
often confine themselves to beating about the bush); it is more than
that—it is an example of the degradation of literature to the level of
Bureninism.  


After quoting the above words of Larin that “if nothing has changed”,
etc., “then ... the only thing to do is to fight the liquidators”, Martov
replies to him: 


   “Hitherto we thought that our tasks were determined by the social
   structure of the society in which we act and that the forms of our activity
   were determined, in the first place, by these tasks and, in the second
   place, by political conditions. The ‘social nature of the
   government’ has, therefore, no direct [the italics are Martov’s]
   bearing on the determination of our tasks and forms of activity.”  


This is not an answer, but an empty, evasive phrase. Martov again
attempts to confuse the issue, to shift the

    

dispute to irrelevant ground. The question is not whether the social nature
of the government is directly or indirectly connected
with the tasks and forms of activity. Even if this connection is an
indirect one it will in no way alter things once the close and
indissoluble connection is recognised. Martov does not venture to say a
word against the recognition of this close and indissoluble
connection. His reference to “political conditions” is nothing but dust
thrown in the eyes of the reader. To draw a contrast between “the social
nature of the government” and the “political conditions” is as senseless
as if I were to contrast goloshes made by human hands, to
overshoes. Overshoes are goloshes. And there are no other goloshes than
those made by human hands. The nature of the government corresponds to the
“political conditions”. And the nature of the government can never be
anything but social.  

The sum total of all this is that Martov “beat about the bush” and
evaded a direct answer to Larin. He evaded an answer because he had no
answer to give. Larin is quite right in stating that views on the “social
nature of the government” (to be more precise—its economic nature). are
closely and inseparably connected with views on the “tasks and forms of
activity”. Both Larin and the “orthodox” acknowledge and apply this
connection. Martov (and his tribe) displays no such consistency in his
views. That is why Martov is compelled to wriggle and make shift with
“overshoes”.  

Listen further.  


   “There flashed more or less clearly in the minds of
   these Mensheviks [Martov is referring to Kogan, Obrazovaniye,
   1907, as an example] the idea of the gradual, so to speak
   ‘organic’, entry of the working class into that ‘legal

       country’[2]

   which received the rudiments

    

   of a constitutional regime, of gradual extension of the June Third
   privileges of the bourgeoisie [not “plutocracy”, eh?] to broad
   democratic circles. If such were really the fundamental principles of
   contemporary ‘liquidationism’ in quotation marks, or of contemporary
   ‘legalism’, we would be confronted with the actual liquidation of our
   traditions, with actual legalism elevated to a principle, with a break
   in principle with all our past. We would have to wage a serious struggle
   with such liquidationism.... Are we really destined to see the
   reformists creeping into the regime of a renovated
   Tolmachovism?” Then comes a footnote by Martov: “Of course [!!] I do
   not suspect Larin of reformist tendencies”.  


This long quotation was necessary in order to demonstrate Martov’s
“method” clearly to the reader. He admits that reformism “flashed more
or less clearly” in the mind of Kogan (a Menshevik who systematically
collaborates in serious “works” with Martov). He admits that if
reformism were really the fundamental principle of liquidationism it would
be a “break with the past”. He hurls a ringing, noisy, stinging phrase at
the “reformists” who are “creeping into”, etc. And he winds up with,
what do you think? with an assurance that he, of course, “does
not suspect” Larin of reformist “tendencies”!  

This is exactly what Eduard Bernstein, Jean Jaurès or
Ramsay MacDonald say. They all “admit” that in the minds of certain
“extremists” there “flashes” something that is bad: reformism,
liberalism. They all admit that if liberalism were the
“fundamental principle” of their policy, that would be a “break
with the past”. They all hurl ringing, noisy, stinging phrases at the
“liberals who are cringing”, etc. And they all wind up with
... assurances that they “do not suspect” the Larins—I beg
pardon—they “do not suspect” their more candid, more “Right”
comrades, adherents, friends, colleagues and collaborators, of
liberal-bourgeois tendencies.  

The crux of the matter is this: in the articles quoted Larin gave an
exposition of the “system” of views of the most undoubted, most genuine
reformism! To deny this means denying the obvious, robbing the concept
reformism of all meaning. And if you “refute” Larin, “condemn”
reformism as “a principle”, hurl ringing phrases at those who are
“creeping into”, and at the same time positively assert that you “do not
suspect” Larin of reformism, surely you thereby

    

expose yourselves completely! By this you prove to the hilt that your
reference to your hostility “on principle” to “reformism as a
principle” is the same as the vow of a peddlar who says: “Believe me,
upon my oath, I paid more for it”.  

Believe me, upon my oath: I condemn reformism as a principle,
but I do not “suspect” Larin of reformism (those
suspicious orthodox people are really disgusting!), and I am at
one with Larin in his liquidationist practice.  

Such is the “detailed formula” of present-day Russian opportunism.


Here is an example of the application of this formula by Martov
himself, whom naïve people (or those unable to understand the
depth of the new re-grouping) still regard as an “undoubted”
non-liquidator: 


   “The tactics which are to be observed in the
   activities of the so-called ‘liquidators’,” writes Martov on pp. 9–10,
   “are those which place the open workers’ movement in the centre, strive
   to extent it in every possible direction, and seek
   within [the italics are Martov’s] this open workers’ movement,
   and only there [note: and only there!], the elements for the revival of
   the Party.”  


This is what Martov says. And this is nothing but reformism
creeping into the regime of a renovated

Tolmachovism.[9] The italics “creeping into” I have borrowed from
Martov himself, for it is important to note that it is precisely
“creeping into” that Martov in fact preaches in the words just
quoted. Irrespective of the extent to which such preachings are accompanied
by oaths and imprecations against “reformism as a principle”, the
matter is not changed, one iota. In reality, having said “and
only there”, and “in the centre”, Martov specifically pursues a
reformist policy (in the particular situation in Russia in 1908–10); and
as to the vows, promises, assurances, oaths—let political babes believe
them.  


   “The disputes between Marx and Willich-Schapper in the early
   fifties of the last century hinged precisely [!!] on the question of the
   Importance of secret societies and the possibility of leading the
   political struggle from within them.... The Blanquist, [in
   France in the sixties] ‘prepared’ for these events [the downfall of
   Bonapartism] by setting up secret societies and bottling up individual
   workers in them, but the French section of the Marxists ... went into
   the labour organisations, founded them and ‘fought for legality’ by
   every means....”  

 

The cases mentioned are tunes from quite a different
opera. The dispute between Marx and Willich in the fifties, between the

Blanquists[10] and the Marxists in the sixties, was not one of
whether it was necessary to seek “elements for the revival of the Party”
“only” within “peaceful, tolerated organisations” (Martov,
Zhizn, No. 1, p. 10). Martov knows this perfectly well and is
wasting his time trying to mislead his readers. Neither of these
disputes was conducted over the “revival” of the workers’ party; at that
time it was impossible to dispute about its revival because it had
never existed. These two disputes hinged on the question of
whether a workers’ party—a party based on the working-class
movement, a class party—was necessary at all. That was what
Willich denied and the Blanquists of the sixties again denied, as Martov
well knows, although he tries to obscure matters in dispute
today by general talk about what is now indisputable. The view
that “only” in peaceful and tolerated organisations should one
seek elements for the revival or for the birth of the Party was
never shared by Marx, either in the fifties or in the
sixties; even at the end of the seventies, during an immeasurably
higher phase of development of capitalism and bourgeois monarchy, Marx and
Engels declared ruthless war on the German opportunists who had
wiped out the recent past of the German party, deplored “extremes”,
talked of “more civilised” forms of the movement (in the language of the
present-day Russian liquidators it is called “Europeanisation”), and
advocated the idea that “only” in “peaceful and tolerated”
organisations should one “seek the elements for the revival”, etc.  


   “To sum up,” writes Martov. “The fact that the present
   regime is an inherently contradictory combination of absolutism and
   constitutionalism, and that the Russian working class has sufficiently
   matured to follow the example of the workers of the progressive countries
   of the West in striking at this regime through the Achilles heel of its
   contradictions is ample material for the theoretical substantiation and
   political justification of what the Mensheviks who remain true to Marxism
   are now doing.”  


Martov’s words (“ample material”) are also ample material
for us to make our summary from. Martov regards as “ample” what is
recognised by both the Cadets and a section of the Octobrists. In
January 1911 it was none other than

    

Rech that formulated the question in the way Martov proposed its
formulation in August 1910: a contradictory combination of
constitutionalism and anti-constitutionalism; two camps—for the
constitution and against it. What is ample for Rech is
“ample” for Martov. There is not a grain of Marxism in
this. Marxism has completely disappeared and has been replaced by
liberalism. The fact that we have a “contradictory combination” is
not by any means “ample” for a Marxist. Marxism only begins with
the beginning of the realisation or understanding that this truth is not
enough, that it contains within itself a spoonful of truth and a barrel of
untruth, that it obscures the depth of the contradictions, that it
embellishes reality and rejects the only possible means of finding a way
out of the situation.  

“The contradictory combination” of the old regime and
constitutionalism exists not only in present-day Russia, but also in
present-day Germany and even in present-day England (the House of Lords;
the Crown’s independence of the people’s representatives in matters of
foreign policy, etc.). What, then, is the position taken up in
reality (i. e., irrespective of good wishes and pious speeches) by the
politician who declares that it is “ample” for a Russian to recognise
what is true as regards Germany as well as England? Such a politician is,
in reality, taking the stand of a liberal, of a
Cadet. Even a more or less consistent bourgeois democrat in our country
cannot, and does not, take such a stand. Martov’s last word, his
concluding formula which sums up the entire discussion among the
liquidators, is a remarkably exact, a strikingly clear and exhaustively
complete expression of liberal views smuggled in under a
pseudo-Marxist flag.  

When the liberals, not only the Cadets, but also a section of the
Octobrists, say that it is ample for the theoretical
substantiation and political justification of our activity to recognise the
inherently contradictory combination of the old regime and
constitutionalism, the liberals are remaining quite true to themselves. In
these words they give a really precise, liberal formula, the formula of the
liberal policy of 1908–10 (if not of 1906–10). A Marxist, on the other
hand, reveals his Marxism only when and to the extent that he explains the
inadequacy and falsity of this formula, which eliminates

    

those specific features which radically and in principle distinguish the
Russian “contradictions” from those of the English and German. The
liberal says: “It is ample to admit that a great many things in our
country contradict constitutionalism”. The Marxist replies: “Such an
admission is altogether inadequate. It must be understood that there is no
elementary, fundamental, cardinal, essential, necessary basis for
‘constitutionalism’ at all. The fundamental error of liberalism is
that it declares that there is such a basis, whereas there is not; and this
error accounts for the impotence of liberalism and is itself explained by
the impotence of bourgeois altruism”.  

Translating this political antinomy into the language of economics, we
may formulate it as follows. The liberal assumes that the path of economic
(capitalist) development is already mapped out, defined, completed, that it
is now only a matter of removing obstacles and contradictions from
that path. The Marxist believes that this particular path of
capitalist development has not, so far, provided a way out of the impasse,
despite such undoubted bourgeois progress in economic evolution as
was marked by November 9, 1906 (or June 14, 1910), the Third Duma, etc.;
and he believes that there is another path which is also
a path of capitalist development, a path that can lead us on to the high
road, a path which must be pointed out, which must be explained, prepared,
insisted upon, pursued, in spite of all the vacillation, lack of faith and
faint-heartedness of liberalism.  

Martov argues with Larin as if he himself were much more to the
“Left” than Larin. Many naïve people allow themselves to be deceived
by this and say: certainly, Potresov, Levitsky and Larin are liquidators,
certainly, they are of the extreme Right, something like Russian

Rouanet[11]; but Martov—Martov is certainly no liquidator! In reality,
how ever, Martov’s flamboyant phrases against Larin, against the creeping
reformists, are only a blind, for in his conclusion, in his last
word, in his resumé, Martov actually supports
Larin. Martov is not more “Left” than Larin; he is only more diplomatic,
more unprincipled than Larin; he hides himself more cunningly beneath the
gaudy rags of pseudo-Marxist phrases. Martov’s conclusion that recognition
of the contradictory combination is “ample”, provides just that
corroboration
    

of liquidationism (and liberalism) which Larin requires. But Larin wants to
justify this conclusion, to prove it, to think it out to the end, to make
it a matter of principle. And Martov says to Larin, as Vollmar, Auer and
the other “old birds” of opportunism used to say to the young opportunist
Eduard Bernstein: “Dear Larin—I mean dear Eddy—you are an ass! Such
things are done, but not talked about”. “Dear Larin, for you and me,
liquidationist practice should be ‘ample’, the liberal recognition of the
contradiction between the old regime and constitutionalism is ‘ample’; but,
for God’s sake, don’t go any further, don’t ‘deepen’ the question, don’t
seek clarity and consistency of principles, don’t make any appraisals of
the ‘present situation’, for that would expose us both. Let us act
and not talk.”  

Martov teaches Larin how to be an opportunist.  

“One must not sit between two stools,” says Larin to Martov,
demanding an explanation and justification of the liquidator principles so
dear to both of them.  

“Well, what sort of opportunist are you,” replies Martov, “if you
don’t know how to sit between two stools?” What sort of opportunist are
you if you insist on exact, clear and direct justification of the
principles of our practice? It is the business of a real opportunist to sit
between two stools, he must advocate the

       “tactics-as-a-process”[3]

(remember Martynov and Krichevsky in the period of 1901), he must drift
with the stream, cover up his traces, evade all matters of principle. Take
Bernstein, he knows now (after the lessons given him by Vollmar, Auer,
etc.) how to be a revisionist without proposing any amendments to
the orthodox Erfurt profession

de foi.[12] And we two must also know how to act as
liquidators without proposing any amendments to the
orthodox formal answer (of 1908) given to the “vexed questions”
of the

day.[13] In order to be a real opportunist, my dear, dear Larin, one must
do the creeping in reality, in one’s practice, in the way one goes
about one’s work; but, in words, before the public, in speeches, in the
press, one must not only abstain from seeking theories justifying the act
of creeping, but, on the contrary, one must shout all the more
loudly against those who creep, one must all the more

    

assiduously vow and protest that we are not of the creeping kind.  

Larin was silenced. Probably, in the depths of his heart he could not
help admitting that Martov was a more skilful diplomat, a more subtle
opportunist.  


We must examine still another aspect of Martov’s concluding formula: it
is “ample” to recognise the contradictory nature of the combination of
the old regime and constitutionalism. Compare this formula with
V. Levitsky’s notorious formula—“Not hegemony,
but a class party” (Nasha Zarya, No. 7). In this formula
Levitsky (the Larin of Nasha Zarya) expressed, only in a more
direct, open, principled manner, what Potresov confused, glossed over,
covered up and clothed in pretentious phrases. when, under the influence of
Plekhanov’s ultimatums, he cleaned up and revised the article he
wrote against the hegemony of the proletariat.  

Martov’s formula and that of Levitsky are two sides of the same
medal. The object of the next article will be to explain this circumstance
for the benefit of Martov who pretends not to understand the connection
between the idea of the hegemony of the proletariat and the question of
liquidationism.  

  

P.S. The present article had already been sent to press when we
received Dyelo Zhizni, No. 2, containing the conclusion of
Y. Larin’s article “Right Turn and About Turn!” Larin explains reformism,
of which L. Martov “of course does not suspect” him, as clearly in the
new liquidationist magazine as he explained it previously. For the present,
we shall confine ourselves to quoting the substance of the
reformist programme: 


   “A state of perplexity and uncertainty, when people
   simply do not know what to expect of the coming day, what tasks to set
   them selves—that is what results from indeterminate, temporising
   moods, from vague hopes of either a repetition of the revolution or of
   ‘we shall wait and see’. The immediate task is, not to wait fruitlessly
   for something to turn up, but to imbue broad circles with the guiding
   idea that, in the ensuing historical period of Russian life, the working
   class must organise itself not ‘for revolution’, not ‘in expectation

    

   of a revolution’, but simply for the determined and systematic defence
   of its particular interests in all spheres of life;for the gathering and
   training of its forces for this many-sided and complex activity; for the
   training and building-up in this way of socialist consciousness in
   general; for acquiring the ability to orientate itself [to find its
   bearings]—and to assert itself—particularly in the complicated
   relations of the social classes of Russia during the coming
   constitutional re form of the country after the economically inevitable
   self-exhaustion of feudal reaction....” (p. 18).  


This tirade expresses exactly the entire spirit and meaning of Larin’s
“programme” and of all the liquidationist writings in Nasha
Zarya, Vozrozhdeniye, Dyelo Zhizni, and others, including L. Martov’s
“ample” which we have examined above. It is the purest and most complete
reformism. We cannot dwell on it now; we cannot examine it here in the
detail it deserves. We shall, therefore, confine ourselves to a brief
remark. The Left Cadets, the non-party socialists, the petty-bourgeois
democrats (like the “Popular Socialists”) and reformists who would like
to be Marxists, preach the following programme to the workers: gather your
forces, train yourselves, learn, defend your interests simply in
order to stand up for yourselves during the coming constitutional
reform. Such a programme curtails, narrows and emasculates the political
tasks of the working class in the period 1908–11 in the same manner as the
Economists emasculated these tasks in the period 1896–1901. The old
Economists, deluding themselves and others, liked to refer to Belgium (the
predominance of reformism among the Belgians was recently brought to light
by the excellent writings of de Man and Brouckère; we shall revert
to these another time); the Neo-Economists, i. e., the liquidators, like to
refer to the peaceful way in which a constitution was obtained in Austria
in 1867. Both the old Economists and our liquidators choose instances,
cases, episodes in the history of the working-class movement and democracy
in Europe that occurred when the workers, for one reason or another, were
weak, lacked class-consciousness and were dependent on the
bourgeoisie—and they advance such instances as a model for Russia. Both
the Economists and the liquidators serve as conductors for bourgeois
influence among the proletariat.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 68–69 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
Perhaps not all readers will understand this gallicism which to my mind
   is an extreme misfit. “Legal country” is a literal translation of the
   French pays legal which implies those classes or groups, those
   strata of the population which are represented in parliament and which,
   unlike the masses of the people, enjoy constitutional
   privileges. Incidentally, this is typical and may serve as an appraisal
   of Martov’s vacillations. He does not want to admit that Russia in
   1908–10 took “another step in the transformation into a bourgeois
   monarchy”. But he does admit that the “bourgeoisie” (and not the
   plutocracy) on June 3, 1907, “obtained the rudiments of a
   constitutional regime”. Who can make head or tail of this?  —Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 387–97.—Ed.  
 



[4]
Lenin refers here to the first all-Russia temperance congress, held in
St. Petersburg on December 28, 1909–January 6, 1910 (January 10-19, 1910),
and the first all-Russia congress of factory doctors and representatives of
industry, which took place in Moscow on April 1–6 (14–19), 1909.





[5]
Lenin is quoting from the speech of the Menshevik-liquidator Dan, at
the Fifth (All-Russia) Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1908, in the
discussion on “The Present Moment and the Tasks of the Party”.





[6]
The expression “third element” was first used by the Vice-Governor of
Samara, V. G. Kondoidi, in his speech at the opening of the Samara Gubernia
Zemstvo meeting in 1900, to describe persons representing neither the
administration nor the social estates—employees of the Zemstvo, doctors,
statisticians, teachers, agronomists, etc. The expression “third element”
found its way into literature to describe the democratically-minded
intellectuals of the Zemstvos.





[7]
The dexterity of Burenin or Menshikov—a dishonest method of
conducting polemics, characteristic of Burenin and Menshikov, contributors
to the Black-Hundred monarchist paper Novoye Vremya (New
Times). Lenin used these names as synonyms for dishonest methods of
controversy.





[8]
Witte reforms—reforms in the sphere of finance, customs
policy, railroad construction, factory legislation, carried out by
S. Y. Witte between 1892 and 1906, while Minister of Communications

   

and later Minister of Finance and Chairman of the Council of Ministers.


Reforms of the sixties—bourgeois reforms carried out by the
tsarist government: the Peasant Reform (1881), financial reforms
(1860–64), abolition of corporal punishment (1863), reforms in the sphere
of public education (1862–64), Zemstvo reform (1864), legal reform (1864),
reform of press and censorship (1865), municipal reform (1870), military
reform (1874).





[9]
See Note 62.





[10]
Blanquists—supporters of a trend in the French socialist
movement headed by the outstanding revolutionary and prominent
representative of French utopian communism—Louis-Auguste Blanqui
(1805–1881). The Blanquists expected “that mankind will be emancipated
from wage slavery, not by the proletarian class struggle, but through a
conspiracy hatched by a small minority of intellectuals”

Substituting the actions of a small group of conspirators for those of a
revolutionary party, they took no account of the real situation necessary
for a victorious uprising and disregarded the question of ties with the
masses.





[11]
Rouanet, Gaston—a French journalist, member of the Socialist
Party; belonged to the Right wing of the Party.





[12]
The Erfurt profession de foi—programme of the German
Social-Democratic Party adopted at the Erfurt Congress in 1891.





[13]
Lenin refers to the section of the resolution “The Present Moment and
the Tasks of the Party” adopted at the Fifth All-Russia Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. in 1908, in which it was decided to combat liquidationism.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Polemical Notes









Lenin: Polemical Notes







V. I.  

      Lenin
Polemical Notes




Published:
Mysl, No. 4. March 1911.

      Published according to the Mysl text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 164-167.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In an article entitled “The Results of the Artisans’
Congress” in Nasha Zarya, No. 2, Mr. B. Bogdanov formulates his
conclusions as follows: 


   “The striving to break with the old underground and embark upon
   really open public and political activity—such is the new feature
   which also characterises the latest phase of our labour movement.”
   (P. 73.) “At a moment of heightened activity in public life, on the eve
   of by-elections in Moscow and general elections to the Fourth State
   Duma, the fact is very keenly felt that the politically organised
   section of the proletariat exercises no influence. The entire activity
   of the organised workers during recent years has been directed to ward
   the revival of this independent political force. Consciously or
   unconsciously, all the participants of this movement are becoming agents
   of the reviving party of the proletariat. But the task of its organised
   section is not so much to accelerate this movement, not so much to give
   it formal shape prematurely, as to contribute to its development and
   lend it the greatest possible scope by drawing the widest possible
   masses into it and by resolutely breaking with the inactivity of the
   underground and its stupefying atmosphere.”  (Pp. 74–75.) 


Only in newspapers of the Novoye Vremya type, and possibly
also in the writings of embittered renegades to liberalism like Mr. Struve
and Co., have we hitherto met with such howls about the “stupefying”
atmosphere, and similar hysterical cries and appeals to “break” with
it. Hitherto it has been the rule for that political press which is
considered in any way decent and honest, not to use a particular platform
to attack things that cannot be defended from that same platform. For over
a year now, however, the crowd of liquidators, which includes B. Bogdanov,
Levitsky, Potresov, and others, has been successfully “overcoming” this
antiquated democratic prejudice, systematically choosing for their appeals
to “break resolutely”, etc., only those platforms which assure them a
monopoly in any discussion on

    

the point at issue. It only remains for us to place on record this
“well-protected” war waged against the “stupefying atmosphere” and—to
pillory the warriors.  

The Bogdanovs, Levitskys, and Potresovs juggle with facts when they
refer to the workers’ urge to act openly and then draw their own
conclusion that the workers are striving to break with the
“stupefying atmosphere”. They rely for the success of their jugglery on
its being impossible for us, the opponents of liquidationism, to make
public the facts, known to the Bogdanovs, which testify to the
indignation of the workers who at various congresses come out
openly against intellectuals who advocate “breaking” with the
underground. At the beginning of 1911, the workers, to their great honour
be it said, are striving to engage in open political activity just as
energetically as they were, for example, at the beginning of 1905; but
neither then nor now have the workers ever revolted against the
“stupefying atmosphere”, nor have they ever wanted “to break” with
it. The only ones who may be correctly said to be striving to “break
resolutely” are the renegade intellectuals. 

Indeed, the reader would do well to reflect on the following fact. A
group of writers has been vociferating, particularly since January 1910,
about a “striving to break with the old”, and to “embark
upon really open political activity”. During this period alone, this
group has published more than twenty issues of its own magazines
(Nasha Zarya, Vozrozhdeniye, Zhizn, Dyelo
Zhizni), not to mention books, pamphlets, and articles in journals and
newspapers that are not specifically liquidationist in character. How then,
may it be asked, are we to account for the fact that writers who have been
working so energetically in the journalistic field, and who speak with so
much conviction of the need “resolutely to break with the old” and to
“embark upon really open political activity” have so far
themselves, in their own group, not ventured, not plucked
up the courage to “break resolutely” with “the old” and to “embark
upon really open political activity” with a programme, platform and
tactics that would mark a “resolute break” with the “stupefying
atmosphere”?  

What kind of a comedy is this? What hypocrisy! They speak of “the
revival of this political force”, rail at “the stupefying

    

atmosphere”, demand a break with the old, preach really open
political activity”, and at the same time refrain from substituting for it
any programme, any platform, any tactics and
any organisation! Why is it that our legalists, our would-be
Marxists, lack even as much political honesty as was displayed by the
Peshekhonovs and other publicists contributing to Russkoye

Bogatstvo[1] who began to speak of the stupefying atmosphere and of
the need to “embark upon really open political activity” much earlier
(beginning from 1905–06) and who practised what they preached,
actually “broke resolutely with the old”, actually came out with an
“open” programme, an “open” platform, “open” tactics and an “open”
organisation?  

Honesty in politics is the result of strength; hypocrisy is the result
of weakness. The Peshekhonovs and Co. are a force among the Narodniks,
therefore they come out really “openly”. The Bogdanovs, Levitskys,
Potresovs and Co. are weak among the Marxists and at every step are
repulsed by the class-conscious workers; that is why they play the
hypocrite, take cover and do not venture to come out openly with a
programme and tactics of “really open political activity”.  

The Peshekhonovs and Co. are so strong among the Narodniks that they
carry their wares under their own flag. The Bogdanovs, Levitskys,
Potresovs, and Martovs are so weak among the Marxists that they are
compelled to smuggle in their goods under a foreign flag. In their petty
intellectualist magazine (Nasha Zarya) they summon up courage and
shout: there is no “hierarchy”, we must “resolutely break with the old”
and “embark upon really open political activity”. But when they face the
workers, our liquidators act according to the saying: A lion among the
lambs becomes a lamb among the lions.  

When facing the workers our heroes, who show such enthusiasm for “open
political activity” act anything but openly and do not offer
any open programme, tactics or organisation. Hence the reason for
the wise diplomacy of Mr. Bogdanov, who, in summarising “the results” of
the artisans’ congress, offers the advice “not ... to accelerate” the
movement for really open political activity, “not ... to give it formal
shape prematurely”. It looks as if Mr. Bogdanov

    

has tried to give formal shape to his liquidationist plans, and
present them to the workers, but burned his fingers in the attempt. This
defecting intellectual met with a rebuff from the workers who, even when
they err, act more straightforwardly and demand a straightforward answer
(“You want us to break with the old? Well, why not come out openly and
honestly with what you propose in its place?”). And Mr. B. Bogdanov, like
the fox in Krylov’s fable, consoles himself by saying—sour grapes! We
must not give the new a formal shape prematurely; while breaking with the
old we must keep on waving its flag when we go to the workers—don’t hurry
with the new.  

You may say that this means sitting between two stools. But such is
precisely the nature of all opportunism. That is precisely what
characterises the bourgeois intellectual of today who plays at
Marxism. Mr. Struve played at Marxism from 1894 to 1898. The Bogdanovs,
Levitskys and Potresovs have been playing at Marxism from 1908 to 1911. The
liquidators today, like the Economists of those days, serve as the channel
for that same bourgeois influence among the proletariat.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth)—a monthly
magazine published in St. Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. From
the early 1890s it was the organ of the liberal Narodniks. From 1908
Russkoye Bogatstvo became factually the organ of the semi-Cadet
Popular Socialist Party.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Meaning of the Crisis









Lenin: The Meaning of the Crisis







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Meaning of the Crisis




Published:
Zvezda, No. 18, April 16, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 168-172.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The notorious Cabinet and political crisis of which so much
has been written in the press, poses more profound questions than the
liberals, who are making the most noise about it, think. They say that the
crisis confronts us with the problem of violation of the
Constitution. Actually what the crisis confronts us with is the Cadets’ and
the Octobrists’ mistaken conception of the Constitution, the profound
delusion entertained on that score by the two parties. The more widespread
this delusion becomes the more insistently must we explain it. The more the
Cadets try to use their accusations against the Octobrists as a means of
peddling their wrong ideas about the allegedly “constitutional” character
of the crisis, ideas common to the Octobrists and the Cadets, the more
important it is to explain this community of ideas now being revealed.


Let us take the recent reflections of Rech and Russkiye
Vedomosti on the slogan for the elections to the Fourth Duma. For or
against the Constitution—that, say the two main Cadet publications, is
how the question is being and will continue to be presented.  

Now take a look at the reasoning of the Octobrists. Here is a typical
article by Mr. Gromoboi in Golos Moskvy for March 30. It is
entitled “A Disturbed Ant-Hill”. The Octobrist publicist tries to
persuade those, in his opinion, conscientious defenders of Mr. Stolypin who
“fear the idea of joining the opposition” by proving to them “that they
are taking the wrong steps”. “To a constitutionalist,” exclaims
Mr. Gromoboi, “there can be no graver sin than the violation of the
Constitution.” What can be said on the essence of the matter? asks
Mr. Gromoboi; and answering, says: 
 


Again the flintlock, nationalism, volitional impulses,
   state necessity?  Alas, we have heard all that before, and we have also
   heard promises that were not justified.”

   

To the Octobrists (and to the Vekhi writers who under stood
most deeply and expressed most vividly the spirit of Cadetism) Stolypin’s
policy was an attractive “promise”. This “promise”, the Octobrists
confess, was not justified.  

What does that mean?  

Actually, Stolypin’s policy was not a promise, but has been the stark
political and economic reality of Russian life in the last four (or even
five) years. Both June 3, 1907, and November 9, 1906 (June 14, 1910), were
not promises but reality. This reality has been put over and enforced by
the representatives of the big landowning nobility and of the élite
of the merchant and industrial capitalists, organised on a national
scale. When today the spokesman of the Octobrist, Moscow (and,
consequently, the all-Russia) capitalists says—“they have not been
justified”—that sums up a definite phase of political history, a
definite system of attempts to satisfy, through the Third Duma, through
Stolypin’s agrarian policy, etc., the demands of the epoch, the demands of
Russia’s capitalist development. The Octobrist capitalists worked
conscientiously and assiduously, sparing nothing—not even their
pockets—to help these attempts; but now they are obliged to confess that
the promise has not justified itself.  

Consequently, it is not a matter of broken promises, or of “violation
of the Constitution”—for it is ridiculous to dissociate March 14, 1911,
from June 3, 1907; the point is that the demands of the epoch cannot be
satisfied through what the Octobrists and the Cadets call the
“Constitution”.  

The “Constitution” which gave the majority to the Cadets in the First
and Second Dumas could not satisfy the demands of the times, nor can these
be satisfied by the “Constitution” which made the Octobrists the decisive
party (in the Third Duma). When today the Octobrists say—“they have not
been justified”, the meaning of this confession, and of the crisis which
has extorted it, is that the constitutional illusions both of the Cadets
and of the Octobrists have again been shattered, this time finally and
completely.  
 

The democratic movement jolted the old out of its groove. The Cadets
deprecated the “excesses” of the democratic movement and promised to
accomplish the new by peaceful, “constitutional” means. These hopes were
not justified. It was Mr. Stolypin who tackled the job of accomplishing the
new—but in such a way as to ensure that the changed forms would reinforce
the old, that the organisation of the diehard landowners and of the pillars
of capital would fortify the old, and that the substitution of private
ownership of land for the village commune would create a new stratum of
defenders of the old. For years the Octobrists, working hand in glove with
Mr. Stolypin, tried to bring this about, “unhampered by the menace” of
the democratic movement which for the time being had been suppressed.  

These hopes have not been justified.  

What has been justified is the words of those who pointed out the
futility and harmfulness of constitutional illusions in epochs of rapid and
radical changes such as the early twentieth century in Russia.  

The three years of the Third, Octobrist Duma, and of its Octobrist
“Constitution”, of the Octobrists’ “life of peace and love” with
Stolypin, have not vanished without leaving a trace: the country has made
further economic progress, and all and sundry “Right” political parties
have developed, grown, shown their worth (and have spent themselves).  

The agrarian policy of the Third Duma has shown itself in
operation in most of the villages and in the most out-of-the-way parts
of Russia, where it has stirred up the discontent that had lain dormant for
centuries, unceremoniously revealing and accentuating the existing
antagonisms, emboldening the kulak and enlightening those at the other end
of the scale. The Third Duma has had its effect. And so have the first two
Dumas, which produced so many good, well-meaning, innocuous and impotent
wishes. The collapse of the constitutional illusions of the years 1906 to
1910, incomparably more pronounced, has been revealed within the shell of
the “constitutional” crisis of 1911.  

In point of fact, both Cadets and Octobrists alike based their policy
on these illusions. They were the illusions of the liberal bourgeoisie, the
illusions of the Centre, and there is no essential difference between the
“Left” Centre (the

    

Cadets) and the “Right” Centre (the Octobrists), since, owing to
objective conditions, both were doomed to failure. The old has been jolted
out of its groove. But neither the Left nor the Right Centre has achieved
the new. Who is going to accomplish this inescapable and historically
inevitable new, and how, that is a moot question. The “constitutional”
crisis is significant because the Octobrists, the masters of the situation,
have admitted that this question is again an “open” one; they
have written “unjustified” across even their apparently most “valid”
aspirations, aspirations which are valid from the merchant’s point of view,
and are commercially sober and modest. The “constitutional” crisis is
significant because the experience of the Octobrists has revealed the
extreme narrowness, poverty and impotence of the Cadets’ catchword—who is
for the Constitution, and who is against it.  

The democratic movement has shown this slogan to be inadequate. The
Octobrist movement has corroborated it by the experience of yet another
phase of Russian history. The Cadets will not succeed in dragging Russia
back to the former naïve constitutional illusions.  

“The orthodox Octobrists,” writes Mr, Gromoboi, “are having a fit of
nerves; they declare that they will resign from the Bureau, and do not know
what to do about their fellow-constitutionalists. Their agitation is
unjustified. They should remain calm in the knowledge that truth is on
their side, and that this truth is so elementary, so universally
recognised, that it does not need a Copernicus or a Galileo to prove
it. They should go on calmly doing their duty—declare that unlawful
actions are unlawful, and without fail, making no compromises, reject the
unlawful law.”  

That is an illusion, Mr. Gromoboi! You cannot dispense with “a
Copernicus and a Galileo”. Your own efforts have brought no
“justification”, you will not manage without them.  

“When we contemplate this disturbed, teeming ant-hill—the servile
press, servile orators, servile deputies [and, you might add, Mr. Gromoboi:
the servile, slavish bourgeoisie]—we can only out of humanity pity them
and gently remind them that they can no longer serve P. A. Stolypin; they
can only cringe before him.”  
 

But P. A. Stolypin is not unique—he is typical; he is not an isolated
individual, but is “hand in glove” with the Council of the United
Nobility. The Octobrists have tried to live in harmony with him under the
new conditions—under the conditions of a Duma, of a “Constitution”, of
the bourgeois policy of ruining the village commune à la
Tolmachov. And if they failed in the attempt, it is by no means Stolypin’s
fault.  

“...After all, the entire strength of people’s representatives is
derived from their contact with the people; and if they [the Right
Octobrists] lose ... their ‘identity’ by the very fact that they are giving
such support [support to Stolypin and his violation of the Constitution],
what will they be worth then?”  

So this is what we have come to! Octobrists speak of “contact with the
people” as the source of “strength of people’s representatives”! That is
really funny. But no more so than the Cadet speeches in the First and
Second Dumas about “contact with the people” alongside their speeches,
say, against local land committees. The words which sound funny when
uttered by Cadets and Octobrists are by no means funny in themselves; they
are significant. For—despite the intentions of those who utter these
words today—they express, once more, the collapse of constitutional
illusions—which is a useful by-product of the “constitutional” crisis.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Conference of the British Social-Democratic Party









Lenin: Conference of the British Social-Democratic Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
Conference of the British Social-Democratic Party




Published:
Zvezda, No. 18, April 16, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 173-178.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Many European socialist parties have taken advantage of the
Easter holidays (April 16, N. S.) to hold their conferences: the French,
Belgian, Dutch (its opportunist section), the British Social-Democratic
Party, and the British Independent Labour Party. We propose to draw the
attention of our readers to some items discussed at the conferences of the
two last-mentioned parties.  

The 31st Annual Conference of the British Social-Democratic Party
(S.D.P.) was held in Coventry. The most interesting item discussed was that
of “armaments and foreign policy”. It is well known that Britain and
Germany have been arming very intensively during the past few
years. Competition between these two countries in the world market is
becoming increasingly acute. The danger of a military conflict is
approaching more and more formidably. The bourgeois jingoist press of both
countries is raining millions upon millions of inflammatory articles upon
the masses, inciting them against the “enemy”, howling about the
inevitable danger of a “German invasion” or of a “British attack” and
clamouring for increased armaments. The socialists of Britain and Germany,
and also of France (whom Britain would be particularly glad to drag into
war in order to have a continental land army against Germany) are devoting
much attention to the threatening war, fighting with might and main against
bourgeois chauvinism and armaments, and doing all they can to explain to
the most backward sections of the proletariat and of the petty bourgeoisie
what misfortunes ensue from a war which serves exclusively the interests of
the bourgeoisie.  
 

There were sad exceptions to this among the socialists, several of whom
were prominent leaders of the British S.D.P., among them Hyndman. The
latter allowed himself to be scared by the screams of the British bourgeois
press about the “German menace”, and went so far as to assert that
Britain had to arm for defence, that she had to have a powerful navy, that
Wilhelm was the aggressive party.  

True, Hyndman encountered opposition, in fact very strong opposition,
within the S.D.P. itself. A number of resolutions from the branches were
emphatically against him.  

The Coventry Congress, or Conference—to use the English term, which
does not correspond in meaning to the Russian “konferentsia”—had to
settle the issue. A resolution emphatically opposing any kind of jingoist
point of view was proposed by the Central Hackney branch (Hackney, a
district in North-East London). In its report on the Conference,
Justice, the central organ of the S.D.P., quotes only the end of
what it terms a “lengthy” resolution, calling for a determined struggle
against all increases in armaments, and opposing all colonial and financial
aggression. Zelda Kahan, in supporting the resolution, emphasised that
during the last forty years Britain had been the aggressor, that Germany
would not gain by making Britain a German province; and that no such danger
existed. “The British Navy,” she said, “is kept to maintain the
Empire. Never had the S.D.P. made a bigger and more terrible mistake than
in identifying the Party with the jingoist warmongers. As a consequence of
this mistake,” said Kahan, “the British Social-Democrats have placed
themselves outside the inter national movement.”  

The entire Party Executive Committee, including Harry Quelch—we
have to confess with shame—supported Hyndman. The “amendment” they
moved declared no more nor less than the following: “This Conference holds
that the maintenance of an adequate navy for national defence” is an
“immediate object”!... Then, of course, it goes on to repeat all the
“good old words”—about combating imperialist policy, about war against
capitalism, etc. All this honey, of course, was spoiled by a spoonful
of tar, by the phrase recognising the need for an “adequate” navy, a
phrase that is

    

bourgeois both in its evasiveness and in its pure chauvinism. This is in
1911, a time when the British naval budget clearly reveals a tendency to
unlimited growth; this is in a country whose navy “defends and protects
the Empire”, i.e., India included, with its population of nearly
300,000,000 that is being plundered and outraged by British bureaucrats,
where “enlightened” British statesmen, like the liberal and “radical”
Morley, sentence natives to transportation or inflict corporal
punishment for political offences!  

The miserable sophistry Quelch had to resort to may be seen from the
following passage in his speech (as reported in Justice, which
defends Hyndman)!... “If we believe in national autonomy, we must have
national defence and that defence must be adequate, or it is useless. We
are opposed to imperialism, whether British or German; the small
nationalities under Prussian rule hate her despotism, and the small nations
threatened by her regard the British Navy and German Social-Democracy as
their only hope....”  

How quickly those who step on the slippery slope of opportunism slide to the
bottom! The British Navy, which helps to enslave India (not a very
“small” nation), is placed on a par with German
Social-Democracy as a champion of national liberty.... Zelda Kahan was right
when she said that never yet had British Social-Democracy so disgraced
itself. Its sectarian character, noted and condemned long ago by

Engels,[1] had never before been so clearly revealed as it was by the
ease with which even men like Quelch can go over to the
chauvinists.  

The voting on the resolution was evenly divided: 28 for the Executive
Committee and 28 against. In order to win a deplorable victory—Hyndman
and Quelch had to demand a branch vote, which secured them 47 votes
against 33.  

Some members of the Social-Democratic Party have voiced a most emphatic
protest against chauvinism in their ranks; there has emerged a very strong
minority ready to wage a serious struggle. The situation in the Independent
Labour Party is worse: there opportunism is no rarity. There the question
of whether socialists and the workers should support armaments is debated
quite calmly in “discussion” articles in the official organ of the Party,
The Labour Leader (No. 16, April 21, 1911).  
 

The London correspondent of Vorwärts justly remarked that
the best criticism of the position of the S.D.P. was an article in the
extremely jingoist Daily Mail which praised the wisdom of
the Social-Democratic leaders. He quotes the beginning of the article in
that newspaper as saying: “It is encouraging to learn that, however
extravagant some of the fallacies and impossible some of the ideals of the
Social-Democratic Party in this country, there is at least one supremely
important question on which that Party is guided by reason and common
sense.  

The really gratifying feature of the Birmingham Conference of the
I.L.P. was that from its ranks firm and determined voices were heard
protesting against the opportunist policy, the policy of dependence upon
the Liberals pursued by this party in general, and by the party leader,
Ramsay MacDonald, in particular. In reply to the reproach that the Labour
members say little about socialism in the House of Commons, MacDonald said
with virginal opportunist innocence that Parliament was hardly the place
for “propaganda speeches”. “The great function of the House of
Commons,” he said, “is to translate into legislation the socialism that
is preached in the country.” The speaker forgot all about the difference
between bourgeois social reform and socialism! He was prepared to expect
socialism from a bourgeois Parliament....  

Leonard Hall pointed out in his speech that the I.L.P. had been formed
in 1892 for the purpose of killing the old Labour Electoral Association
which was merely a wing of liberalism. They had buried the corpse (after
killing the Association), but it seemed to have revived in the Labour
Party. He added that the leader of the Party was pursuing this policy in
his speeches, letters and books.  

Another I.L.P. member, George Lansbury, M. P., sharply criticised the
policy of the Parliamentary Labour Party for its dependence upon the
Liberals and its fear of “endangering” the Liberal government. Lansbury
said that more than once he had been so ashamed of the conduct of the
Labour members that he had nearly resigned. He went on to say that all the
time the Liberals tried to keep the House busy with minor questions and
that Labour members were unable to win independence for themselves. “I
have never

    

known a time,” said Lansbury, “when both Liberals and Tories had not some
great question to hide the poverty question. I am in the House of Commons
with the picture before me of those men and women, who night after night
toiled in the slums of Bow and Bromley [poor districts in the East End of
London] to send me there. They worked for me because they thought I was
different from the Liberals and Tories.... They sent me to face the
question of poverty, poverty, poverty.... I appeal to you,” he said,
addressing the Conference, “to keep a solid party in the House of Commons
absolutely distinct, from the convenience of Liberals and Tories. We must
show no more mercy to the Liberals when they do wrong than to the
Tories.... The men and women who toil and suffer have nothing to hope for
from either Liberals or Tories; their only hope lies in, and salvation can
come from, their organised effort....” Let us “make it clear to the men
and women of the slums that even in Parliament we are true to what we say
outside, namely, that Liberals and Tories are the enemies of the people and
socialism their only hope”.  

Lansbury’s speech was interrupted by thunders of applause, and when he
finished he received a real ovation. In Germany such speeches are an
everyday occurrence. In Britain they are a novelty. And when such speeches
are beginning to be delivered, when worker delegates at the Conference of
the Independent Labour Party (unfortunately, very frequently independent of
socialism, but dependent upon the Liberals) applaud such speeches, then we
have the right to conclude that in Britain, too, the spirit of
proletarian struggle is gaining the upper hand over the diplomacy of
opportunist parliamentarians like MacDonald. (Let us add in parenthesis
that this MacDonald recently sent the Italian reformists an expression of
his complete sympathy with their readiness to join a bourgeois Cabinet, and
his dislike for “dry theory”.)  

The speeches of Hall, Lansbury, and others have not changed the policy
of the I.L.P. MacDonald remains at the head of the Party, and its policy
will continue to be opportunist. The bourgeois influence upon the
proletariat is strong—especially in democratic countries. But these
speeches do not pass without leaving a trace, they undermine the influence

    

of the bourgeoisie and of the opportunists. When the British people get a
daily newspaper going (and both parties are seriously thinking
about this), such and only such speeches will reach the minds and hearts of
the working class. The Liberals of all countries, Russia included, are
rejoicing and laughing now at the sight of the predominance of opportunism
in the British labour movement. But “he laughs best who laughs last”.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Engels frequently referred to the sectarian nature of British
Social-Democracy in letters to F. A. Sorge (see, for example, Engels’s
letters to Sorge on June 10, 1891, on March 18, 1893, on May 21, 1894 and
November 10, 1894; an English translation of the last letter is to be found
in: Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, p. 556).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Conversation Between a Legalist and an Opponent of Liquidationism









Lenin: A Conversation Between a Legalist and an Opponent of Liquidationism







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Conversation Between a Legalist and an Opponent of Liquidationism[1]




Published:
Diskussionny Listok, No. 3, April 29 (May 12), 1911.

      Signed: B. V. Kuprianov.

      Published according to the Diskussionny Listok text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 179-188.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Legalist: It seems to me that the extreme
bitterness of the struggle and controversy with the liquidators in the
Social-Democratic press has over-inflamed passions and somewhat obscured
the substance of the disagreement.  

Anti-liquidator: Isn’t it the other way round? Isn’t the
sharpness of the struggle due to the profundity of the ideological
differences?  Or you have, perhaps, also joined the camp of the
“vacillators”—in other words, the “conciliators”—who are trying to
bridge the gulf with hollow phrases and sweeping platitudes?  

Legalist: Oh no! I am not at all inclined to
“conciliate”. On the contrary. The point I want to make is that the
liquidators have not enough understanding of what they want and hence are
not resolute enough. They are still groping in the dark and developing
spontaneously, if one may put it that way. They are still afraid of
pursuing their line of thought to its conclusion. That is the reason for
that inconsistency, confusion and hesitancy which their opponents mistake
for hypocrisy and for fraudulent methods of struggle against the illegal
party, etc. The result is a free-for-all and the public at large, for whose
benefit the controversy is being conducted, no longer understands what it
is all about. Had they had fewer smart diplomats and more confidence in
themselves, the liquidators would have proved their case sooner and smashed
you to pieces.  

Anti-liquidator: That all sounds very nightmarish.... Still,
it would be interesting to hear your arguments.  

Legalist: In my opinion, the liquidators are right. They ought
to adopt the legalist label which has been hurled at them. We shall adopt
it and prove that it is the legalists who give the only correct
answer—correct from the

    

standpoint of Marxism—to the vexed problems of the working-class movement
in Russia today. Do you or do you not admit that the period we are now
passing through represents in some ways a distinctive stage in the economic
and political evolution of Russia?  

Anti-liquidator: I do.  

Legalist: You do so only in words, just as your notorious
“December” (1908) resolutions do. Seriously considered, an admission of
this sort means that the open existence of, let us say, the
Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma is not an accident, but an
inseparable constituent of “the present moment”. The sum total of the
present political conditions, the sum total of the conditions obtaining in
the working-class movement, is such that it is possible and essential to
have an open, legal Social-Democratic group in the Duma, and it is
possible and essential to have an open, legal Social-Democratic
workers’ party.  

Anti-liquidator: Isn’t it rather risky—this jump from a
Social-Democratic group in the Duma to a Social-Democratic workers’ party?


Legalist: Not in the least. The only difference is that the
forms in which the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma exists were
determined for us from outside; all we had to do was to accept them, to
enter, so to speak, into previously prepared premises, whereas it is up to
us to find the forms for the existence of a legal workers’ party. Here we
must show initiative, we must fight for new forms. Those whom you
contemptuously call liquidators have embarked upon this fight, have entered
on the new path; but, unfortunately, they have only made the first
step. Unfortunately, they are still timid about it, keep looking back and
confine themselves to half-measures. This may be inevitable at the
beginning of the new road; but the beginning will be followed by further
steps. The indecision of the first steps will disappear, and the mistakes
will be rectified.  

Anti-liquidator: Excellent. Will you be kind enough to explain
what these mistakes are and how they will be corrected.  

Legalist: With pleasure! We cannot foretell exactly what the
legal workers’ party of tomorrow will be like, but we can see the general
direction in which the working-class

    

movement is developing. Once we grant that this is the direction, I can
boldly draw a picture of the legal party, knowing that the actual party may
not be exactly like the picture, but it will be something like
it. And in order to draw this picture for you I don’t have to
“invent” anything. All I need is to consider the lessons life teaches us,
the experience of activity under the new, post-revolutionary conditions. I
need only to sum up this experience, disregarding the irrelevant details,
and following the main thread. The working class is legally represented in
the Duma. There is a legal Social-Democratic group in the Duma. It is
hounded, spied on; it is not allowed to hold meetings, it is deprived of
experienced people; tomorrow it may perhaps be scattered in prisons and
places of exile—a legal party by no means precludes judicial and police
persecution, as your short-sighted followers believe. But the legal group
in the Duma exists despite the persecutions. There are legal trade unions
and clubs, legal Marxist monthly and weekly journals; they are even more
hounded, they are being suppressed, bled white by fines, their editors pay
perhaps with a month and a half in prison for each month in the editorial
office, the unions are constantly being disbanded but still they
exist. Think this over. It is one thing when there are no legal trade
unions, no legal Marxist press, and no legal Social-Democratic
deputies. That was the position up to 1905. It is a different thing when
they do exist, even if they are hounded all the time, even if they
are constantly being suppressed. This has been the state of affairs since
1907. This is the new feature in the situation. It is this “new feature”
that we must be able to turn to account, so as to extend, reinforce, and
consolidate it.  

Anti-liquidator: You started with the promise to be a more
courageous and a more consistent legalist than those whom we have heard
before, but so far you have done nothing but repeat what all the
liquidators said long ago.  

Legalist: As I said before, the picture of a consistent and
convinced legalism follows logically from close observation of the
experience provided by life. Actually all the various elements that go to
make up a legal Social-Democratic workers’ party already exist. We must
speak out loudly and bluntly and call things by their real names. We must
fearlessly

    

recognise that these disjointed elements will be, must be, brought
together—if not today then tomorrow—and such a party will then
emerge. It must be founded, and will be founded. It will be persecuted, but
nevertheless it will exist, the years when there was no legal workers’
party will be succeeded by years during which a legal workers’ party will
lead a precarious existence interrupted by numerous persecutions; and these
years in their turn will be succeeded by years when Russia will have a
legal Social-Democratic party following the purely European pattern. The
years for a legal Social-Democratic party have already begun and It is
already something more real than your underground organisation
which is ninety-nine per cent demolished. In order fully to rally the
legalists and imbue their activity with more confidence, system, and
steadfastness, we must not be afraid of speaking of things as they are, we
must not be afraid of calling this reality by its real name, we must not be
afraid of issuing the slogan and raising the banner. What if the courts and
the police wrench the banner from our hands, what if they wrench it from us
scores of times—they cannot destroy it, they cannot take it from
us for long; for it sums up what actually exists, is growing and is bound
to continue growing.  

Anti-liquidator: Keep to the point. Or I may have to remind
you of the saying: “He sings well, but nobody knows what the end will
be”. You promised to speak plainly. Well then, make it plain and more
concrete: what are you going to inscribe on your banner?  

Legalist: That is exactly what I have been leading up to. We
establish a legally functioning association to promote the working-class
movement. This association is based on the principles of Marxism. Its aim
is to bring about a change in the social conditions of life along Marxist
lines, to abolish classes, to abolish the anarchy of production, etc. The
immediate aim of the legal party, that is to say, of our association, is
the complete democratisation of the political and social system, help in
solving the agrarian problem along democratic lines, on the basis of
Marxist views, and extensive labour legislation. Finally, the means by
which the new association carries on its activity are all the legal means
of propaganda, agitation, and organisation.  
 

Anti-liquidator: You don’t suppose that our government will
permit such an association to be officially registered, do you?  

Legalist: Don’t worry, I am not as naïve as that. Of
course, our association will not be registered; but neither will it be
right to regard it as illegal—that is the task we set ourselves. In each
gubernia, worker after worker will draw up the rules of such an association
and submit them to the authorities for endorsement. That will be a
consistent and unremitting struggle for legality. The founders and members
of such an association will not be liable to prosecution for the
“dreadful” clauses of the programme of what is at present our apology for
a party; for the R.S.D.L.P. today is nothing but an apology for a party,
and the “dreadful” clauses of its programme, such as the demand for a
republic and the dictatorship of the proletariat—to say nothing of the
“dreadful” clauses in the numerous resolutions about an armed uprising,
etc.—frighten no one, are of no significance, and play no role whatever,
unless we mean their. “role” in causing people to be sent to
penal servitude, although in actual fact they are not guilty of
anything illegal. This is the point, this is the tragicomedy of the present
situation in the Party. The hand of the dead grips the living. The obsolete
“clauses” of various resolutions and of the old Party
programme—“clauses” which life itself has repudiated, which have become
useless and have actually been relegated to the archives—only serve our
enemies, only help them to suppress us, and render no useful purpose, none
whatsoever, in promoting the real movement of our days, the actual
Social-Democratic work now being carried on in the Third Duma, in
the legally published magazines and newspapers, in the legally existing
unions, in the legally held congresses, and so on, and so forth. That is
why as far as we legalists are concerned, the essence of the
question is not the desire to avoid the most dangerous persecutions and
penalties (as your followers, who, forgive me for saying so, have been
coached to hound the liquidators, would be prepared to conclude), but is,
first, the importance in principle of an open working-class
movement, and, secondly, in taking advantage of the contradictions of the
present regime. Yes, yes, Mr. Orthodox, the principles of Marxism

    

can by no means be reduced to a sum of words learned by rote, or to
“orthodox” formulas fixed once and for all; no, they consist in helping
the broad working-class movement, in promoting the organisation and
initiative of the masses. What if some word or other remains
“unspoken”—I am fully aware that you and your followers make
it a point to “voice” what has been left unsaid by the Social-Democratic
group in the Duma, by the legally published magazines, etc.; what if some
words do remain “unspoken”—what of it, the cause will still go
on. Larger sections of the workers will be drawn into the movement. A
resolute step will be taken towards uniting open actions. Every
politically-conscious worker will strike a blow at the regime which
oppresses him, he will aim at the very contradiction most
characteristic of that regime at the moment, the contradiction between the
formal recognition of legality and the actual refusal to grant it, between
“toleration” of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma and the attempts
to suppress the Social-Democratic party, between the recognition of
workers’ associations in official statements and their persecution in
actual fact. To strike a blow at the contradictions of the regime which
oppresses the proletariat—that and not dead formulas, is the living
soul of Marxism. One of the principal—I may even say one of the
fundamental—reasons why the German Social-Democratic Party has been
successful, is that it has always been willing to sacrifice the
formula in the interests of the movement. After 1871 it succeeded
in creating a party whose programme recognised only “lawful” methods of
political activity. It succeeded in building up the strongest
Social-Democratic movement in the world by means of a Social-Democratic
programme which is much more “legal” than ours, for it does not
contain and never has contained anything about a republic. You, however,
are prepared to show the world an example of a “model-radical”
Social-Democratic programme in the model-radical absence of a
Social-Democratic mass organisation, of a Social-Democratic mass movement.


Anti-liquidator: So far your entire plan reduces itself in
practice to a “mass movement” of incoming and outgoing papers in the
government offices dealing with the affairs of associations and unions,
assuming that in every gubernia

    

every politically-conscious worker copies your draft plan for a legal
Marxist “association” and submits them to the authorities for
endorsement. Since you, yourself, say that this association will not be
permitted, that means that no open movement, not even an “open”
association, is going to be launched anywhere, except in your legalist
imagination. But before answering you in detail, I should like to ask you
one more question: do you conceive of this legal Marxist “association” as
existing in place of the old, i. e., the present Party, or
alongside it?  

Legalist: That’s just it. You have touched upon a very
interesting point! This is one of the unfortunate errors committed by the
official leaders of liquidationism. They are afraid of taking a big step
forward along the obviously correct road; but at the same time they are
taking a number of extremely hazardous steps, totally unnecessary for the
cause, in a different direction—namely, that of opportunism. For my part,
I would say that one can be a legalist, without being a liquidator. One
should be a legalist, without being an opportunist. We must accept the
legal forms of the movement, and we must accept them not half way,
not in words alone, but seriously and in practice, that is to say, we must
immediately set up a legal Marxist workers’ party; but it would be
impermissible opportunism to renounce the revolution. Yet many, if not the
majority, of our liquidators do reveal such a tendency. The denial of the
hegemony of the working class is opportunism, and I roundly condemn
it. There is no need for us to renounce anything, to liquidate
anything. The new, legal party must exist together with the old,
alongside of it. They will reinforce one another.  

I see you are smiling. But there is nothing funny in this. You may say
that it is “double-entry bookkeeping”. But, then, let me ask you this: Is
not the joint existence of a legal and illegal press something fully
analogous to my plan, or rather to the conclusions I draw from all the
lessons of present-day experience? Before 1905, émigrés could
not contribute to the legal press; in those days periodicals were banned
for printing articles written by such émigrés, even under a
nom de plume, but it is typical of our contradictory era, that
well-known émigrés sign their own names to articles
appearing both in the illegal and legal press. Yet you do not

    

object to this instance of “double-entry bookkeeping”! It causes no
“confusion” whatever. It is force of habit and nothing else that prevents
you from realising that this “double entry bookkeeping” is dictated by
all the conditions of our epoch, that we must turn its contradictions to
account and know what action to take in that sphere in which the
most important events of our times are taking place. In words you
all subscribe to the “combination of illegal with legal work”. Then apply
it in practice. Having said A, don’t be afraid to say B. Since you have
accepted this fundamental thesis for tactics and organisation in general,
don’t be afraid to accept it for Party organisation. Get rid of
the absurd anarchist prejudice against legality, can’t you, and do it
resolutely, seriously and sincerely.  

Anti-liquidator: That is just the trouble with you; you are
merely playing at “legality”, pretending “legality”, whereas the
Germans relied on a legality which actually existed. The example of the
legal and illegal press is a particularly glaring argument against
you. When a Social-Democrat who is working illegally uses the legal press
to publish what is legally permissible, he is not playing at legality, but
is actually taking advantage of a legality that, within certain narrow
limits, actually does exist. Your legal workers’ party, however, or Marxist
association (as well as the “open workers’ party” of the liquidators from
whom you do not really differ at bottom) is just a legalist
mirage, nothing more; for you, yourself, admit that it will not be
permitted, that actually these so-called “legal” associations
will have no legal existence. Just as the anarcho-syndicalists indulge
mainly in “revolutionary acrobatics”, so all you manage to achieve is
“legalistic acrobatics”. The Cadets have a party that functions legally
although it is legally non-existent, not because they have turned the
contradictions to account, but because there is nothing revolutionary in
the content of their work, and it does not imply any democratic
organisational activity among the masses. Their work is of a
liberal-monarchist nature, and the autocracy can afford to permit and
tolerate political activity of this kind. But the autocracy cannot afford
to tolerate the activity of Marxists among the working class, and it is
naive to try to promote the cause

    

by a masquerade. Your “legal association”, as well as the open workers’
party” of the liquidators, is nothing but a sham association, a
masquerade, for actually you are counting on the Social-Democrats. The
ambiguous and vague formulations which you have chosen to define the aims,
platform and tactics of your “association” are but a verbal disguise,
flimsy defences, the same sort of legalistic acrobatics. Our Party must
speak out in the Duma, found legally functioning trade unions and
speak at legally held congresses and it would be sheer anarchism or
intellectualist nihilism to deny this. It is by recognising this
kind of activity that we take into account the new conditions of the new
epoch. But legality for political activity is still out of the
question (except for intellectual opportunists), because the conditions for
such legality have not yet been won, and it is a futile dream to think that
you can “creep into” it. In the case of the Germans, such legality had
been fully created by 1871, the transformation of the country on bourgeois
lines had been completed and the conditions for a directly revolutionary
movement had entirely disappeared. It is these real conditions and
not the skill of the German Social-Democrats that made possible
the emergence of a Social-Democratic party that is really legal
and does not play at legality or indulge in “legalist acrobatics”.  

It is a naive dream and a meaningless pastime to try to copy
some of the legal clauses of the programme of such legal party, some of its
resolutions, etc., and transfer this sort of “legality” to Russia, for
you cannot transfer to Russia the German completion of the
bourgeois revolution, the German history of a democracy that had spent
itself, the German “revolution from above” of the

1860s,[2] and the actually existing German legality. There are
some monarchist countries in which republican parties exist legally; what
legality will actually be like in Russia after her bourgeois revolutions
have been achieved and we have a bourgeois system similar to that existing
in Europe, remains to be seen when the future battles are over; it will be
deter mined by their outcome. The task of the Social-Democratic movement
today is to be able to prepare itself and the masses for revolution under
the special conditions of the period of the June Third regime.  
 

Under these conditions a legal party of the working class, an open
workers’ party, is a hollow phrase—it simply conceals the desire for the
legalisation of ... a group of legalist
opportunists. This is the kind of legalisation actually enjoyed by
the Popular Socialists. This legalisation is actually enjoyed by
the group of our legal, liquidationist journalists. It is not by chance but
of necessity, not due to the “errors” of some liquidators but by virtue
of the social composition of all the intellectual-liquidationist groups,
that all opportunist elements—all those who nurture the idea of
renouncing the revolution and repudiating the hegemony of the
proletariat—gravitate and cannot help gravitating toward them. The only
way in which the legalist may be distinguished from these people is by his
good intentions; actually, he is indistinguishable. The real
conditions of the present epoch are such that the legalisation of the
Popular Socialists and the legalisation of the group of liquidationist
writers is possible and inevitable; but the legalisation of a workers’
party is mere words.  

The illegal party of the working class exists, and even the fact that
it has, in our days, been extremely weakened, and that most of its
organisations have fallen to pieces, does not militate against its
existence. Again and again the revolutionary underground is given fresh
impetus by newly-emerging study circles and groups. The question reduces
itself to the following: what is the organised force, what is the
ideological tradition, what is the party capable of influencing, and which
will influence, the open actions of the worker deputies in the Duma, of the
workers’ trade unions, of the workers’ clubs, and of the workers’ delegates
at various legally held congresses? The revolutionary proletarian party,
the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, or the opportunist group of
liquidationist writers? That is the real essence of the “struggle
against liquidationism”, that is the real background which creates a gulf
between the adversaries in this conflict. And this gulf cannot be bridged
by any good intentions, by any attempts to draw a verbal distinction
between legalism and liquidationism.  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
This article was written following an article by N. A. Rozhkov “An
Essential Beginning” sent to the editors of Sotsial-Demokrat.

   

In this article Rozhkov developed his liquidationist plan for the creation
of a legal labour party under the Stolypin regime. Lenin attempted to
convince Rozhkov of the incorrectness of his views. “... I earnestly
implore you to delay, give up, think over, correspond...” he wrote to
Rozhkov on February 23 (March 8), 1911 (Lenin Miscellany XXV,
p. 66). When it became clear that Rozhkov insisted on the publication of
this article, Lenin published his reply in Diskussionny Listok
(Discussion Bulletin), No. 3, a supplement to
Sotsial-Demokrat, on April 29 (May 12), under the above heading.





[2]
After the defeat of the 1848–49 Revolution, whose main aim had been
the reunification of Germany into a single democratic republic, reactionary
Prussian Junkers led by Bismarck carried out a policy of uniting Germany
“by blood and iron”. Its aim was the formation of a single monarchist
state with a Prussian king as monarch. The Prussian Junkers relied on the
support of the big German bourgeoisie for the fulfilment of this
“revolution from above”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Regret” and “Shame”









Lenin: 'Regret' and 'Shame'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Regret” and “Shame”




Published:
Zvezda, No. 21, May 7, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 189-194.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Every crisis reveals the real nature of phenomena or
processes, sweeps away the superficial, the trivial, the external, and
demonstrates the more profound fundamentals of what is taking place. Take,
for instance, the most common and least complicated of crises in the sphere
of economic phenomena, a strike. Nothing serves to reveal more clearly the
actual relationships between classes, the real nature of contemporary
society, the fact that the vast majority of the population has to submit to
the power of hunger, and that the propertied minority resorts to
organised violence in order to maintain its rule. Take commercial and
industrial crises. Nothing refutes so glaringly the various speeches of the
champions and apostles of “harmony of interests”, nothing reveals so
vividly and so fully the entire mechanism of the contemporary, capitalist
system, the “anarchy of production”, the disunity of the producers and
the struggle of each against all and of all against each. Take, lastly,
such a crisis as war. All the political and social institutions are, tested
and verified “by fire and sword”. The strength or weakness of the
institutions and social system of every nation are determined by the
outcome of the war and its consequences. The essential nature of
international relations under capitalism—the open robbery of the
weaker—is fully and clearly exposed by war.  

The significance of our notorious “parliamentary” crisis lies also in
its revelation of the deep-rooted contradictions of the entire
social and political system of Russia. Most of those participating in and
acting out this crisis are, unfortunately, not attempting to
explain it, to indicate its real causes and real significance but are
doing their best to obscure it by words, words and more words—some of
them

    

are doing so deliberately, others because of their warped judgement or in
deference to routine and tradition. The “big day” in the Third Duma,
April 27, the day of the debate with Stolypin, was a big day of
“parliamentary” phrase-mongering. But, despite the inordinate torrents of
verbiage let loose by Stolypin himself and by his friends and opponents,
they were unable to hide the essence of the matter. And the more
the daily press tries to distract the attention of its readers by harping
on liberal phrases, details and juridical formalities, the more appropriate
it is to review again the picture of the crisis which was revealed on
April 27.  

The keynote of Stolypin’s speech was defence of the “rights of the
Crown” from any “derogation”. “The significance of Article 87,” said
Stolypin, “is that it defines the rights of the Grown, and it cannot be
departed from without creating an undesirable precedent.” Stolypin objects
to the attempts “to discredit the right of the supreme authority to invoke
Article 87 in an emergency such as had arisen before the prorogation of the
Chambers”. “This right,” he said, “is incontrovertible; it is based on,
and rooted in, the conditions of life itself.” “Any other interpretation
of this right is inacceptable,” he went on to say; “it would violate the
meaning and sense of the law, it would reduce to naught the Monarch’s right
to issue emergency decrees.”  

All this is very clear, and all this is not mere words. The question is
stated in cynically “realistic” terms. The Grown and attempts at its
derogation.... If a dispute arises as to who is ultimately to interpret the
meaning of the law, then force decides the issue. All this is very clear,
and is not mere words.  

On the other hand, Maklakov’s “ardent, fervent, impassioned, and
sincere” reproaches were nothing but mere words, juggling, juridical
fictions. “It was with a feeling of pro found regret and great shame”
(report in Rech, April 28, p. 4) that he had heard certain
references to the Crown. Maklakov, who spoke on behalf of the entire
so-called “constitutional Centre” (i.e., on behalf of the Cadets and
Octobrists), defended the usual fiction of the monarchy being
constitutional. But the “defence”, voiced by the Cadets, or by the Cadets
and the Octobrists, consisted of hollow phrase mongering. What has it to do
with regret and shame when

    

it is a question of force? The bourgeoisie, who would like to have a
constitution, regret the fact that the Crown refuses to grant a
constitution, and is “ashamed” of this. The Crown is “ashamed” to have
anyone impose a constitution on it, regards it as “derogation” and
“regrets” any and all interpretation of any law that might be intended to
“derogate”.  

Here we have two sides, and two interpretations of the law. Regrets and
shame on both sides, with the only difference that one side does nothing
else but “regret” and be “ashamed”; whereas the other side
says nothing either about regretting or about being ashamed—it
says only that derogation is “unacceptable”.  

Surely it is obvious that the ones to be “ashamed” of this state of
affairs, the ones to be ashamed of their impotence, should be the
Maklakovs, should be the whole of our Cadet and Octobrist bourgeoisie. The
spokesman of the Council of the United Nobility is cynical about the crisis
he cynically engineered, he hurls defiance and draws his sword. And the
liberal bourgeoisie, like a street-trader who has been scared out of his
wits by a police officer, shrinks back in awe, muttering: I regret, I am
ashamed to ... be treated in this manner!  

“I say,” Maklakov vowed, “that I am a better constitutionalist than
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers [I can imagine how Stolypin
inwardly, and in the privacy of his home, laughed at these words; the
point, my dear sir, is not whether one proclaims oneself a
constitutionalist, but who possesses the power to determine
whether a constitution shall exist, and what kind of constitution it shall
be!], but for all that I am no less a monarchist than he. [Stolypin smiles
even more contentedly, so that’s the kind of a fellow he is—starts off by
uttering threats, and winds up by offering regrets! He is a great warrior,
this Maklakov!] I consider it lunacy to create a monarchy where it has no
roots, but just as much lunacy to renounce it where its historical roots
are strong.”  

Having first uttered some threats, and then offered his regrets, he now
begins to cite arguments in favour of Stolypin. Oh, magnificent
parliamentarian of the liberals! Oh, incomparable leader of the
“constitutional” (lucus a non
    

   lucendo[1]

–“constitutional”

though there is no constitution) Centre, of the Cadet and Octobrist Centre!


“The Chairman of the Council of Ministers,” thunders our tribune of
“people’s freedom” (read, of the historical slavery of our people), “may
still remain in power; he will hold on to it both because of fear of the
revolution which is being engineered by his own agents (shouts from the
benches on the right: “Shame!”, tumult) ... and because of
the danger of creating a precedent!”  

It is a tale about how Ivan Ivanovich cried “shame” upon Ivan
Nikiforovich, and Ivan Nikiforovich cried “shame” upon Ivan

Ivanovich.[2] “It’s a shame not to observe the common standards of
constitutional procedure,” Ivan Ivanovich says to Ivan
Nikiforovich. “It’s a shame to threaten a revolution, which you yourself
fear, in which you don’t believe, and which you don’t help,” Ivan
Nikiforovich says to Ivan Ivanovich.  

Well, reader, who do you think had the better of that argument?  

The representative of the “constitutional Centre”, Lvov the First,
spoke after Gegechkori who had quite correctly explained that the liberal
press wrongly represents the crisis as being of a
“constitutional” nature, that the Cadets “have, through their spokesmen,
supported the criminal illusion about a constitutional Centre”, and that a
constitution needs a certain movement, which is still lacking. (Gegechkori
made one awkward slip at the end when he mentioned “anarchy”—that was
not the word he should have used.)  

To judge by the speech of Lvov the First, it seemed at one time that
even some of the landowners had learned a thing or two from Gegechkori’s
explanations. “All that has happened,” said Lvov the First, “goes to
show indeed that we have no Constitution, and we have no parliamentary
system; but neither have we any fundamental laws and, in general, any
organised system [that’s a good one! And what about the existence of the
landowners—doesn’t that mean that there is an organised landowners’
system? You let your

    

tongues run away with you, gentlemen of the “constitutional
Centre”]—there is only arbitrary rule [that is precisely one of the
fundamental and most essential features of the organised landowner system]
and demagogy.”  

Judging by the interpretation of the “progressive” land lord Nikolai
Nikolayevich Lvov the First, demagogy stands for something highly
unpleasant. Listen further: 

“And the men who are now in office employ this demagogy in order to
enhance their own influence and their own power. But others, too, will make
use of this demagogy—those who want to seize power [brr ... what an
odious and immoral desire! Far be it from the Russian liberal bourgeois to
entertain such a desire. It is only in the decadent West that the immoral
bourgeoisie tries to seize power, and has even invented the unnatural
doctrine that only the bourgeoisie in power can safeguard a bourgeois
constitution. We, the Russian liberals, have been enlightened by the moral
and idealist sermons of Struve, Berdayev and Co. and we are, therefore, of
the opinion that power must remain in the hands of the Tolmachovs, whereas
the Maklakovs ought to be engaged in writing instructions for the truly
constitutional application of that power]... those who are more proficient
in wielding the instrument of demagogy. Fear this demagogy, for everything
will be sacrificed to it: your dignity, your possessions, your honour, and
Russia’s civic system.  

The “progressist” Nikolai Nikolayevich Lvov the First talks sense. He
is even fairly clear when he refers to “possessions”. For instance, if
yesterday a landowner owned 10,000 dessiatines, and today he is left with
only 50 dessiatines, it means that 9,950 dessiatines have been
“sacrificed” to “demagogy”. That is clear. That is not mere words. But
matters are not so clear when he refers to “dignity” and “honour”. Does
our progressist imply that a landlord can be a man of “dignity” and
“honour” only when he owns 10,000 dessiatines, and that he is bound to
lose both if he loses 9,950 of his dessiatines? Or does Lvov the First
imply that dignity and honour stand to be sacrificed if the dessiatines do
not fetch a fair price—say, 500 rubles a dessiatine?  

On the subject of “Russia’s civic system” the “progressist” Lvov
the First is somewhat at sea. If it is true, as he said,

    

that we have neither a constitution, nor a parliamentary system, nor
fundamental laws, that means that we have no civic system either, and what
doesn’t exist, cannot be sacrificed. If what Lvov the First said is true
this means that our civic system has been sacrificed to our “organised
[landowner] system”. Wasn’t this a slip of the tongue on the part of our
“progressist”? Didn’t he mean to say that our organised landowner system
would be sacrificed to Russia’s civic system? Didn’t he imply that it would
be demagogy if events were to take such a hypothetical course?  When he
said—“fear this demagogy”—didn’t he imply that the majority of the
Third Duma ought to fear that hypothetical course of events?  

It is a tale about how Ivan Ivanovich accused Ivan Nikiforovich of
demagogy, and Ivan Nikiforovich accused Ivan Ivanovich of the same thing:
“You are a demagogue,” said Ivan Ivanovich to Ivan Nikiforovich,
“because you are In office and you are using it to enhance your own
influence and your own power, while at the same time pretending to serve
the national interests of the population.” “No,” said Ivan Nikiforovich
to Ivan Ivanovich, “you are a demagogue, because you are shouting at the
top of your voice and in a public place, that all we have is arbitrary
rule, and that we have neither a constitution nor fundamental laws; more
over you are hinting rather impolitely at some sort of sacrifice of our
possessions.”  

We do not know which of them proved, in the long run, that the other
was a demagogue. But we do know that when thieves fall out true men come
into their own.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
An untranslatable Latin pun: its meaning is clear from the
context. (Literally “a grove, but not giving light”; lucus—a
grove, lucere—to give light.)—Ed.  
 



[2]
Ivan Ivanovich and Ivan Nikiforovich—characters in
Gogol’s Tale of How Ivan Ivanovich Quarrelled with Ivan
Nikiforovich.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]
May 28–June 4 (June 10–17), 1911




Published:

      First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV.

      Published according to the manuscripts.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 195-205.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents




1.


Letter to the Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P. Abroad
  197

2.


Summary (Plan) for Report by Three Bolshevik Members of the C.C. to a Private Meeting of Nine Members of the Central Committee
  200

3.


Draft Resolution Defining Terms of Reference
  205

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Meeting of the C.C. members of the R.S.D.L.P. living
abroad, organised on Lenin’s initiative, was held in Paris on
May 28–June 4 (June 10–17), 1911.  

The purpose of this Meeting was to work out measures for the calling of
a plenary meeting of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. and an all-Party conference
at an early date. By this time, all the Bolshevik members of the Central
Committee working in Russia had been arrested, and the Central Committee
Bureau Abroad, which consisted of liquidators, refused to convene the
plenary meeting abroad. Invitations to the Paris Meeting were sent on
May 14(27), 1911 by the Bolsheviks and representatives of the Polish
Social-Democrats.  

Three Bolsheviks, two representatives of the Polish and Lithuanian
Social-Democrats, and one representative of the Latvian S.D.W.P. attended
the Meeting. A Menshevik Golos-ist (who left the Meeting after the
resolution on defining terms of reference had been adopted), and a
representative of the Bund (who left the Meeting on the second day) were
also present.  

The agenda of the Meeting included the following items:

(1) the convening of a plenary meeting of the C.C.;

(2) the holding of a meeting on the forthcoming elections to the Fourth
Duma;

(3) the convening of a Party conference;

(4) the Central Committee Bureau Abroad;

(5) the organisation of a Technical Commission.  

The Meeting adopted a resolution to convene a plenary meeting of the
C.C. abroad; to set up an Organising Commission for calling an all-Russia
conference and a Technical Commission Abroad (the T.C.A.) to cater to the
needs of the Party press, to provide transport facilities, etc.  


The Meeting condemned the anti-Party behaviour of the Central Committee
Bureau Abroad and placed the-question of its further existence before the
Plenary Meeting. Notification about the Meeting was published in a separate
leaflet which called on Party organisations to contact the Organising
Commission, and to “immediately start practical work for the calling of
the conference, which is the only means whereby the Party can be assisted
to unite its ranks and prepare itself for the forthcoming struggle”. The
local Party organisations welcomed the decisions of the Meeting. By
September 1 (14), 1911, nearly ten of the more important Party
organisations had expressed their confidence in the C.C. Meeting abroad and
had started the practical work of preparation for the conference.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Letter to the Meeting









Lenin: 1911/mccm: Letter to the Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P. Abroad







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.
May 28–June 4 (June 10–17), 1911



    

    
 

1
Letter to the Meeting of the C.C. Members
    of the R.S.D.L.P. Abroad[1]

Igorev’s piece of paper dated June 1, 1911, once again
shows the disgraceful game being played around the convening of
the C.C.; that policy of delay and sabotage which the Central Organ of our
Party has been exposing for a long time, over a period of several months.


Igorev’s assertion that Yudin and

Kostrov[2] comprise a temporary Bureau or even a part of it, is out and
out lying. Over a long period of months, when Makar and

Lindov[3] (after Innokenty) constituted the Bureau
organisation, selected agents, arranged a number of
visits connected with the affairs of the central organisation, organised
meetings with agents and candidates for co-option (Makar and

Katsap[4] and others, with Milyutin and others), established contact
with the general Party centre for Social-Democratic work in the Duma, and
with the city Social-Democratic circles at the time of the elections
(Moscow), etc., etc., no such work was carried out either by Yudin
or Kostrov. Precisely none, absolutely none of this kind of
activity was carried out by either one of them.  

Not a single official body of the Party abroad (neither the
Central Organ nor the Central Committee Bureau Abroad) received a
single formal notification of the co-option of Yudin and Kostrov
to the Bureau.  

For a period of more than two months following the arrest of
Makar and Lindov, not a single piece of paper, not a single letter was
received and no one heard a sound about Yudin or Kostrov regarding their
work in the Bureau. Not only were Yudin and Kostrov not recognised by
anyone as members of the Bureau (as were, without any argument, Makar

    

and Lindov), but neither did Yudin or Kostrov ask for a kopek, and, unlike
Makar and Lindov, they did not inform the Central Committee Bureau Abroad
that they comprised the Bureau.  

In such a state of affairs we maintain that Igorev’s reference to
Kostrov and Yudin comprising the “Bureau” is a mockery of the
Party, is deception of the Party. We shall expose this deception.


Further, after the experience of Inok, Makar and others, and following
the exposure by

Olgin,[5] etc., we regard all attempts to revive the Central Committee
in Russia with the old C.C. members, elected in London, as playing
right into Stolypin’s hands. We warn the Party against those who are
angling for uninformed people, who send Central Committee members where
conditions are impossible, who send them on jobs that cannot
be done, straight into the hands of the police.  

Finally, as regards the “plan” to call a plenary meeting in
a month’s time, announced in Igorev’s paper of June 1, 1911, but
of which he said nothing to the Central Committee Bureau Abroad,
we draw the Party’s attention to a new intrigue of the liquidators
in connection with the convening of the Central Committee.  

No Central Committee can be convened within a month, but it is possible
to “bring together” fictitious Central Committee members—that
is the kernel of the Golos intrigue.  

Since the Plenary Meeting, four Bolshevik members of the
Central Committee (Meshkovsky + Innokenty + Makar + Lindov) have been lost
while engaged in the Central Committee work. The Mensheviks have
not lost one member, for not one of them has been working!!  

And so now, the Golos group dare to propose a period of a
month calculating on bringing in such individuals as

Pyotr[6] who, for a whole year and a half (since the Plenary
Meeting) has not done a single stroke of work, who not
once put in an appearance at the Bureau. The Golos group know
that within a month it is not possible to “bring
together” Bolsheviks who are in exile either following a trial or by
administrative decision.  

They sent the Central Committee to Russia “in order that it might
be destroyed there”!  
 

They lived to see the day when all the Bolsheviks had been
arrested.  

They were able to save all the fictitious Menshevik members
who had been inactive.  

They want to fix a period of one month in which ficticious Central
Committee members like Pyotr could be brought there, and Bolsheviks who
were working could not even be notified!  

They are wrong if they think that the game the liquidators are
playing with the convocation of a plenary meeting will not be disclosed to
the Party!  

Written between May 19 and 23 (June 1 and 5), 1911



    

     
Notes
 
 



[1]
The manuscript had no heading. The heading has been provided by the
Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.





[2]
Yudin (I. L. Eisenstadt), Kostrov
(N. N. Zhordaniya)—members of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.,
Menshevik-liquidators.





[3]
Makar (V. P. Nogin), Lindov
(G. D. Leiteisen)—members of the C.C., R.S.D.L.P.,
Bolshevik-conciliators, arrested at the end of March 1911.





[4]
Katsap—A. Polyakov.





[5]
For the exposure by Olgin (pro-Party Menshevik, V. P. Fomin)





[6]
Pyotr (N. V. Ramishvili)—member of the Central Committee of
the R.S.D.L.P., one of the leaders of the Georgian Menshevik liquidators.



 
  


|

Summary (Plan) for Report by Three Bolshevik Members of the C.C. to a Private Meeting of Nine Members of the Central Committee

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Three Bolshevik Members
      of the C.C. to a Private Meeting of Nine Members









Lenin: 1911/mccm: Summary (Plan) for Report by Three Bolshevik Members of the C.C. to a Private Meeting of Nine Members of the Central Committee







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.
May 28–June 4 (June 10–17), 1911



    

2
Summary (Plan) for Report by Three Bolshevik Members
    of the C.C.  to a Private Meeting of Nine Members of the Central
    Committee

1. History of attempts to restore the Central Committee in Russia.


Two periods: 

(a) I. 1910-August (or September) 1910.  

Two Bolshevik members of the Central Committee arrested following
attempts to convene the Committee. Arranged C.C. meetings many
times. Not once did Mikhail + Yuri + Roman, not a
single Menshevik, put in an appearance.  

(b) End of 1910-spring 1911.  

New Bureau formed by two Bolshevik members of the Central
Committee. Not a single Menshevik participated in their
work (contact with agents, with the Duma group, with the Moscow
Social-Democrats in connection with the elections, etc.).  

One Menshevik (Kostrov) turned up at the Bureau once or twice
in order to “vote”!  

Both Bolsheviks arrested.  

Conclusion: all Bolshevik members of the Committee arrested on
account of the Central Committee work and while engaged in this
work.  

Of the Mensheviks, a section (Mikhail+Yuri+Roman) refused to take
any part whatsoever, one (Pyotr) took not The slightest
part for a whole year and a half, one (Kostrov) turned up twice at the
Bureau in one and a half years (in 1911!), having played absolutely no part
whatsoever in the Central Committee work. For two and a half months after
the arrests of the Bolsheviks, this Menshevik took not a
    

single step, nor did he write a single letter stating that he was
re-forming the Committee.  

Therefore, we consider it insolent for Igorev to state that this
Menshevik+Bundist now comprise the Bureau (no formal notification
of this having been given the Central Committee Bureau Abroad, and it being
recognised by no one!).  

2. Is it now possible to restore the plenary meeting abroad?  

Juridically—9 out of 15 members are available. Formally they
can (a) proclaim themselves the meeting. Beyond question from the formal
point of view, such a step is probably admissible with a majority
of one, that is, by a vote of five out of these nine, against four. In
reality, the value of such a formally irreproachable step is
insignificant; there can be no doubt that it will be impossible
for the Central Committee to carry out its role under such
circumstances.  

(b) Formally, it is also possible for these nine available members of
the C.C. to bring over from Russia people with the rights of alternate
members. What is the actual meaning of such a step? The Mensheviks can
“bring” either their liquidators (Mikhail + Yuri + Roman, and others),
who (after the famous statement of Mikhail + Yuri + Roman) will not be
recognised as Central Committee members by a single honest Party member, or
two Central Committee members who attended the Plenary Meeting in January
1910 and since then, for one and a half years, have not carried out any
Central Committee work. The period required to bring them together is
unpredictable.  

The Bolsheviks may bring in another two of their alternate members in
addition to the three Bolsheviks already available. In order to do this,
months and months of work are required to establish contact with exiles,
organise escapes, arrange for aid to their families, etc., etc. It is
impossible to say how many months would be required for this “work”.


For the Party, the real meaning of this protracted work of bringing
together “formal” candidates, who at the moment are incapable of
providing genuine central leadership in Russia, will not only be nil, the
real meaning will be even worse, for the game of allocating places
in central bodies

    

hides from the local Party groups the sad reality in respect of
which vigorous action must be taken.  

After eighteen months of unsuccessful attempts to restore the Central
Committee, to feed the Party with further promises—tomorrow “you” will
have a Committee—that would be an affront to the Party. We do not intend
to be a party to any such affront.  

3. It goes without saying that an attempt to bring together candidates
in Russia in order to restore the Central Commit tee there, can only come
from supporters of Stolypin. The police know all the candidates
and keep them under surveillance as has been shown by the arrests of
Innokenty and Makar, twice and three times. That is the first and most
important thing to note. And secondly, the real aim of such a
gathering—the co-option of people living in Russia—is impossible of
achievement now, since there are none avail able (they were seized with
Makar when he was last arrest ed). It is impossible to achieve the
unanimity required by the rules in the co-option of Mensheviks, since not
one Bolshevik (as has already been stated by Inok to Sverchkov) will allow
in a single liquidator (or Golos supporter).  

4. At present the real position of the Party is such that
almost everywhere in the localities there are informal, extremely small and
tiny Party workers’ groups and nuclei that meet irregularly. Everywhere
they are combating liquidator-legalists in the unions, clubs, etc. They are
not connected with each other. Very rarely do they see any literature. They
enjoy prestige among workers. In these groups Bolsheviks and Plekhanov’s
supporters unite, and to some extent those Vperyod “supporters”
who have read Vperyod literature or have heard Vperyod
speakers, but have not yet been dragged into the isolated Vperyod
faction set up abroad.  

This anti-Party faction undoubtedly has some influence, although it is
not great, among a section of St. Petersburg workers. There is sufficient
proof that it does not hold itself responsible to any Central Committee,
and interferes as much as possible with the work of the Social-Democrats
(so far it has not given a direct call to the elections to the Fourth Duma,
and continues to flirt with the otzovists).  
 

A far more serious anti-Party and anti-Social-Democratic force is the
faction of the independent legalists (Nasha Zarya +
Dyelo Zhizni + Golos Sotsial-Demokrata). It has been
proved beyond doubt that they recognise no Central Commit tee and publicly
ridicule Central Committee decisions. They cannot carry out the
Plenary Meeting’s decisions (not to “minimise” the role of an illegal
party, etc.) because they do not wish to. They cannot help taking the
opposite line of action.  

No honest Social-Democrat can doubt that the “independent legalists”
are preparing for the elections to the Fourth Duma, and will conduct their
election work separately from and contrary to the Party.  

The task of Party members is clear: they must no longer permit the
slightest delay, nor postpone for even a day a forthright
declaration against the independent legalists; they must openly and
decisively call on Party workers’ circles in Russia to prepare for the
elections, to work for the election of only those Party members
who are fully loyal and aware of the danger of this tendency, and
during the election campaign to warn the workers against the
“legalist independents” and to struggle against them.  

Such is the task of the day for our Party. There must be no deviation
from this presentation of an issue with which the existing situation (and
the independent legalists) con front us. All evasions, delays, attempts by
the legalists to repeat the game of “promises” and “assurances” are
fraught with great danger to the Party.  

5. Our practical conclusion: the meeting of the nine must absolutely
and immediately issue a manifesto to the Party in which the failure to
convene the Central Committee in Russia is truthfully and fully described,
and which calls upon local Party circles to display initiative and
establish regional organising commissions and, following that, a Central
Organising Commission and to conduct a determined, direct and
implacable struggle against the “independent legalists”.  

A formal vote of the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee
supporting this call should only take place if the overwhelming majority of
the nine members of the Central Committee, not merely five, agree to regard
themselves as

    

the Plenary Meeting and to take the path of decisive struggle against the group
(faction) of legalist independents. It is, of course, understood that such a
struggle is incompatible with participation by these legalists in central Party
bodies, which they have sabotaged, obstructed, weakened and “kept in a
sick condition” for eighteen months.


Written between May 19 and 23 (June 1 and 5), 1911



    

     
Notes
 
 

 
  

Letter to the Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P. Abroad

|

Draft Resolution Defining Terms of Reference

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Defining
      Terms of Reference









Lenin: 1911/mccm: Draft Resolution Defining Terms of Reference







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Meeting of the C.C. Members of the R.S.D.L.P.
May 28–June 4 (June 10–17), 1911



    

3
Draft Resolution Defining Terms of Reference[1]

Placing on record that all members of the Central Committee living abroad have
been invited and that all except one are present, this meeting regards itself to
be a conference of Central Committee members living abroad and places on its
agenda the question of reconstituting the Central Committee in connection with
the general situation within the Party.


Written on May 28 (June 10) 1911



 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The manuscript had no heading. The heading has been provided by the
Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.



 
  

Summary (Plan) for Report by Three Bolshevik Members of the C.C. to a Private Meeting of Nine Members of the Central Committee

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Results of the Duma Session









Lenin: The Results of the Duma Session







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Results of the Duma Session
“We Did This Together”




Published:
Zvezda, No. 28, May 28, 1911.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 206-210.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

During the “historic” sitting of the Duma on April 27
Mr. Teslenko, who took issue with Mr. Stolypin, said in part: 


   “The Chairman of the Council of Ministers said to the
   State Duma:

   Yes, gentlemen, I shall come to your assistance in the very near
   future. There is the Bill about the Old Believers—you’ll probably arrange
   matters so as to vote it down before the recess, and then it will be put
   into effect during the recess. I even imagined in this a sort of flippant
   we-know-each-other-well tone, as if we were told: why, we did this
   together. And, gentlemen, forgive me if it reminds me of the scene in the
   Inspector-General, in which the Mayor of the town says: ‘Ah! So
   you’ve come to lodge a complaint against me? Have you forgotten how we did
   this and that together?’ And, I presume, gentlemen, that those among you
   who, perhaps, once counted on this assistance, or who, perhaps, still count
   on it, must have felt embarrassed and, perhaps, thought (and you did well
   if you did think so): ‘God preserve us from such friends, we can cope with
   our enemies ourselves’.”  


By these words, Mr. Teslenko, according to the Verbatim Report, earned
“applause from the Left”, apparently from the benches of the people’s
freedom group. The Cadets regarded it as fitting irony directed against the
Octobrists. But in this case, as in many others, they applauded without
giving thought to the profound meaning of the words which their speaker let
fall. They applauded believing that these words wounded only the
Octobrists, that they compromised only their particularly hated
rivals. They did not realise that Mr. Teslenko’s apt phrase, if its meaning
is seriously analysed, represents a truth which stigmatises both the
Octobrists and the Cadets. It is worth dwelling on this truth at greater
length for it concerns one of the most vital questions of the past five or
six years—and what years!—of Russia’s political history.  
 

“We did this together”—well put, Mr. Teslenko. But it would,
perhaps, be more correct to put it this way: you have excellently
repeated what has been said time and again at “Left”
“meetings” which are usually so disparaged by the Cadet gentlemen. “We
did this together”—these words by no means apply only to bills in the
Third Duma, they by no means apply only to the notorious so-called
“miscellany”. They apply to everything that the Stolypins and
the Russian liberal bourgeoisie (or the bourgeoisie that has pretended to
be liberal) “have done together” ever since the end of 1905. As for
Mr. Stolypin’s “flippant tone”, it was not something that the Cadet
speaker merely “imagined”, it was precisely the tone Stolypin assumes in
all his speeches, it is the tone of the whole policy of the Stolypins in
dealing with the bourgeoisie (who, in the persons of the Octobrist and
Cadet deputies, incidentally, constitute the majority in the Third Duma).


This flippant tone—which at every serious turn of events gives way to
gross bullying or even to brute force—is account ed for by the fact that
not only the Octobrists but the Cadets as well merely play for effect,
exclusively for the sake of winning applause (and the Stolypins know this
only too well) when they hurl phrases like: “God preserve us from such
friends [i.e., from the Stolypins], we can cope with our enemies [meaning,
apparently, the reactionaries on the Right, and—how can we express it in
the mildest possible terms?—the “exacting” Left] ourselves”.  

Had these been more than mere words, Russia would by now have been
entirely and irrevocably rid of “such friends”. But the point is that the
Cadets hurl such phrases only in the heat of “opposition”
speeches—opposition speeches can not be made from the national rostrum
unless they are given democratic flavour, even if only a slight one. That
is why the Cadets sometimes give vent to democratic statements, which may
be usefully compared with the deeds of these same Cadets. The
historical role of a bourgeoisie playing at democracy (or threatening the
enemy on the right with democracy) is such that this “playing” with words
sometimes serves a useful purpose for some sections of the popular masses
since it awakens sincere and profound democratic thought. “When the fiddle
is played upstairs, people downstairs want to

    

dance.” There is a Latin proverb that says: Littera scripta
manet—“what is written is permanent”. Nor do spoken words always
disappear, even if they are mere words and only spoken for effect.  

It does not follow, of course, that hypocritical phrases uttered by the
Cadets may be accepted at their face value, and that they may be proclaimed
or regarded as an expression of democracy. But it certainly does follow
that we ought to make use of every hypocritical phrase uttered by a Cadet
so long as it has a democratic ring; that we ought to make use of it,
first, to demonstrate the divergence between the words and the deeds of the
man uttering them, and, secondly, to show what real, vital and direct
significance democracy has for those masses who happen to get an inkling of
the flamboyant phrases uttered by the speakers in the Taurida Palace.  

The reflections of Mr. Teslenko quoted above are hypocritical, but not
because Mr. Teslenko personally was hypocritical in his remarks; he may
have been carried away by the torrent of his own oppositionist
eloquence. The statement is hypocritical because the words of the
representative of the Cadet Party are at variance with the deeds
of that party at all serious moments in modern Russian history.  

Recall the events of August 1905. What did Mr. Stolypin’s predecessor
do at that time? He was setting the stage for the Bulygin

Duma[1] and for elections to it. What did Mr. Teslenko and his friends
do at that time? Within the limits of their forces and in line with their
“speciality” in the sphere of public activity, they were setting the
stage for those same elections. Mr. Bulygin (and Mr. Stolypin) would be
justified in saying to Mr. Teslenko: “We did this together”. And
Mr. Teslenko “did this together” for the very reason that he was fearful
of being left without those “friends” of his, of whom he now says so
magnificently, with the courage of a knight errant: “God preserve us from
such friends.”...  

Recall the events that took place three months after the promulgation
of Bulygin’s State Duma Act. What did Mr. Stolypin’s predecessor do at that
time? He resisted, for instance, the movement of the postal and telegraph
employees and the numerous ramifications of similar
movements. Mr. Teslenko,

    

or, at any rate, his party as personified by Mr. Struve, Mr. Karaulov, and
others, resisted—in its own way—the same movement. Mr. Witte (and
Mr. Stolypin) would be justified in saying to the Teslenkos: “We did this
together”. It was the same in the case of the working-class holiday on
May 1, 1906, in the case of the “local land committees” a little later,
and in 1907, systematically and invariably, in the attitude to the worker
and peasant deputies to the Second Duma, and so on, and so forth.  

This policy, which the Cadet Party has been pursuing for many years,
was summed up correctly by the well-known Cadet writer Mr. Izgoyev when he
declared in Vekhi: 

“We must at last have the courage to admit that the Vast majority of
members of our State Dumas, with the exception of thirty or forty Cadets
and Octobrists, have not shown themselves to possess the knowledge required
to under take the job of governing and reconstructing Russia.”  

Mr. Izgoyev’s “courageous admission” is courageous because,
abandoning all appearances and all diplomacy, he has blurted out some words
of truth. It is true that in “our State Dumas” the Cadets have
indeed been guided by the landowner, bourgeois, liberal-monarchist
“knowledge”, which could not satisfy “the vast majority of members”,
particularly those on the left. And it goes without saying, of course, that
Stolypin fought these latter members, and in fighting them relied for
support on the “knowledge” (or, more correctly: on the interests and
point of view) of “thirty or forty Cadets and Octobrists”. Mr. Stolypin
would be justified in saying to the entire Cadet Party: “We did this
together”—together we fought against the clumsiness, inexperience, and
ignorance of the workers and peasants.  

The principal result of this year’s session of the Duma is that the
excessively “flippant tone” assumed by Stolypin towards the majority of
the Third Duma—and, moreover, towards its bourgeois, Octobrist-Cadet,
majority—proved too much even for this majority, which cannot be
suspected of lacking in patience. The old regime assumes a flippant
attitude towards the bourgeoisie, even though the latter is well aware of
its own importance under the new, present day economic conditions, and is
longing for independence, even for power. The Article 87 episode brought
out this

    

flippant attitude so sharply and, at the same time, affronted some of the mighty
of this world so crudely, that even the most patient of people began to
grumble. But grumbling is as far as they can go. They are bound hand and foot,
and that is why they cannot go any farther. They are bound because at every
important juncture of Russian history, in the course of all these last years,
they have been afraid of the broad popular movement and turned their backs upon
it; they have been hostile to the forces of democracy—to the real, live,
active, mass forces of democracy—and have shunned them, attacked them from
the rear in the same way as Stolypin has attacked them. And with these facts
behind them, the Octobrists and the Cadets now suffer the penalty they deserve;
in point of fact, they have nothing with which to parry Stolypin when
he assumes a flippant tone and tells them: “If I am an enemy of democracy,
you, my dear sirs, have proved that you are afraid of democracy—’we did
this together’”.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Bulygin Duma—the “advisory representative assembly”
which the tsarist government promised to convene in 1905. The Act for its
convocation and the regulations governing the elections were drafted by a
commission presided over by Minister of the Interior Bulygin, and,
published on August 6 (19), 1905. The Bolsheviks proclaimed an active
boycott of the Bulygin Duma, and its convocation was prevented by the
forces of the revolution.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Old Truths That Are Ever New









Lenin: Old Truths That Are Ever New







V. I.  

      Lenin
Old Truths That Are Ever New




Published:
Zvezda, No. 25, June 11, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 211-215.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The incidents that prevented the workers’ delegates from attending the second
congress of factory doctors in Moscow are known to readers from press

reports.[1] We are not in a position to dwell here on the details of
those incidents or to comment upon their significance. We shall merely note the
instructive reflections that appeared in Rech of April 14, i.e., on the
day the congress opened, in a leading article which was written on the eve of
these events.


“It is to be regretted,” wrote the organ of the Constitutional-Democratic Party, “that outside obstacles are placed in the way of such
participation [participation by representatives of the workers]. The fate
likely to befall some too fiery speakers is all too well known. As a result, the
representatives of the workers insist on talking about their difficulties in
concentrating on special questions, the impossibility of organising proper
representation at the congress, about the obstacles put in the way of their
organisations, and many other things of a like nature which are far removed from
the programme of the congress and the discussion of which distracts attention
from the questions on the agenda and sometimes leads to undesirable
consequences. The charged atmosphere explains also the intolerance shown by
workers’ representatives to ’bourgeois’ speakers, to all the measures taken by
the government, and to the possibility of collaboration with representatives of
other social groups.”


This whole tirade is a characteristic example of feeble lamentations whose
impotence is explained, not by the chance composition or by any special features
of the given liberal party, of the given question, etc., but by causes of a more
profound nature—by the actual conditions in which the liberal bourgeoisie
in general finds itself in twentieth century Russia. The liberal bourgeoisie is
longing for the

    

kind of “regime” under which it could have dealings with workers not
likely “to make too fiery speeches” and who are fairly “tolerant” in
their attitude towards the bourgeoisie, towards the idea of
collaboration with the bourgeoisie, and “to all the
measures taken by the government”. It is longing for a regime under which
these unassuming workers “collaborating” with it could “concentrate on
the special questions” of social policy and would meekly agree to confine
themselves to patching up the threadbare cloak of bourgeois solicitude for
“the younger brother”. In a word, the Russian liberals are longing for
something like the present regime in England or in France, as
distinct from that of Prussia. In England and France the bourgeoisie
holds full sway, and it exercises its rule practically (with few
exceptions) by itself, whereas in Prussia it is the feudal landowners, the
Junkers, and the monarchist militarists, who are in the ascendancy. In
England and France the bourgeoisie makes particularly frequent, free and
wide use of the services of men of proletarian origin or traitors to the
cause of the proletariat (John Burns, Briand) in the capacity of
“collaborators” who “concentrate”, undisturbed, “on special
questions” and who teach the working class to maintain an attitude of
“tolerance” to the rule of capital.  

There is not the slightest doubt that the English and French systems
are much more democratic than the Prussian; that they are much more
favourable for the struggle of the working class, and have to a much
greater degree eliminated the medieval institutions which distract the
attention of the working class from its principal and real adversary. There
is not the slightest doubt, therefore, that support for all aspirations to
remodel our country along Anglo-French, rather than Prussian, lines is in
the interests of the Russian workers. But we must not confine ourselves to
this indisputable conclusion, as is so often done. Only here does the
disputed question or questions begin—the dispute is with democrats of
various shades.  

The aspirations must be given support. To support him who is weak and
who wavers, it is necessary to sustain him with something more solid and to
dispel the illusions that prevent him from seeing his weakness and
understanding its causes. One does not give support to the urge towards
bourgeois democracy

    

by strengthening those illusions and by adding one’s voice to the feeble
lamentations of the weak,inconsistent and wavering adherents of democracy,
but, on the contrary, one deprives that urge of its force. The bourgeoisie
of England and then of France, in the middle of the seventeenth and the
late eighteenth century respectively, did not lament the “intolerance” of
the younger brother, and made no wry faces over the “too fiery speakers”
among the representatives of that younger brother, but they themselves
supplied the most fiery speakers (and not only speakers) who
inculcated a feeling of contempt for the advocacy of “tolerance”, for
weak lamentations, for vacillation and irresolution. Among those
fiery speakers there were men who, in the course of centuries, have served
as beacons and guides to humanity, despite historical limitations and often
the naïveté of their ideas regarding the means of salvation
from every kind of misfortune.  

The German bourgeoisie, like the Russian, also lamented the fact that
the speakers representing the “younger brother” were “too fiery”—and
it left behind it in history a model of abasement, infamy, and flunkeyism
for which it was rewarded with kicks administered by the “Junkers”. The
difference in the attitude of the two bourgeoisies was not due, of course,
to the “characteristics” of different “races”, but to the different
levels of economic and political development which caused one of them to
fear the “younger brother”, and made it vacillate impotently between
deprecating the violence of feudalism and censuring the “intolerance” of
the workers.  

Those are old truths. But they are ever new, and remain so as long as
we are treated, in publications issued by people who profess to be
Marxists, to lines like the following: 

“The failure of the movement of 1905-06 was not due to the ‘excesses’
of the Lefts, for those ‘excesses’ were them selves the consequence of the
aggregate of a large number of causes; nor was it due to ‘treachery’ on the
part of the bourgeoisie who, everywhere in the West, had ‘betrayed’ at the
crucial moment; it was due to the fact that there was no clearly defined
bourgeois party which could supersede the obsolete bureaucracy at the helm
if government, and which would be strong enough economically and
sufficiently democratic to enjoy the support of the people.” And a few
lines

    

further on: “... the weakness of the urban bourgeois democrats who should
have become the political centre of attraction for the democratic
peasantry...” (Nasha Zarya, No. 3, p. 62, article by
Mr. V. Levitsky).  

Mr. V. Levitsky is more consistent in his renunciation of the idea of
“the hegemony of the proletariat” (“the urban bourgeois democrats”, and
no other group, “should have become the centre of attraction”!),
or he expresses his ideas more boldly, definitely and consistently than
Mr. Potresov, who brushed up his article in The Social Movement to
comply with Plekhanov’s ultimatums.  

Mr. V. Levitsky argues just like a liberal. He is an in consistent
liberal, despite his use of many Marxist phrases. He has no idea that an
entirely different social category, not the urban bourgeois democrats,
should have become the “centre of attraction for the democratic
peasantry”. He forgets that this “should” was a reality during
momentous historical periods in England and in France, as well as in
Russia—they were of momentous significance although they were of short
duration in the latter country; in the two first-named countries it was for
the most part the democratic, ultra-democratic and “too fiery” plebeian
sections that united the various elements of the “lower classes”.  

Mr. V. Levitsky forgets that even in those brief periods of history
when these “lower classes” played the role of “centres of attraction for
the democratic peasantry”, when they succeeded in wresting this
role from the liberal bourgeoisie, they did exercise a decisive influence
in determining the degree of democracy the country in question was
to enjoy in the succeeding decades of so-called peaceful
development. During the brief periods of their hegemony, these
“lower classes” trained their bourgeoisie and remoulded it to such an
extent that subsequently it was anxious to beat a retreat, but was
unable to go farther in this retrograde movement than, say, an upper
chamber in France, or certain departures from the principles of democratic
elections, and so on, and so forth.  

This idea, confirmed by the historical experience of all
European countries—the idea that in epochs of bourgeois change (or, more
correctly, of bourgeois revolution) the bourgeois democracy of each country
is moulded one way or

    

another, assumes one form or another, becomes trained in one tradition or
another, and accepts one or another minimum of democracy, depending on the
extent to which, in the decisive moments of the history of the nation,
hegemony passes not to the bourgeoisie but to
the “lower classes”, to the “plebeian” elements, as was the case in the
eighteenth century, or to the proletariat in the nineteenth and twentieth
con tunes—this idea is foreign to Mr. V. Levitsky. The idea of the
hegemony of the proletariat constitutes one of the fundamental tenets of
Marxism; and the liquidators’ departure from these tenets (or even their
indifference to them) is a profound source of quite a number of their
irreconcilable fundamental differences with the opponents of the
liquidationist trend.  

Every capitalist country passes through an era of bourgeois revolutions
which produces a definite degree of democracy, a definite constitutional or
parliamentary regime, a definite degree of independence, love of liberty,
and initiative among the “lower classes” in general and the proletariat
in particular, a definite tradition permeating the entire political and
social life of the country. The particular degree of democracy, or the
particular tradition, depends on whether, in the decisive moments,
the hegemony belongs to the bourgeoisie or to those at the other end of the
scale; it depends on whether it is the former or the latter which (again in
those decisive moments) constitutes the “centre of attraction for the
democratic peasantry” and, in general, for all intermediary democratic
groups and sections.  

Mr. V. Levitsky is a past master at coining brilliant formulations
which have the effect of at once revealing the ideological foundations of
liquidationism, bringing them out clearly and in bold relief. Such was his
famous formula:

“Not hegemony, but a class party”, which—translated into plain
language—means: not Marxism, but Brentanoism (social-liberalism). The two
formulas noted in the present article—namely: “the urban bourgeois
democrats should have become the centre of attraction for the
democratic peasantry” and “the failure ... was due to the fact that there
was no clearly defined bourgeois party”—are, undoubtedly, destined to
become just as famous.  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The workers’ delegates to the second all-Russia congress of factory
doctors and representatives of industry were arrested on April 13 (26),
1911, on the eve, of the congress.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Resolution Adopted by the Second Paris Group of the R.S.D.L.P. on the State of Affairs in the Party









Lenin: Resolution Adopted by the Second Paris Group of the R.S.D.L.P. on the State of Affairs in the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
Resolution Adopted by the Second Paris Group of the R.S.D.L.P. on the State of Affairs in the Party[4]




Written: Written not later than June 18 (July 1), 1911 

Published:

      Published in July 1911, as a separate leaflet.

      Published according to the leaflet text and verified with the text of the Information Bulletin.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 216-224.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

INTRODUCTION

The resolution of the Second Paris Group of the
R.S.D.L.P. printed below (this group consists mainly of Bolsheviks with a
small number of Vperyod supporters and “conciliators”) outlines
the fundamental propositions of the platform of all the Bolsheviks. At a
time when the inner-Party struggle is becoming more acute, it is
particularly important to make a fundamental statement on the
cardinal problems of programme, tactics and organisation. People like
Trotsky, with his inflated phrases about the R.S.D.L.P. and his toadying
to the liquidators, who have nothing in common with the R.S.D.L.P., today
represent “the prevalent disease”. They are trying to build up a career
for them selves by cheap sermons about “agreement”—agreement with all
and sundry, right down to Mr. Potresov and the otzovists—while of
necessity maintaining complete silence as to the political conditions of
this wonderful supposed “agreement”. Actually they preach
surrender to the liquidators who are building a Stolypin labour
party.  

The Bolsheviks must now close their ranks more firmly, strengthen their
group, define more clearly and precisely its Party line (as distinct from
the line of the groups which, in one way or another, conceal their
“identity”), rally the scattered forces, and go into battle for an
R.S.D.L. Party purged of those who spread bourgeois influence among the
proletariat.  

N. Lenin 
    

I

The meeting of the Second Paris Group of the
R.S.D.L.P. after discussing the state of affairs in the R.S.D.L.P. in
general, and the latest manifestations of the struggle that has flared up
abroad between the Social-Democrats and those who want to be counted as
Social-Democrats, considers it necessary, first of all, to draw attention
to the fundamental statement of principles unanimously endorsed by the last
(January 1910) Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee, which defines the
nature of real Social-Democratic activity. That statement of principles
declares that “renunciation of the illegal Social-Democratic Party, the
belittling of its role and importance, attempts to cur tail the
programmatic and tactical tasks and slogans of revolutionary
Social-Democracy” are a manifestation of bourgeois influence over the
proletariat. The only true Social-Democratic activity is that which
recognises the danger of this deviation and of any ideological and
political trend that is otzovist or justifies otzovism, and which
really overcomes such deviations.  

This meeting further places on record that, despite the above-mentioned
unanimous resolution of the Plenary Meeting, and despite the solemn promise
made by the Golos representatives at the last Plenary Meeting
to renounce liquidationism and to combat it, the editorial board
abroad of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and its group of adherents have
for more than eighteen months since that Meeting, pursued that very
bourgeois policy of liquidationism and supported, justified, and
defended journals of the Russian legalists that are independent of
Social-Democracy and of socialism, such as Nasha Zarya,
Vozrozhdeniye, Dyelo Zhizni, etc. Those responsible for
these journals, as has been stated repeatedly on behalf of the Party by its
Central Organ, and as has also been stated by the pro-Party Mensheviks
headed by Comrade Plekhanov, have nothing in common with the
R.S.D.L.P. Those responsible for these journals not only belittle the
role and importance of the illegal Social-Democratic Party, but frankly
renounce it, slander the “underground” as renegades would, deny the
revolutionary nature of the activity and the revolutionary tasks of the
working-class movement

    

in Russia today, deceive the workers by spreading liberal-bourgeois ideas
about the “constitutional” nature of the maturing crisis, throw overboard
(and not only curtail) such time-honoured slogans of revolutionary Marxism
as the recognition of the hegemony of the working class in the
struggle for socialism and for the democratic revolution. By preaching and
building what they call a legal or “open” workers’ party these people
have actually become the builders of a Stolypin “labour” party
and spread bourgeois influence among the proletariat; in reality, the ideas
preached by these people are bourgeois in content, and an “open” workers’
party under Stolypin amounts to open renegacy on the part of people who
have renounced the tasks of the revolutionary struggle of the masses
against the tsarist autocracy, the Third Duma, and the entire Stolypin
regime.  

The meeting places on record that the Central Committee Bureau Abroad,
which is supposed to be a technical organ of the C.C., has come completely
under the influence of the

     liquidators.[1]


By its failure to fulfil, in the course of eighteen months, any one of
the commissions given to it by the Central Committee (for instance—to
unite the groups abroad on the basis of the acceptance and implementation
of the Plenary Meeting’s decisions, to help the organisations in the
localities, or to see to it that Golos is discontinued and an end
put to the factional aloofness of the Vperyod group), the Bureau
Abroad has been of direct assistance to the enemies of the
Social-Democratic Party, the liquidators.  

The majority of the Central Committee Bureau Abroad showed contempt for
the Party by systematically obstructing, ever since December 1910,
the calling of a plenary meeting (as demanded by the Rules). The first time
the Bolsheviks filed their application that the meeting be convened, the
Central Committee Bureau Abroad wasted seven weeks just “taking a vote”
on this question. After those seven weeks the Central Committee Bureau
Abroad acknowledged

    

that the Bolsheviks’ demand for a plenary meeting was “legitimate”, but
at the same time it in practice obstructed the calling of a
plenary meeting and did the same again at the end of May 1911. Actually,
the role of this Central Committee Bureau Abroad has been to
render assistance from abroad and from within the central Party bodies to
leaders of the legalists and active promoters of a Stolypin labour party,
such as Mikhail, Yuri, and Roman, who have declared the very existence of
the Central Committee to be harmful (see Nos. 12 and 21-22 of
Sotsial-Demokrat, Central Organ of the

Party[2]

).

The meeting declares that the holding of Party posts by liquidators is
outright deception of the Party, for the decisions of the Plenary
Meeting clearly and unambiguously state that only those Mensheviks
should be permitted to hold such posts who conscientiously abide
by their promise to renounce liquidationism and to combat

 it.[3]


The meeting is, therefore, of the opinion that it was absolutely
incumbent upon the Bolsheviks to break completely with the Central
Committee Bureau Abroad as a body which has placed itself outside Party law
and outside the Party, and that the Meeting of members of the Central
Committee (see its “Notification”), which represented the vast majority
of Social-Democratic Party organisations, groups, and circles actually
working in Russia, was absolutely right in declaring that “the Central
Committee Bureau Abroad has been pursuing a factional anti-Party policy,
thereby violating the clear and precise decisions of the 1910 Plenary
Meeting”.  

The meeting resolves to discontinue all relations with the Central
Committee Bureau Abroad, and to support the decisions of the Meeting of
members of the Central Commit tee, which has outlined a number of
absolutely necessary measures to be taken in order to paralyse the activity
of the liquidators, hampering as it does the entire work of the Party;

    

to call a Party conference, and to help Party functionaries in all
localities to revive the illegal organisations and nuclei of the Party. The
meeting calls upon all Party comrades in all localities to set to work at
once (in line with the decisions of the May-June Meeting) to
prepare for a Party conference and hold elections to it, and, for this
purpose, to establish regular connections with the Organising

Commission,[5] the Central Organ and Rabochaya Gazeta.  
II

The meeting draws the attention of worker Social-Democrats,
irrespective of factions, to the fact that the émigré leaders
of the Vperyod group, and Trotsky, editor of Pravda, are
pursuing a policy of supporting the liquidators and of an alliance with
them against the Party and against its decisions. This policy must be
combated all the more vigorously since it is profoundly detrimental to the
interests of the proletariat and, as such, is completely at variance with
the activity of the Russian illegal Social-Democratic groups
which, though connected with Pravda or Vperyod, are
absolutely loyal in carrying out the decisions of the Party, and are
everywhere struggling persistently against the liquidators to uphold the
illegal R.S.D.L.P. and its revolutionary programme.  

The meeting particularly warns worker Social-Democrats against the
deception systematically practised by the Golos writers,
who describe all the comrades active in the legal movement as opponents of
the old Party and adherents of Potresov’s new “open” party. Thus, in the
latest bulletin, published by Golos on June 25 (reporting a
“conference” of people active in the legal movement), the Golos
editors suppressed the fact that the conference had voted
down a motion of the liquidators to boycott a certain legally
published newspaper for its anti-liquidationist

policy.[6] Thus, the editors of Golos also suppressed
the fact that that same conference had voted down the openly
legalist and obviously renegade resolutions which had been proposed by
Golos supporters. Even a Bundist who participated in the
conference had there admitted that the proposals of the “Potresovites”
were of an anti-Party nature, A number of those

    

active in the open movement have already embarked upon a resolute
struggle against the Stolypin “labour” party. And if all Party members
work solidly together, the number of such people will undoubtedly increase.

III

Whenever the struggle between Social-Democrats and those
who spread bourgeois influence among the proletariat is intensified, all
the unprincipled elements invariably bend their efforts to obscure great
questions of principle by cheap sensationalism and scandal-mongering, such
as those to which the Golos people abroad are assiduously treating
audiences avid for contaminated spiritual food at meetings organised by the
liquidators.  

At a time like this it is more than ever incumbent upon revolutionary
Marxists to remind all and sundry of the old truths
forgotten by the liquidators, truths which constitute the
foundation of our Social-Democratic activity.  

The meeting, therefore, reminds all the members of the R.S.D.L.P. of
our Party programme, of the programme which at a time when
international opportunism is intensifying and when a decisive struggle is
maturing between opportunism and revolutionary Social-Democracy, has given
a precise, clear, definite, and unyielding formulation of the revolutionary
ultimate goal of socialism which can be achieved only by means of
the dictatorship of the proletariat, and of the immediate revolutionary
aims of the Russian Social-Democratic movement, the overthrow of tsarism
and the establishment of a democratic republic. The entire
propaganda conducted by our legalists and by Golos shows that,
in actual fact, far from adhering to and carrying out our
programme, they are frankly defending reformism [as the pro-Party
Mensheviks have also admitted (see Plekhanov’s The Diary of a

Social-Democrat[7] and the Discussion Bulletin, No. 3)]
and are plainly renouncing the immediate revolutionary aims of the
R.S.D.L.P.  

The meeting reminds all members of the R.S.D.L.P. that to be a
real Party member, it is not enough to call oneself such,
nor is it enough to carry on propaganda “in the spirit” of the
programme of the R.S.D.L.P.; one must also carry

    

out the entire practical work in conformity with the
tactical decisions of the Party. In the present period of counter
revolution, at a time of universal renegacy, resignation, and despondency,
particularly among the bourgeois intellectuals, only the Party decisions on
tactics provide an appraisal of the situation, an appraisal of the
practical line of conduct from the viewpoint of the principles of
revolutionary Marxism. The real R.S.D.L.P., and not tile one which
Golos writers use as a screen for liquidationism, has no
Party definition of the tasks of Social-Democracy at the present moment
except the resolutions on tactics adopted in December 1908. 

The liquidators, and to a certain extent the Vperyod group,
hush up these resolutions or confine themselves to cursory references and
outcries against them precisely for the reason that they feel that
these resolutions call for a line of activity which radically
repudiates both opportunist and semi-anarchist vacillations; which holds
aloft the banner of revolution in spite of all and sundry
counter-revolutionary trends; and which explains the economic and
political characteristics of the present period as a new phase in Russia’s
bourgeois development, a phase which leads to a revolution destined to
achieve the old objectives. A Party member is one who pursues the tactical
line of the Party in practice. And there is only one tactical line
of the R.S.D.L.P., the one stated in the resolutions of December 1908,
which combine loyalty to the banner of the revolution with due regard for
the new conditions of the present period. The resolutions of the
Plenary Meeting held in January 1910, which are directed against
those who spread bourgeois influence among the proletariat,
represent a logical and direct corollary to, and are the natural
continuation and fulfilment of, the resolutions of December 1908, which
condemn liquidationism and categorically demand that Social-Democratic work
in the Duma should be recognised and advantage taken of the possibilities
offered for legal activity. In our days of confusion and disorganisation,
we often come across people who invoke the great principle of the unity of
tile proletarian army in order to justify their unprincipled or cheap
diplomatic attempts to effect “unity” or to “draw closer to” those who
spread bourgeois influence among the proletariat.

    

The meeting most categorically condemns and repudiates all such attempts,
regardless of who is responsible for them, and declares that the great work
of uniting and consolidating the fighting army of the revolutionary
proletariat cannot be carried out unless a line of demarcation is drawn and
a ruthless struggle is waged against those who serve to spread bourgeois
influence among the proletariat.  

A Party member is one who actually helps build up the
organisation in conformity with the principles of Social-Democracy. The
Party, the R.S.D.L.P., has no other Party definition of the nature
and tasks of organisational work but the one given in the resolution on the
organisational question adopted in December 1908, in the resolution on the
same question adopted by the Plenary Meeting of January 1910, and in the
letter of the Central Committee published immediately after that
Meeting. Only all-round help in re establishing and reinforcing
the illegal organisation can be regarded as Party work;
and only the illegal R.S.D.L.P. can and should surround itself
with a network of legally existing organisations, make use of all
kinds of legally existing organisations, and direct the entire
work of such organisations in the spirit of our revolutionary
principles. Anyone who does not actually carry on such work, who takes part
in the counter-revolutionary crusade in general, and in the liberal crusade
in particular, against the “underground”, against illegal activity,
deceives the workers when he speaks of his membership of the
R.S.D.L.P.  

The elections to the Fourth Duma are drawing near. The more acute the
crisis becomes in the top leadership of the Party abroad, the more urgent
the need for Social-Democratic functionaries in the localities to show
initiative; the more strictly must they insist, and ensure, that
election activity is really carried on in a Party spirit by every
group, every nucleus, every workers’ circle. Anyone who to this day regards
“otzovism” as a “legitimate trend in our Party” takes the name of the
R.S.D.L.P. in vain. You cannot conduct Party work in the elections
to the Fourth Duma unless you most resolutely refuse to have anything to do
with such people. He who to this day talks of conducting the Fourth Duma
election campaign with the forces and resources of “legally functioning
organisations”, with the

    

forces and resources of an “open workers’ party”, and who at the same
time refuses to abide by and carry out the decisions of the R.S.D.L.P. on
the illegal organisation and the tactics as set forth in the Party’s
resolutions, takes the name of the R.S.D.L.P. in vain. He who carries on
election activity and does not abide by the decisions of the R.S.D.L.P.,
but follows the line proposed in articles appearing in Nasha
Zarya, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata and Dyelo Zhizni, is
a builder of a Stolypin “labour” party, and not of the revolutionary
Social-Democratic party of the proletariat.  

The first aim of our Party at the forthcoming Fourth Duma elections is
to educate the masses in socialism and develop mass agitation in favour of
a democratic revolution to be accomplished by the forces of the proletariat
and revolutionary bourgeois democrats (in the first place the revolutionary
peasantry).  

In the interests of such propaganda and agitation our Party must
organise the independent participation of Social-Democrats in the
elections and Party candidates must be put forward, not only in the worker
curia, but everywhere, in all urban and rural constituencies.  

The Party’s entire agitational work during the elections must be
conducted on two fronts, i.e., against the government and the parties
openly supporting it, as well as against the Cadet Party, the
party of counter-revolutionary liberalism.  

Only those people may be Party candidates who really carry out the
policy of the R.S.D.L.P. in full, are loyal not only to its programme but
also to its resolutions on tactics, and who fight the new Stolypin
“labour” party.  

As to election agreements, the fundamental principles of the London
Party Congress and the Party Conference of

July 1907[8] must remain in force.  

The Fourth Duma election campaign must be conducted by Party groups of
workers, in the spirit of the Party decisions and in strict conformity with
them.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
Igorev of Golos (sufficiently exposed and branded by the
pro-Party Menshevik Plekhanov) and the Bundist

Lieber,[9] who is conducting open propaganda in defence of
Mr. Potresov and other figures of a Stolypin labour party, are the leading
lights of this Central Committee Bureau Abroad.  —Lenin

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 16, “Golos (Voice) of the
Liquidators Against the Party”, and pp. 129–33 of this
volume.—Ed.  

[3]
As regards the methods resorted to by the liquidators abroad in their
fight against the R.S.D.L.P., such as political blackmail and the supplying
of information to the secret police—which is what Mr. Martov did with the
aid of the Golos editors—the meeting expresses its scorn for
literary efforts of that nature, which can only arouse the disgust of all
decent people.  —Lenin
 



[4]
The meeting of the Second Paris Group of the R.S.D.L.P. took
place on June 18 (July 1), 1911.





[9]
Lieber, Ber (M. I. Goldman)—a liquidator, one of the leaders
of the Bund.





[5]
Organising Commission (Organising Commission Abroad, O.C.A.)
was set up at the Meeting of members of the Central Committee,
R.S.D.L.P. in June 1911 in order to prepare for a conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. The O.C.A. consisted of Bolsheviks, conciliators and
representatives of the Polish Social-Democrats. Other factions (pro-Party
Mensheviks, Vperyod group, etc.) did not appoint any
representatives to the O.C.A.  

The O.C.A. issued a “Notification” about the June Meeting of the
members of the Central Committee, and a leaflet “To All Social-Democratic
Party Organisations, Groups and Circles” on the calling of a conference
and also sent three representatives with full powers to Russia, including
G. K. Orjonikidze, who were to carry out the preparatory work for the
calling of the conference, and to set up the Russian Organising Commission.


From its inception, the conciliators, supported by the representatives
of the Polish Social-Democrats, were in the majority in the O.C.A. In
November 1911 it refused to submit to the decisions of the Russian
Organising Commission, after which the Bolshevik members of the
O.C.A. declined responsibility for its actions and withdrew from
it. Subsequently, the conciliator majority of the O.C.A. openly campaigned
against the Russian Organising Commission.  

In his “Letter to the Editorial Board”, published in December 1911 in
No. 25 of Sotsial-Demokrat, G. K. Orjonikidze exposed the
anti-Party activities of the O.G.A.





[6]
The reference is to the legal Bolshevik newspaper Zvezda




[7]
The Diary of a Social-Democrat was published by
G. V. Plekhanov, and issued irregularly in Geneva at long intervals from
March 1905 to April 1912; 16 numbers appeared. Publication of The
Diary was recommenced in 1916 in Petrograd but only one number
appeared.





[8]
The Fifth (London) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (April
30–May 19 [May 13–June 1], 1907) in its resolution on “Attitude to
Non-proletarian Parties” recognised that any united activity with the
Narodnik parties must exclude any deviation from the programme and tactics
of Social-Democracy, and should serve only the aims of a general attack
both against reaction and the treacherous tactics of the liberal
bourgeoisie.  

The Third (Second All-Russia) Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. (July 21–23 [August 3–5], 1907) in a resolution on the
question of participation in elections to the State Duma resolved that in
the

   

election campaign and in the Duma itself, Social-Democrats must spread and
inculcate in the mass of the people the ideas of socialism and
revolutionary slogans, anti carry out a determined struggle both against
reaction and the leadership of the Cadets in the liberation movement in
general, and in the Duma in particular.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Introduction to the Pamphlet Two Parties









Lenin: Introduction to the Pamphlet Two Parties







V. I.  

      Lenin
Introduction to the Pamphlet Two Parties




Written: Written on July 20 (August 2), 1911 

Published:

      Published in August 1911, in the pamphlet entitled Two Parties, Paris, published by Rabochaya Gazeta.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 225-228.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Kamenev’s pamphlet represents a systematised summary of the
material on the struggle against the liquidationist trend waged during the
period of counter-revolution by the Bolsheviks and, following their lead,
by the whole R.S.D.L.P. Quite naturally, Kamenev devotes most of his space
to an elucidation of the divergence on questions of principle between
Social-Democracy and the liquidationist trend, a subject to which

Proletary[2] and the Central Organ of the Party,
Sotsial-Demokrat, also devoted most of their space during the
period from 1908 to 1911.  

Kamenev has proved conclusively that, in point of fact, the
liquidationist group represents a separate party, not the
R.S.D.L. Party. His evidence sums up the experience primarily of the years
1909–11, which confirmed the resolution of December 1908. That resolution,
which was moved and carried by the Bolsheviks on behalf of the R.S.D.L.P.,
had already declared that the liquidators were endeavouring to
“substitute” for the R.S.D.L.P. an “amorphous” legally
existing federation. That amorphous legally existing federation of
Potresov, Larin, Levitsky and Co. (with Mr. Martov and the Golos
group abroad trailing behind), has now fully revealed itself. It is a group
of literary men who have nothing in common with the R.S.D.L.P., and who
pursue, not a Social-Democratic, but a liberal labour policy. They are the
leading lights of a Stolypin “labour” party.  

It is a feature specific of Russia at the turn of the century that we
often meet with cases of extremely rapid and sometimes very “unexpected”
transition from Marxism to liberalism. The Economists and
Credo—Mr. Struve and Co.—the liquidators, are all rungs of one
ladder, stages in a

    

single process of evolution, expressions of the same tendency. The party of
the working class in Russia began to form shortly before the Revolution of
1905; now, in the period of counter-revolution, this party is being
reconstructed, and to a certain extent built anew, on a more solid
foundation. The bourgeois intelligentsia, attracted to the revolution by
the knowledge that Russia has not yet passed through the epoch of
democratic revolutions, has been joining the proletariat group after
group—and group after group has again deserted the proletariat, having
found out through experience that they cannot live up to revolutionary
Marxism, that their real place is outside the ranks of the
Social-Democratic Party. Such are our liquidators, too, some of whom are
already speaking quite clearly, bluntly, and frankly of a new
party they are creating.  

Otzovism and liquidationism, while similar in the sense that both
represent non-Social-Democratic, bourgeois trends, differ materially in
respect of the fate that attended their political evolution. Otzovism was
nipped in the bud by the Bolsheviks, and it has not gone so far as to
attempt to create a party of its own; today it represents an insignificant
group abroad, whose activity has been reduced to aiding the liquidators in
their intrigues and struggle against the R.S.D.L.P. The liquidationist
trend, on the other hand, has its centre (in the first place, political,
and then organisational) in Russia; it has created a party of its
own, even though it is an amorphous one (so far it is amorphous). That
is why it has been necessary for Kamenev to dwell at length on the
liquidationist tendency and to touch upon otzovism only in passing.  

There are not many people among the adherents of the R.S.D.L.P. capable
of sincerely defending the liquidationist

trend.[1]

Unfortunately, there are still quite a number of

    

people who are sincerely opposed to liquidationism, but do not
understand the conditions under which the struggle against it has to
be waged. Of course, they say, liquidationism is a bourgeois trend in the
Social-Democratic movement; but why not fight it in the ranks of a single
party, just as the Germans fight the Bernsteinians? Why not try to come to
an “agreement” with the liquidators?  

Our champions of “agreement” fail to understand a very important and
very simple thing: the liquidators are not only opportunists (like
Bernstein and Co.); they are also trying to build a separate party
of their own, they have is sued the slogan that the R.S.D.L.P. does not
exist; they pay no heed whatever to the decisions of the
R.S.D.L.P. That is the difference between us and “Europe”, and only
people who have not given sufficient thought to the question, or who are
not acquainted with Russian conditions, can invoke the example of
“Europe”. In Europe, an opportunist guilty of but one-tenth of what the
Potresovs, Igorevs, Bers, Martovs, Dans, and their like have done and are
doing against their Party and in defiance of its decisions would not be
tolerated in the ranks of the party a single month. In Europe the parties
function openly, and it is possible to see at once whether one belongs to
an organisation and submits to its decisions.  

Our Party is illegal. It is impossible to “see”, and it is
impermissible (unless one is an agent of the secret police) to talk openly
of whether X, Y, or Z belongs to the organisation. But it is a fact that
the Potresovs do not belong to the organisation, and that they
sneer at all its decisions, just as the Golos
people do. How can we come to an “agreement” with the Potresovs who have
proved that as far as they are concerned the Party does not
exist? Or with the Martovs and Dans who have proved the same thing?
What can we agree on with the liquidators, unless it is
the destruction of the R.S.D.L.P.?  

Let the advocates of “agreement” try to name the terms of
agreement with the liquidators, the means of exercising

    

control over the fulfilment of the terms, the facts proving that
they would be fulfilled. They can name none of these. And
therefore it is beyond any doubt that references to “agreement” are
nothing but idle and puerile talk. This talk only helps the intrigues of
the circles abroad (such as the Vperyod and Golos
circles, and the Trotskyites), who have fully demonstrated that they ignore
the decisions of the Party, and that they refuse to give up an
iota of their “freedom” to support the liquidators.  

In Russia, in the meantime, the illegal workers’ circles have been
drawing away from the liquidators, and are dissociating themselves from
them to an ever greater extent with each passing day, at the same time
slowly and laboriously building up the revolutionary R.S.D.L.P. The task of
the adherents of the Social-Democratic Labour Party is to help
these circles, to translate the decisions of the R.S.D.L.P. into practical
work, and to put an end to the game of agreement with the windbags abroad
(the Golos group, the strongest group abroad, are also mere
windbags). Membership of the Party means fighting for the Party. All talk
about “agreement” with the liquidators who are building a
non-Social-Democratic party, is a violation of the duty deriving from Party
membership.  

August 2, 1911 

N. Lenin 

P.S. It should be added that the analysis of the
“charges” levelled against the Bolshevik Centre, given in the Appendix,
represents our collective opinion and has been elaborated on the basis of
material and documents in the hands of the Bolshevik Centre, as well as on
the basis of information sup plied by comrades of the Bolshevik Centre who
personally conducted some of its affairs.  

N. Lenin 

 
Notes
 

[1]
Obviously it would be ridiculous to talk of sincerity on the part of
the Golos group abroad. They are past masters at blackmail and
slander, with gentry like Martov in the lead in this respect. The decision
arrived at by Kautsky, Mehring and Zetkin that the disputed funds be turned
over, not to the Central Committee Bureau Abroad, but to
the Technical

Commission[3] (see Bulletin of the Organising Commission,
August 1, 1911), means complete vindication of Comrade Alexandrov and all
the Bolsheviks (who are fully in agreement with Alexandrov) and
complete condemnation of the foul

   

slander spread by Martov, Dan, Martynov and Axelrod. We also draw readers’
attention to Comrade

Victor’s[4] letter printed in the Appendix. It shows what vile means
Mr. Martov and his abettors stoop to in their fight against political
adversaries.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Proletary—an illegal newspaper founded by the Bolsheviks
after the Fourth (Unity) Congress of the Party. Published from August 21
(September 3), 1906 to November 28 (December 11), 1909 under Lenin’s
editorship. The organ of the Moscow and St. Petersburg Party Committees,
and for a time also of the Moscow District, Perm, Kursk and Kazan
Committees, Proletary was actually the Bolshevik Central
Organ. Altogether fifty issues appeared (the first twenty in Vyborg,
Finland). From February 13 (26) to December 11 (14), 1908,
Proletary was published in Geneva, and from January 8 (21) to
November 28 (December 11), 1909, in Paris.  

Proletary carried over one hundred articles and shorter items
by Lenin. During the Stolypin reaction it played an outstanding part in
preserving and strengthening the Bolshevik organisations.





[3]
The Technical Commission (the Technical Commission Abroad,
T.C.A.) was set up at the Meeting of C.C. members in June 1911 to deal with
technical matters (publishing, transport, etc.). It was an ad hoc
Commission designed to function until the convening of the plenary meeting
of the C.C., and subordinate to a group of C.C. members who took part in
the Meeting of June 1911. It consisted of one representative each, from the
Bolsheviks, conciliators, and Polish Social-Democrats respectively. The
conciliators were in the majority and sabotaged the organisational work of
the Bolsheviks; refused to abide by the decisions of the Russian Organising
Commission and stopped allocating funds for the publication of the Party’s
Central Organ—Sotsial-Demokrat. They also attacked Lenin and the
Bolsheviks in the press (publishing leaflets and the Information
Bulletin).  

M. F. Vladimirsky, the Bolshevik representative on the Commission,
withdrew from it on October 19 (November 1), 1911, and the Bolsheviks
severed all connections with it.





[4]
A letter “To the Party” from the Bolshevik V. K. Taratuta was written
because of rumours spread in 1906 about his alleged provocative
actions. The investigating committee appointed by the January Plenary
Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1910 went into this
matter and unanimously decided that in view of the absence of any
incriminating facts, the matter be considered closed and that Taratuta be
reinstated with full Party rights.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Reformism in the Russian Social-Democratic Movement









Lenin: Reformism in the Russian Social-Democratic Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
Reformism in the Russian Social-Democratic Movement




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 23, September 14(1), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 229-241.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The tremendous progress made by capitalism in recent
decades and the rapid growth of the working-class movement in all the
civilised countries have brought about a big change in the attitude of the
bourgeoisie to the proletariat. Instead of waging an open, principled and
direct struggle against all the fundamental tenets of socialism in defence
of the absolute inviolability of private property and freedom of
competition, the bourgeoisie of Europe and America, as represented by their
ideologists and political leaders, are coming out increasingly in defence
of so-called social reforms as opposed to the idea of social
revolution. Not liberalism versus socialism, but reformism versus socialist
revolution—is the formula of the modern, “advanced”, educated
bourgeoisie. And the higher the development of capitalism in a given
country, the more unadulterated the rule of the bourgeoisie, and the
greater the political liberty, the more extensive is the application of the
“most up-to-date” bourgeois slogan: reform versus revolution,
the partial patching up of the doomed regime with the object of dividing
and weakening the working class, and of maintaining the rule of the
bourgeoisie, versus the revolutionary over throw of that rule.


From the viewpoint of the universal development of socialism this
change must be regarded as a big step forward. At first socialism fought
for its existence, and was con fronted by a bourgeoisie confident of its
strength and boldly and consistently defending liberalism as an integral
system of economic and political views. Socialism has grown into a force
and, throughout the civilised world, has already

    

upheld its right to existence. It is now fighting for power and
the bourgeoisie, disintegrating and realising the inevitability of its
doom, is exerting every effort to defer that day and to maintain its rule
under the new conditions as well, at the cost of partial and spurious
concessions.  

The intensification of the struggle of reformism against revolutionary
Social-Democracy within the working-class movement is an
absolutely inevitable result of the changes in the entire economic and
political situation throughout the civilised world. The growth of the
working-class movement necessarily attracts to its ranks a certain number
of petty-bourgeois elements, people who are under the spell of bourgeois
ideology, who find it difficult to rid themselves of that ideology and
continually lapse back into it. We can not conceive of the social
revolution being accomplished by the proletariat without this struggle,
without clear demarcation on questions of principle between the socialist
Mountain and the socialist

Gironde[2] prior to this revolution, and without a complete
break between the opportunist, petty-bourgeois elements and the
proletarian, revolutionary elements of the new historic force
during this revolution.  

In Russia the position is fundamentally the same; only here matters are
more complicated, obscured, and modified, because we are lagging behind
Europe (and even behind the advanced part of Asia), and we are still
passing through the era of bourgeois revolutions. Owing to this, Russian
reformism is distinguished by its particular stubbornness; it represents,
as it were, a more pernicious malady, and it is much more harmful to the
cause of the proletariat and of the revolution. In our country reformism
emanates from two sources simultaneously. In the first place, Russia is
much more a petty-bourgeois country than the countries of Western
Europe. Our country, therefore, more frequently produces individuals,
groups and trends distinguished by their contradictory, unstable,
vacillating attitude to socialism (an attitude veering between “ardent
love” and base treachery) characteristic of the petty bourgeoisie in
general. Secondly, the petty-bourgeois masses in our country are more prone
to lose heart and to succumb to renegade moods at the failure of any
one phase of our bourgeois revolution; they are more ready to
renounce the aim of a complete democratic

    

revolution which would entirely rid Russia of all survivals of medievalism
and serfdom.  

We shall not dwell at length on the first source. We need only mention
that there is hardly a country in the world in which there has been such a
rapid “swing” from sympathy for socialism to sympathy for
counter-revolutionary liberalism as that performed by our Struves,
Izgoyevs, Karaulovs, etc., etc. Yet these gentlemen are not exceptions, not
isolated individuals, but representatives of wide spread trends!
Sentimentalists, of whom there are many out side the ranks of the
Social-Democratic movement, but also a goodly number within it, and who
love to preach sermons against “excessive” polemics, against “the
passion for drawing lines of demarcation”, etc., betray a complete lack of
understanding of the historical conditions which, in Russia, give rise to
the “excessive” “passion” for swinging over from socialism to
liberalism, 

Let us turn to the second source of reformism in Russia.  

Our bourgeois revolution has not been completed. The autocracy is
trying to find new ways of solving the problems bequeathed by
that, revolution and imposed by the entire objective course of economic
development; but it is unable to do so. Neither the
latest step in the transformation of old tsarism into a renovated bourgeois
monarchy, nor the organisation of the nobility and the upper crust of the
bourgeoisie on a national scale (the Third Duma), nor yet the bourgeois
agrarian policy being enforced by the rural

superintendents[3]—none of these “extreme” measures, none of these
“latest” efforts of tsarism in the last sphere remaining to it,
the sphere of adaptation to bourgeois development, prove adequate, It just
does not work! Not only is a Russia “renovated” by such means
unable to catch up with Japan, it is perhaps, even beginning to fall behind
China, Because the bourgeois-democratic tasks have been left unfulfilled, a
revolutionary crisis is still inevitable. It is ripening again, and we are
heading toward it once more, in a new way, not the same way as
before, not at the same pace, and not only in the old forms—but that we
are heading toward it, of that there is no doubt.  

The tasks of the proletariat that arise from this situation are fully
and unmistakably definite. As the only consistently

    

revolutionary class of contemporary society, it must be the leader in the
Struggle of the whole people for a fully democratic revolution, in the
Struggle of all the working and exploited people against the
oppressors and exploiters. The proletariat is revolutionary only insofar as
it is conscious of and gives effect to this idea of the hegemony of the
proletariat. The proletarian who is conscious of this task is a slave who
has revolted against slavery. The proletarian who is not conscious of the
idea that his class must be the leader, or who renounces this idea, is a
slave who does not realise his position as a slave; at best he is a slave
who fights to improve his condition as a slave, but not one who
fights to overthrow slavery.  

It is, therefore, obvious that the famous formula of one of the young
leaders of our reformists, Mr. Levitsky of Nasha Zarya, who
declared that the Russian Social-Democratic Party must represent
“not hegemony, but a class party”, is a formula of the most
consistent reformism. More than that, it is a formula of sheer renegacy. To
say, “not hegemony, but a class party”, means to take the side
of the bourgeoisie, the side of the liberal who says to the slave of our
age, the wage-earner: “Fight to improve your condition as a slave, but
regard the thought of overthrowing slavery as a harmful utopia”! Compare
Bernstein’s famous formula—“The movement is everything, the final aim is
nothing”—with Levitsky’s formula, and you will see that they are
variations of the same idea. They both recognise only reforms, and
renounce revolution. Bernstein’s formula is broader in scope, for it
envisages a socialist revolution (==the final goal of Social-Democracy, as
a party of bourgeois society). Levitsky’s formula is narrower; for while it
renounces revolution in general, it is particularly meant to renounce what
the liberals hated most in 1905-07—namely, the fact that the proletariat
wrested from them the leadership of the masses of the people
(particularly of the peasantry) in the struggle for a fully democratic
revolution.  

To preach to the workers that what they need is “not
hegemony, but a class party” means to betray the cause of the proletariat
to the liberals; it means preaching that Social-Democratic labour
policy should be replaced by a liberal labour policy.  
 

Renunciation of the idea of hegemony, however, is the crudest form of
reformism in the Russian Social-Democratic movement, and that is why not
all liquidators make bold to express their ideas in such definite
terms. Some of them (Mr. Martov for instance) even try, mocking at the
truth, to deny that there is a connection between the renunciation of
hegemony and liquidationism.  

A more “subtle” attempt to “substantiate” reformist. views is the
following argument: The bourgeois revolution in Russia is at an end; after
1905 there can be no second bourgeois revolution, no second nation-wide
struggle for a democratic revolution; Russia therefore is faced not with a
revolutionary but with a “constitutional” crisis, and all that
remains for the working class is to take care to defend its rights and
interests on the basis of that “constitutional crisis”. That is how the
liquidator Y. Larin argues in Dyelo Zhizni (and previously in
Vozrozhdeniye).  


   “October 1905 is not on the order of the day,” wrote
   Mr. Larin. “If the Duma were abolished, it would be restored more
   rapidly than in post-revolutionary Austria, which abolished the
   Constitution in 1851 only to recognise it again in 1860, nine years
   later, without any revolution (note this!), simply because it was in the
   interests of the most influential section of the ruling classes, the
   section which had reconstructed its economy on capitalist lines.” “At
   the stage we are now in, a nation-wide revolutionary movement like that
   of 1905 is impossible.”  


All Mr. Larin’s arguments are nothing more than an expanded rehash of
what Mr. Dan said at the Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in
December 1908. Arguing against the resolution which stated that the
“fundamental factors of economic and political life which gave
rise to the Revolution of 1905, continue to operate”, that a
new—revolutionary, and not “constitutional”—crisis was
developing, the editor of the liquidators’ Golos exclaimed: “They
[i.e., the R.S.D.L.P.] want to shove in where they have once been
defeated”.  

To shove again toward revolution, to work tirelessly, in the changed
situation, to propagate the idea of revolution and to prepare the forces of
the working class for it—that, from the standpoint of the reformists, is
the chief crime of the R.S.D.L.P., that is what constitutes the
guilt
    

of the revolutionary proletariat. Why “shove in where they have once been
defeated”—that is the wisdom of renegades and of persons who lose heart
after any defeat.  

But in countries older and more “experienced” than Russia the
revolutionary proletariat showed its ability to “shove in where it has
once been defeated” two, three, and four times; in France it accomplished
four revolutions between 1789 and 1871, rising again and again
after the most severe defeats and achieving a republic in which it now
faces its last enemy—the advanced bourgeoisie; it has achieved a
republic, which is the only form of state corresponding to the conditions
necessary for the final struggle for the victory of socialism.  

Such is the distinction between socialists and liberals, or champions
of the bourgeoisie. The socialists teach that revolution is inevitable, and
that the proletariat must take advantage of all the contradictions
in society, of every weakness of its enemies or of the intermediate
classes, to prepare for a new revolutionary struggle, to repeat the
revolution in a broader arena, with a more developed population. The
bourgeoisie and the liberals teach that revolutions are unnecessary and
even harmful to the workers, that they must not “shove” toward
revolution, but, like good little boys, work modestly for reforms.  

That is why, in order to divert the Russian workers from
socialism, the reformists, who are the captives of bourgeois ideas,
constantly refer to the example of Austria (as well as
Prussia) in the 1860s. Why are they so fond of these examples? Y. Larin let
the cat out of the bag; because in these countries, after the
“unsuccessful” revolution of 1848, the bourgeois transformation was
completed “without any revolution”.  

That is the whole secret! That is what gladdens their hearts, for it
seems to indicate that bourgeois change is possible without
revolution!! And if that is the case, why should we Russians bother our
heads about a revolution?  Why not leave it to the landlords and factory
owners to effect the bourgeois transformation of Russia “without any
revolution”!  

It was because the proletariat in Austria and Prussia was weak that it
was unable to prevent the landed proprietors

    

and the bourgeoisie from effecting the, transformation regardless
of the interests of the workers, in a form most prejudicial to the
workers, retaining the monarchy, the privileges of the nobility, arbitrary
rule in the countryside, and a host of other survivals of medievalism.


In 1905 our proletariat displayed strength unparalleled in any
bourgeois revolution in the West, yet today the Russian reformists use
examples of the weakness of the working class in other countries, forty or
fifty years ago, in order to justify their own apostasy, to
“substantiate” their own renegade propaganda!  

The reference to Austria and Prussia of the 1860s, so beloved of our
reformists, is the best proof of the theoretical fallacy of their arguments
and of their desertion to the bourgeoisie in practical politics.  

Indeed, if Austria restored the Constitution which was abolished after
the defeat of the Revolution of 1848, and an “era of crisis” was ushered
in in Prussia in the 1860s, what does this prove? It proves, primarily,
that the bourgeois transformation of these countries had not been
completed. To maintain that the system of government in Russia has
already become bourgeois( as Larin says), and that government
power in our country is no longer of a feudal nature (see Larin again), and
at the same time to refer to Austria and Prussia as an example, is to
refute oneself! Generally speaking it would be ridiculous to deny that the
bourgeois transformation of Russia has not been completed: the very policy
of the bourgeois parties, the Constitutional-Democrats and the Octobrists,
proves this beyond all doubt, and Larin himself (as we shall see further
on) surrenders his position. It cannot be denied that the monarchy is
taking one more step towards adapting itself to bourgeois development—as
we have said before, and as was pointed out in a resolution adopted by the
Party (December 1908). But it is still more undeniable that even
this adaptation, even bourgeois reaction, and the Third Duma, and
the agrarian law of November 9, 1906 (and June 14, 1910) do not
solve the problems of Russia’s bourgeois transformation.  

Let us look a little further. Why were “crises” In Austria and in
Prussia in the 1860s constitutional, and not revolutionary?
Because there were a number of special circumstances

    

which eased the position of the monarchy (the “revolution from above” in
Germany, her unification by “blood and iron”); because the proletariat
was at that time extremely weak and undeveloped in those countries, and the
liberal bourgeoisie was distinguished by base cowardice and treachery, just
as the Russian Cadets are in our day.  

To show how the German Social-Democrats who themselves took part in the
events of those years assess the situation, we quote some opinions
expressed by Bebel in his memoirs (Pages from My Life), the first
part of which was published last year. Bebel states that Bismarck, as has
since become known, related that the king at the time of the
“constitutional” crisis in Prussia in 1862 had given way to utter
despair, lamented his fate, and blubbered in his, Bismarck’s, presence that
they were both going to die on the scaffold. Bismarck put the coward to
shame and persuaded him not to shrink from giving battle.  

“These events show,” says Bebel, “what the liberals might have
achieved had they taken advantage of the situation. But they were already
afraid of the workers who backed them. Bismarck’s words that if he were
driven to extremes he would set Acheron in motion [i.e., stir up a popular
movement of the lower classes, the masses], struck fear into their heart.”


Half a century after the “constitutional” crisis which “without any
revolution” completed the transformation of his country into a
bourgeois-Junker monarchy, the leader of the German Social-Democrats refers
to the revolutionary possibilities of the situation at that time,
which the liberals did not take advantage of owing to their fear of the
workers. The leaders of the Russian reformists say to the Russian workers:
since the German bourgeoisie was so base as to cower before a cowering
king, why shouldn’t we too try to copy those splendid tactics of
the German bourgeoisie? Bebel accuses the bourgeoisie of not having “taken
advantage of the “constitutional” crisis to effect a revolution because
of their fear, as exploiters, of the popular movement. Larin and Co. accuse
the Russian workers of having striven to secure hegemony (i.e., to draw the
masses into the revolution in spite of the liberals), and advise them to
organise “not for revolution”, but “for the defence of
their interests

    

in the forthcoming constitutional reform of Russia”. The liquidators offer
the Russian workers the rotten views of rotten German liberalism as
“Social-Democratic” views! After this, how can one help calling such
Social-Democrats “Stolypin Social-Democrats”?  

In estimating the “constitutional” crisis of the 1860s in Prussia,
Bebel does not confine himself to saying that the bourgeoisie were afraid
to fight the monarchy because they were afraid of the workers. He also
tells us what was going on among the workers at that time. “The appalling
state of political affairs,” he says, “of which the workers were becoming
ever more keenly aware, naturally affected their mood. Everybody clamoured
for change. But since there was no fully class-conscious leadership with a
clear vision of the goal and enjoying the confidence of the workers, and
since there existed no strong organisation that could rally the forces, the
mood petered out [verpuffte]. Never did a movement, so splendid in
its essence [in Kern vortreffliche], turn out to be so futile in
the end. All the meetings were packed, and the most vehement speakers were
hailed as the heroes of the day. This was the prevailing mood,
particularly, in the Workers’ Educational Society at Leipzig.” A mass
meeting in Leipzig on May 8, 1866, attended by 5,000 people, unanimously
adopted a resolution proposed by Liebknecht and Bebel, which demanded, on
the basis of universal, direct, and equal suffrage, with secret ballot, the
convening of a Parliament supported by the armed people. The resolution
also expressed the “hope that the German people will elect as deputies
only persons who repudiate every hereditary central government power”. The
resolution proposed by Liebknecht and Bebel was thus unmistakably
revolutionary and republican in character.  

Thus we see that at the time of the “constitutional” crisis the
leader of the German Social-Democrats advocated resolutions of a
republican and revolutionary nature at mass meetings. Half a century later,
recalling his youth and telling the new generation of the events of days
long gone by, he stresses most of all his regret that at that time there
was no leadership sufficiently class-conscious and capable of understanding
the revolutionary tasks (i.e., there was no revolutionary
Social-Democratic Party understanding the
    

task implied by the hegemony of the proletariat);
that there was no strong organisation; that the revolutionary mood
“petered out”. Yet the leaders of the Russian reformists, with the
profundity of Simple Simons, refer to the example of Austria and Prussia in
the 1860s as proving that we can manage “without any revolution”! And
these paltry philistines who have succumbed to the intoxication of counter
revolution, and are the ideological slaves of liberalism, still dare to
dishonour the name of the R.S.D.L.P.!  

To be sure, among the reformists who are abandoning socialism there are
people who substitute for Larin’s straight forward opportunism the
diplomatic tactics of beating about the bush in respect of the most
important and fundamental questions of the working-class movement. They try
to confuse the issue, to muddle the ideological controversies, to defile
them, as did Mr. Martov, for instance, when he asserted in the legally
published press (that is to say, where he is protected by Stolypin from a
direct retort by members of the R.S.D.L.P.)  that Larin and “the orthodox
Bolsheviks in the resolutions of 1908” propose an identical
“scheme”. This is a downright distortion of the facts worthy of this
author of scurrilous effusions. The same Martov pretending to argue against
Larin, declared in print that he, “of course” did “not suspect Larin of
reformist tendencies”.  Martov did not suspect Larin, who
expounded purely reformist views, of being a reformist! This is an
example of the tricks to which the diplomats of reformism

       resort.[1]

The same Martov, whom some simpletons regard as being more “Left”, and a
more reliable revolutionary than Larin, summed up his “difference” with
the latter in the following words: 


   “To sum up: the fact that the present regime is an
   inherently contradictory combination of absolutism and
   constitutionalism, and that the Russian working class has sufficiently
   matured to follow the example of the workers of the progressive
   countries of the West in striking at this regime through the Achilles
   heel of its contradictions, is ample material for the theoretical
   substantiation and political justification of what the Mensheviks who
   remain true to Marxism are now doing.”  

 

No matter how hard Martov tried to evade the issue, the result of his
very first attempt at a summary was that all his evasions collapsed of
themselves. The words quoted above represent a complete renunciation of
socialism and its replacement by liberalism. What Martov proclaims as
“ample” is ample only for the liberals, only for the
bourgeoisie. A proletarian who considers it “ample” to recognise the
contradictory nature of the combination of absolutism and constitutionalism
accepts the standpoint of a liberal labour policy. He is
no socialist, he has not understood the tasks of his
class, which demand that the masses of the people, the masses of
working and exploited people, be roused against absolutism in all its
forms, that they be roused to intervene independently in the
historic destinies of the country, the vacillations or resistance of the
bourgeoisie notwithstanding. But the independent historical action of the
masses who are throwing off the hegemony of the bourgeoisie turns a
“constitutional” crisis into a revolution. The bourgeoisie
(particularly since 1905) fears revolution and loathes it; the proletariat,
on the other hands educates the masses of the people in the spirit of
devotion to the idea of revolution, explains its tasks, and prepares the
masses for new revolutionary battles. Whether, when, and under what
circumstances the revolution materialises, does not depend on the will of a
particular class; but revolutionary work carried on among the masses is
never wasted. This is the only kind of activity which prepares the masses
for the victory of socialism. The Larins and Martovs forget these
elementary ABC truths of socialism.  

Larin, who expresses the views of the group of Russian liquidators who
have completely broken with the R.S.D.L.P., does not hesitate to go the
whole hog in expounding his reformism. Here is what he writes in Dyelo
Zhizni (1911, No. 2)—and these words should be remembered by
everyone who holds dear the principles of Social-Democracy: 


   “A state of perplexity and uncertainty, when people
   simply do not know what to expect of the coming day, what tasks to set
   them selves—that is what results from indeterminate, temporising
   moods, from vague hopes of either a repetition of the revolution or of
   ‘we shall wait and see’. The immediate task is, not to wait fruitlessly
   for something to turn up, but to imbue broad circles with the guiding

    

   idea that, in the ensuing historical period of Russian life, the working
   class must organise itself not ‘for revolution’, not ‘in expectation of
   a revolution’, but simply [note the but simply] for the
   determined and systematic defence of its particular interests in all
   spheres of life; for the gathering and training of its forces for this
   many-sided and complex activity; for the training and building-up in
   this way of socialist consciousness in general; for acquiring the
   ability to orientate itself [to find its bearings]—and to assert
   itself—particularly in the complicated relations of the social classes
   of Russia during the coming constitutional reform of the country after
   the economically inevitable selfexhaustion of feudal reaction.”  


This is consummate, frank, smug reformism of the purest water. War
against the idea of revolution, against the “hopes” for revolution (in
the eyes of the reformist such “hopes” seem vague, because he
does not understand the depth of the contemporary economic and political
contradictions); war against every activity designed to organise the forces
and prepare the minds for revolution; war waged in the legal press that
Stolypin protects from a direct retort by revolutionary Social-Democrats;
war waged on behalf of a group of legalists who have completely broken with
the R.S.D.L.P.—this is the programme and tactics of the Stolypin labour
party which Potresov, Levitsky, Larin, and their friends are out to
create. The real programme and the real tactics of these people are
expressed in exact terms in the above quotation—as distinct from their
hypocritical official assurances that they are “also
Social-Democrats”, that they “also” belong to the “irreconcilable
International”. These assurances are only window-dressing. Their deeds,
their real social substance, are expressed in this programme, which
substitutes a liberal labour policy for socialism.  

Just note the ridiculous contradictions in which the reformists become
entangled. If, as Larin says, the bourgeois revolution in Russia has been
consummated, then the socialist revolution is the next stage of historical
development. This is self-evident; it is clear to anyone who does not
profess to be a socialist merely for the sake of deceiving the workers by
the use of a popular name. This is all the more reason why we
must organise “for revolution” (for socialist revolution), “in
expectation” of revolution, for the sake of the “hopes” (not vague
“hopes”, but the certainty based on exact and growing scientific
data) of a socialist revolution.  
 

But that’s the whole point—-to the reformist the twaddle about the
consummated bourgeois revolution (like Martov’s twaddle about the Achilles
heel, etc.) is simply a verbal screen to cover up his renunciation of
all revolution. He renounces the bourgeois-democratic revolution on
the pretext that it is complete, or that it is “ample” to recognise the
contradiction between absolutism and constitutionalism; and he renounces
the socialist revolution on the pretext that “for the time being” we must
“simply” organise to take part in the “coming constitutional reform” of
Russia!  

But if you, esteemed Cadet parading in socialist feathers, recognise
the inevitability of Russia’s “coming constitutional reform”, then you
speak against yourself, for thereby you admit that the bourgeois-democratic
revolution has not been completed in our country. You are
betraying your bourgeois nature again and again when you talk about an
inevitable “self-exhaustion of feudal reaction”, and when you
sneer at the proletarian idea of destroying, not only feudal
reaction, but all survivals of feudalism, by means of a
popular revolutionary movement.  

Despite the liberal sermons of our heroes of the Stolypin labour party,
the Russian proletariat will always and invariably put the spirit of
devotion to the democratic revolution and to the socialist revolution into
all that difficult, arduous, everyday, routine and inconspicuous
work, to which the era of counter-revolution has condemned it; it will
organise and gather its forces for revolution; it will ruthlessly repulse
the traitors and renegades; and it will be guided, not by “vague hopes”,
but by the scientifically grounded conviction that the revolution will come
again.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Compare the just remarks made by the pro-Party Menshevik Dnevnitsky in
No. 3 of Diskussionny Listok (supplement to the Central Organ of
our Party) on Larin’s reformism and Martov’s evasions.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Mountain and Gironde—the two political groups of the
bourgeoisie during the French bourgeois revolution at the close of the
eighteenth century. Montagnards (representatives of the Mountain), or
Jacobins, was the name given to the more resolute representatives

   

of the bourgeoisie, the revolutionary class of the time; they stood for the
abolition of the autocracy and the feudal system. The Girondists, as
distinct from Jacobins, vacillated between revolution and
counter-revolution, and their policy was one of compromise with the
monarchy.  

Lenin called the opportunist trend in Social-Democracy the “socialist
Gironde” and the revolutionary Social-Democrats “proletarian
Jacobins”. After the R.S.D.L.P. split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks,
Lenin frequently stressed that the Mensheviks represented the Girondist
trend in the working-class movement.





[3]
Rural superintendent—the administrative post introduced in
1889 by the tsarist government in order to increase the power of the
landlords over the peasants. The rural superintendents were selected from
among the local landed nobility, and were given enormous administrative and
judicial powers over the peasantry including the right to have the peasants
arrested and flogged.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (September 4, 1911)









Lenin: From the Camp of the Stolypin 'Labour' Party (September 4, 1911)







V. I.  

      Lenin
From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (September 4, 1911)
Dedicated to Our “Conciliators” and Advocates of “Agreement”




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 23, September 14 (1), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 242-244.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 


Comrade K.’s[1] letter deserves the profound attention of all to whom
our Party is dear. A better exposure of Golos policy (and of
Golos diplomacy), a better refutation of the views and hopes of
our “conciliators” and advocates of “agreement” it is hard to imagine.


Is the case cited by Comrade K. an exception? No, it is
typical of the advocates of a Stolypin labour party, for we know
very well that a number of writers in Nasha Zarya, Dyelo
Zhizni, etc., have already been systematically preaching
these very liquidationist ideas for many a year. These
liquidators do not often meet worker members of the Party; the Party very
rarely receives such exact information of their disgraceful utterances as
that for which we have to thank Comrade K.; but, always and
everywhere, the preaching of the group of independent
legalists is conducted precisely in this spirit. It is impossible to doubt
this when periodicals of the Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni
type exist. It is to the advantage of only the most cowardly and most
despicable defenders of the liquidators to keep silent about this.  

Compare this fact with the methods employed by people like Trotsky, who
shout about “agreement” and about their hostility to the liquidators. We
know these methods only too well; these people shout at the top of their
voices that they are “neither Bolsheviks nor Mensheviks, but revolutionary
Social-Democrats”; they zealously vow and swear that they are foes of
liquidationism and staunch defenders of the illegal R.S.D.L.P.; they
vociferously abuse those who
    

expose the liquidators, the Potresovs; they say, that the anti
liquidators are “exaggerating” the issue; but do not say a word
against the definite liquidators, Potresov, Martov, Levitsky, Dan, Larin,
and so on.  

The real purpose of such methods is obvious. They use
phrase-mongering to shield the real liquidators and do
everything to hamper the work of the anti-liquidators. This was
exactly the policy pursued by Rabocheye

Dyelo,[2] so notorious in the history of the R.S.D.L.P. for its
unprincipled character; it vowed and swore, “We are not Economists, not at
all, we are wholly in favour of political struggle”; but in reality it
provided a screen for Rabochaya

Mysl[3] and the Economists, directing its whole struggle against
those who exposed and refuted the Economists.  

Hence it is clear that Trotsky and the “Trotskyites and conciliators”
like him are more pernicious than any liquidator; the convinced liquidators
state their views bluntly, and it is easy for the workers to detect where
they are wrong, whereas the Trotskys deceive the workers,
cover up the evil, and make it impossible to expose the evil and
to remedy it. Whoever supports Trotsky’s puny group supports a policy of
lying and of deceiving the workers, a policy of shielding the
liquidators. Full freedom of action for Potresov and Co. in Russia, and the
shielding of their deeds by “revolutionary” phrase-mongering
abroad—there you have the essence of the policy of “Trotskyism”.  

Hence it is clear, furthermore, that any “agreement” with the
Golos group that evades the question of the liquidators’ centre in
Russia, that is, the leading lights of Nasha Zarya and Dyelo
Zhizni, would be nothing but a continuation of this deception of the
workers, this covering up of the evil. Since the Plenary Meeting of
January 191O the Golos sup porters have made it abundantly clear
that they are capable of “subscribing” to any resolution, not allowing
any resolution “to hamper the freedom” of their liquidationist activities
one iota. Abroad they subscribe to resolutions saying that any
disparagement of the importance of the illegal Party is evidence of
bourgeois influence among the proletariat, while in Russia they assist the
Potresovs, Larins, and Levitskys, who, far from taking part in illegal
work, scoff at it and try to destroy the illegal Party.  
 

At present Trotsky, together with Bundists like Mr. Lieber (an extreme
liquidator, who publicly defended Mr. Potresov in his lectures and who now,
in order to hush up the fact, is stirring up squabbles and conflicts),
together with Letts like

Schwartz,[4] and so on, is concocting just such an “agreement” with
the Golosgroup. Let nobody be deceived on this score: their
agreement will be an agreement to shield the liquidators.  


P.S. These lines were already set up when reports appeared in the press
of an “agreement” between the Golos group and Trotsky, the
Bundist and the Lett liquidator. Our words have been fully borne out: this
is an agreement to shield the liquidators in Russia, an agreement
between the servants of the Potresovs.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
In this letter, published in Sotsial-Democrat, No. 23,
September 1 (14), 1911, it was reported that a prominent St. Petersburg
liquidator, addressing a meeting of worker members of the Party in Vyborg
District, proposed that instead of reviving the Party organisation they
should set up “organising groups” for legal educational work. This
proposal was met with a unanimous rebuff, no one voting in its favour.





[2]
Rabocheye Dyelo (Workers’ Cause)—a magazine of the
Economists, organ of the Union of Russian Social-Democrats Abroad. It was
published at irregular intervals in Geneva from 1899 to 1902. Lenin
criticised the views expressed by the Rabocheye Dyelo group in a
number of articles published in Iskra and in his book What Is
To Be Done?





[3]
Rabochaya Mysl (Workers’ Thought)—the Economist
newspaper published from 1897 to 1902. Lenin’s criticisms of the views of
Rabochaya Mysl as a Russian variety of international opportunism
appeared in articles published in Iskra and in his book What
Is To Be Done?





[4]
Schwartz (U. Elias)—a Latvian Social-Democrat, liquidator.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat Editors on Statement by Commission Convening Plenary Meeting of C.C.









Lenin: Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat Editors on Statement by Commission Convening Plenary Meeting of C.C.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Comment by Sotsial-Demokrat Editors on Statement by Commission Convening Plenary Meeting of C.C.[2]




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 23, September 14 (1), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 245-246.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

For a long time, ever since December 1910, the Editorial
Board of the Central Organ has been warning the Party that the
Golos group is sabotaging the plenary

       meeting.[1]

We now have the facts of their sabotage of plenary meetings, first in
Russia and then abroad.  

The meeting in Russia was wrecked by Mikhail, Yuri, and Roman. By
their “clever rebuttal” they merely confirmed their having been invited
to attend a meeting of the Central Committee, if only to co-opt new
members, and that it was not the wicked “factional” “Leninist”
Bolsheviks who had invited them, but conciliators. Yet the three
gentlemen refused to attend the meeting. It was their refusal that
sabotaged the work of the Central Committee in Russia, for all the
Bolshevik members of the Central Committee who went to Russia (and they
were all of them practical leaders) were “eliminated” before
they succeeded in calling a plenary meeting after that trio had refused to
attend.  

No matter what the Golos people say now, no matter what they
swear to and what assurances they give, no matter how they try to confuse
the issue and wriggle out by resorting to imprecations, feuds, and
chicanery, there is no getting away from the facts. And it is a fact that a
trio of the chief leaders of the legalists—Mikhail + Yuri +
Roman, the closest associates of Mr. Potresov and of the other heroes of
the Stolypin labour party—sabotaged the Central Committee in
Russia.  
 

Now the Golos group has sabotaged the Central Commit tee
abroad as well. The Bolsheviks demanded that it be convened in
December 1910; but the liquidationist Central Committee Bureau Abroad
refused to convene it, pleading that that was the business of the
Central Committee Bureau in Russia (this was a lie, because a meeting held
abroad did not preclude one being held in Russia).  

The second time, after the arrests in Russia, the Bolsheviks demanded
that the meeting be convened abroad in April or May 1911. Again
the Central Committee Bureau Abroad refused on the plea
that half the “Russian Bureau” had survived.  

Four or five months have passed since then, and the falsity of the
excuses cited by the Bureau Abroad has been fully exposed: in
four months not a single letter has been received from “that half”
of the “Bureau”, there has been no news of a single step taken by that
half, not a single spark of life shown. The Liebers, Igorevs, and
Schwartzes deceived the Party. By referring to the non-existent
Bureau in Russia, they refused to convene the Central Committee
abroad. Yet, the Meeting of members of the Central Committee held in June,
proved that nine members of the Central Committee were
abroad at the time.  

Anyone who is capable of thinking and of keeping a clear head amid the
shouts, imprecations, feuds, and chicanery, cannot help seeing that the
Central Committee has been definitely wrecked by the Golos people.


The Golos group has done everything it could to destroy the
Party. The Party will do everything it can to destroy them.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 23–38 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Lenin wrote this comment to the statement made by the commission
appointed by the Meeting of Central Committee members in June 1911 to
prepare for a plenary meeting of the Central Committee. The statement cited
facts of sabotage on the part of the liquidators to prevent preparations
for a plenary meeting of the Central Committee in Russia and abroad.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Stolypin and the Revolution







Lenin: Stolypin and the Revolution







  V. I. Lenin
Stolypin and the Revolution




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 24, October 18 (31), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

[1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 247-256.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The assassination of the arch-hangman Stolypin occurred at
a time when a number of symptoms indicated that the first period in the
history of the Russian counter-revolution was coming to an end. That is why
the event of September 1, quite insignificant in itself, again raises the
extremely important question of the content and meaning of the
counter-revolution in Russia. One discerns notes of a really serious and
principled attitude amid the chorus of reactionaries who are servilely
singing the praises of Stolypin, or are rummaging in the history of the
intrigues of the Black-Hundred gang which is lording it over Russia, and
amid the chorus of the liberals who are shaking their heads over the “wild
and insane” shot (it goes without saying that included among the liberals
are the former Social-Democrats of Dyelo Zhizni who used the
hackneyed expression quoted above). Attempts are being made to view “the
Stolypin period” of Russian history as a definite entity.  

Stolypin was the head of the counter-revolutionary government for about
five years, from 1906 to 1911. This was indeed a unique period crowded with
instructive events. Externally, it may be described as the period of
preparation for and accomplishment of the coup d’état of June 3,
1907. The preparation for this coup, which has already shown its results in
all spheres of our social life, began in the sum mer of 1908, when Stolypin
addressed the First Duma in his capacity as Minister of the Interior. The
question is, on what social forces did the men who staged the coup rely, or
what forces prompted them? What was the social and

    

economic content of the period ushered in on June 3? Stolypin’s personal
“career” provides instructive material and interesting examples bearing
on this question.  

A landowner and Marshal of the

Nobility,[1] he was appointed governor in 1902, under Plehve, gained
“fame” in the eyes of the tsar and the reactionary court clique by his
brutal reprisals against the peasants and the cruel punishment he inflicted
upon them (in Saratov Gubernia), organised Black-Hundred gangs and pogroms
in 1905 (the pogrom in Balashov), became Minister of the Interior in 1906
and Chairman of the Council of Ministers after the dissolution of the First
Duma. That, in very brief out line, is Stolypin’s political biography. The
biography of the head of the counter-revolutionary government is at the
same time the biography of the class which carried out the
counter-revolution—Stolypin was nothing more than an agent or clerk in
its employ. This class is the Russian landed nobility with Nicholas
Romanov, the first nobleman and biggest landowner, at their head. It is
made up of the thirty thousand feudal landowners who control seventy
million dessiatines of land in European Russia—that is to say, as much
land as is owned by ten million peasant house holds. The latifundia owned
by this class form a basis for feudal exaction which, in various forms and
under various names (labour-service, bondage, etc.) still reigns in the
traditionally Russian central provinces. The “land hunger” of the Russian
peasant (to use a favourite expression of the liberals and Narodniks) is
nothing but the reverse side of the over-abundance of land in the
hands of this class. The agrarian question, the central issue in our 1905
Revolution, was one of whether landed proprietorship would remain
intact—in which case the poverty-stricken, wretched, starving, browbeaten
and downtrodden peasantry would for many years to come inevitably
remain as the bulk of the population—or whether the bulk of the
population would succeed in winning for themselves more or less human
conditions, conditions even slightly resembling the civil liberties of the
European countries. This, however, could not be accomplished
unless landed proprietorship and the landowner monarchy inseparably bound
up with it were abolished by a revolution.  
 

Stolypin’s political biography is the faithful reflection and
expression of the conditions facing the tsarist monarchy. Stolypin could
only act as he did in the situation in which the revolution placed the
monarchy. The monarchy could not act in any other way when it
became quite clear—became clear in actual practice both prior to
the Duma, in 1905, and at the time of the Duma, in 1906—that the
vast, the overwhelming majority of the population had already realised that
its interests could not be reconciled with the preservation of the
landowning class, and was striving to abolish that class. Nothing could be
more superficial and more false than the assertions of the Cadet writers
that the attacks upon the monarchy in our country were merely the
expression of “intellectual” revolutionism. On the contrary, the
objective conditions were such that it was the struggle of the peasants
against landed proprietorship that inevitably posed the question of whether
our landowning monarchy was to live or die. Tsarism was compelled
to wage a life-and-death struggle, it was compelled to seek other
means of defence in addition to the utterly impotent bureaucracy and the
army which had been weakened as a result of military defeat and internal
disintegration. All that the tsarist monarchy could do under the
circumstances was to organise the Black-Hundred elements of the population
and to perpetrate pogroms. The high moral indignation with which our
liberals speak of the pogroms gives every revolutionary an impression of
something abominably wretched and cowardly, particularly as this high moral
condemnation of pogroms has proved to be fully compatible with the idea of
conducting negotiations and concluding agreements with the pogromists. The
monarchy had to defend itself against the revolution, and the semi-Asiatic,
feudal Russian monarchy of the Romanovs could only defend itself
by the most infamous, most disgusting, vile and cruel means. The only
honourable way of fighting the pogroms, the only rational way from the
point of view of a socialist and a democrat, is not to express high moral
condemnation, but to assist the revolution selflessly and in every way, to
organise the revolution for the over throw of this monarchy.  

Stolypin the pogrom-monger groomed himself for a ministerial post in
the only way in which a tsarist governor could;

    

by torturing the peasants, by organising pogroms and by showing an ability
to conceal these Asiatic “practices” behind glib phrases, external
appearances, poses and gestures made to look “European”.  

And the leaders of our liberal bourgeoisie, who are expressing their
high moral condemnation of pogroms, carried on negotiations with the
pogromists, recognising not only the latters’ right to existence, but their
leadership in the work of setting up a new Russia and of ruling it! The
assassination of Stolypin has occasioned a number of interesting
revelations and confessions concerning this question. Witte and Guchkov,
for instance, have published letters concerning the former’s negotiations
with “public figures” (road: with the leaders of the moderate
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie) about forming a Cabinet after

October 17,[2] 1905. Among those who took part in the negotiations with
Witte—these negotiations must have taken a long time, because Guchkov
writes of “the wearisome days of protracted negotiations”—were Shipov,
Trubetskoi, Urusov, and M. Stakhovich, i.e., the future leaders of the
Cadets, and of the Party of Peaceful

Renovation,[3] and of the Octobrist Party. The negotiations,
it turns out, were broken off on account of Durnovo, whom the “liberals”
refused to accept as Minister of the Interior, while Witte demanded this in
the form of an ultimatum. Urusov, however, a leading light of the Cadet
Party in the First Duma, “ardently supported Durnovo’s candidacy”. When
Prince Obolensky suggested Stolypin for the post “some of those present
supported the idea, others said that they did not know him”.  “I remember
definitely, “writes Guchkov, “that no one raised the objection
of which Count Witte writes in his letter.”  

Now the Cadet press, in its desire to emphasise its “democracy”
(don’t be funny!), particularly, perhaps, in view of the elections in the
first curia in St. Petersburg, where a Cadet opposed an Octobrist, is
trying to sling mud at Guchkov for those negotiations. “How often,”
writes Rech in its issue of September 28, “the Octobrist
fraternity with Guchkov at their head, joined hands with Mr. Durnovo’s
colleagues in order to please the powers that be. How often, with their
eyes riveted on the powers that be, did they turn their backs on public
opinion!” The same reproach

    

levelled by the Cadets at the Octobrists is repeated in a number of
variations in the leading article of Russkiye Vedomosti of the
same date.  

But, pardon me, gentlemen of the Cadet Party, what right have
you to reproach the Octobrists, since your
representatives also took part in those very same negotiations and even
defended Durnovo? At that time, in November 1905, were not all the
Cadets, like Urusov, in the position of people who have “their eyes
riveted on the powers that be” and “their backs turned on public
opinion”? Yours is a “family quarrel”; not a matter of principle, but
rivalry between equally unprincipled parties; that is what we have
to say apropos of the present reproaches levelled by the Cadets against the
Octobrists in connection with the “negotiations” at the end of 1905. An
altercation of this sort only serves to obscure the really important and
historically undeniable fact that all shades of the liberal
bourgeoisie, from the Octobrists to the Cadets inclusive, “had their
eyes riveted on the powers that be” and “turned their backs” on
democracy from the time our revolution assumed a really popular
character, i.e., from the time it became a democratic revolution because of
the democratic forces taking an active part in it. The Stolypin period of
the Russian counter-revolution is characterised specifically by the fact
that the liberal bourgeoisie had been turning its back on democracy, and
that Stolypin was able to turn for assistance, sympathy, and
advice first to one then to another representative of this bourgeoisie. Had
it not been for this state of affairs, Stolypin would not have been able to
give the Council of the United Nobility dominance over the
counter-revolutionary-minded bourgeoisie and obtain the assistance,
sympathy, and active or passive support of that bourgeoisie.  

This aspect of the matter deserves special attention, precisely because
it is lost sight of, or intentionally ignored, by our liberal press, as
well as by such organs of liberal labour policy as Dyelo
Zhizni. Stolypin not only represented the dictatorship of the feudal
landlords, and anyone confining himself to this characterisation has
understood nothing of the specific nature and meaning of the “Stolypin
period”. Stolypin was minister during a period when counter-revolutionary
sentiments prevailed among the entire liberal

    

bourgeoisie, including the Cadets, when the feudal landowners
could, and did, rely on these sentiments, when they
could, and did, approach the leaders of this bourgeoisie with
“offers” (of hand and heart), when they could regard even the
most “Left” of these leaders as “His Majesty’s Opposition”, when they
could, and did, refer to the fact that the ideological leaders of
the liberals were turning towards them, towards the side of reaction,
towards those who fought against democracy and denigrated it. Stolypin was
minister during the period when the feudal landowners bent all their
efforts to inaugurate and put into effect as speedily as possible a
bourgeois policy in peasant life in the countryside, when they had
thrown overboard all romantic illusions and hopes based on the muzhik’s
“patriarchal” nature, and had begun to look for allies among the
new, bourgeois elements of Russia in general and of rural Russia in
particular. Stolypin tried to pour new wine into old bottles, to reshape
the old autocracy into a bourgeois monarchy; and the failure of Stolypin’s
policy is the failure of tsarism on this last, the last
conceivable, road for tsarism. The landowner monarchy of
Alexander III tried to gain support in the “patriarchal” countryside and
in the “patriarchal element” in Russian life in general. That
policy was completely defeated by the revolution. After the revolution, the
landowner monarchy of Nicholas II sought support in the
counter-revolutionary sentiments of the bourgeoisie and in a bourgeois
agrarian policy put into effect by these very same landowners. The failure
of these attempts, which even the Cadets, even the Octobrists can no longer
doubt, is the failure of the last policy possible for
tsarism.  

Under Stolypin the dictatorship of the feudal landowner was not
directed against the whole nation, including the entire “third estate”,
the entire bourgeoisie. On the contrary, the dictatorship was exercised
under conditions most favourable for it when the Octobrist bourgeoisie
served it with heart and soul, when the landowners and the bourgeoisie had
a representative body in which their bloc was guaranteed a majority, and an
opportunity was provided for conducting negotiations and coming to an
agreement with the Crown, when Mr. Struve and the other Vekhi
writers reviled the revolution in a hysterical frenzy and propounded

    

an ideology which gladdened the heart of Anthony, Bishop of Volhynia, and
when Mr. Milyukov proclaimed that the Cadet opposition was “His Majesty’s
Opposition” (His Majesty being a feudal relic). Nevertheless, despite all
these favourable conditions for the Romanovs, despite all these conditions
being the most favourable that can be conceived from the point of view of
the alignment of social forces in twentieth-century capitalist Russia,
Stolypin’s policy ended in failure. Stolypin has been assassinated at a
moment when a new grave-digger of tsarist autocracy—or, rather, the
grave-digger who is gathering new strength—is knocking at the door.  
 *     *  * 

Stolypin’s attitude to the leaders of the bourgeoisie, and theirs to
him, is most fully characterised by the relations that existed at the time
of the First Duma. “The period from May to July 1906 was decisive for
Stolypin’s career,” writes Rech. What was the centre of gravity
during that period?  

“The centre of gravity during that period, was not, of course, the
speeches in the Duma,” states the official organ of the Cadet Party.  

That is a valuable admission, isn’t it? How many lances were broken at
that time in tilts with the Cadets over the question of whether the
“speeches in the Duma” could be regarded as the “centre of gravity”
during that period I What a torrent of angry abuse and supercilious
doctrinaire lecturing was let loose in the Cadet press against the
Social-Democrats who, in the spring and summer of 1906, maintained that the
centre of gravity during that period was not the speeches in the
Duma!  What reproaches were levelled by Rech and Duma at
the whole of Russian “society” at that time because it dreamed about a
“Convention” and was not sufficiently enthusiastic over the Cadet
victories in the “parliamentary” arena of the First Duma! Five years have
passed since then; it is necessary to make a general estimate of the period
of the First Duma, and the Cadets proclaim quite nonchalantly, as if
changing a pair of gloves, that, “of course, the centre of gravity during
that period was not the speeches in the Duma”.  
 

Of course not, gentlemen! But what was the centre of gravity?  

“Behind the scenes,” we read in Rech, “a sharp struggle was
going on between the representatives of two trends. One recommended a
policy of compromise with the people’s representatives, not even shrinking
at the formation of a ‘Cadet Cabinet’. The other demanded vigorous action,
the dissolution of the State Duma and a change in the election law. That
was the programme advocated by the Council of the United Nobility which
enjoyed the support of powerful influences.... At first Stolypin
hesitated. There are indications that on two occasions, with Kryzhanovsky
acting as intermediary, he made overtures to Muromtsev, proposing to
discuss the possibility of forming a Cadet Cabinet with himself as Minister
of the Interior. But at the same time Stolypin undoubtedly maintained
contact with the Council of the United Nobility.”  

That is how history is written by the educated, learned and well-read
liberal leaders! It appears that the “centre of gravity” was not
the speeches, but the struggle of two trends within the Black-Hundred
tsarist Court clique! Immediate “attack”, without delay, was the policy
of the Council of the United Nobility, i.e., the policy not of individual
persons, not of Nicholas Romanov, not of “one trend” in “high
places”, but the policy of a definite class. The Cadets
clearly and soberly see their rivals on the right. But anything
to the left of the Cadets has disappeared from their field of
vision. History was being made by “high places”, by the Council of the
United Nobility and the Cadets; the common people, of course, took
no part in the making of history! A definite class (the nobility) was
opposed by the party of people’s freedom, which stands above
classes, while the “high places” (i.e., Our Father the Tsar) hesitated.


Is it possible to imagine a higher degree of selfish class blindness, a
worse distortion of history and forgetfulness of the elementary truths of
historical science, a more wretched muddle and a worse confusion of class,
party and individuals?  

None are so blind as those who will not see democracy and its
forces.  
 

Of course, the centre of gravity during the, period of the
First Duma was not the speeches in the Duma. It was out side the Duma, in
the struggle between classes, in the struggle waged by the feudal
landowners and their monarchy against the masses, against the
workers and peasants. It was precisely during that period that the
revolutionary movement of the masses was again on the upgrade; the spring
and summer of 1906 were marked by a menacing upsurge of the strike wave in
general and of political strikes, of peasant riots and of mutinies in the
armed forces in particular. That, Messrs. Cadet historians, was
why there was hesitation in “high places”. The struggle between
the trends within the tsar’s gang was over the question whether, bearing in
mind the strength of the revolution at the time, they should attempt the
coup d’état at once, or whether they should bide their
time and lead the bourgeoisie by the nose a little longer.  

The First Duma fully convinced the landowners (Romanov, Stolypin and
Co.) that there could be no peace between them and the peasant and
working-class masses. This conviction of theirs was in complete accordance
with objective reality. All that remained for them to decide was a question
of minor importance; when and how to change the election law, at once or
gradually? The bourgeoisie wavered; but its entire behaviour, even that of
the Cadet bourgeoisie, showed that it feared the revolution a hundred times
more than it feared reaction. That was why the landowners deigned to invite
the leaders of the bourgeoisie (Muromtsev, Heyden, Guchkov and Co.) to
conferences at which they discussed the question of whether they might not
jointly form a Cabinet. And the entire bourgeoisie,
including the Cadets, conferred with the tsar, with the pogromists, with
the leaders of the Black Hundreds about the means of combating the
revolution; but never once since the end of 1905 has the bourgeoisie ever
sent representatives of a single one of its parties to confer with the
leaders of revolution about how to overthrow the autocracy and the
monarchy.  

That is the principal lesson to be drawn from the “Stolypin period”
of Russian history. Tsarism consulted the bourgeoisie when the revolution
still seemed to be a force; but it gradually applied its jackboot to kick
out all the

    

leaders of the bourgeoisie—first Muromtsev and Milyukov, then Heyden and
Lvov, and, finally, Guchkov—as soon as the revolutionary pressure from
below slackened. The difference between the Milyukovs, the Lvovs, and the
Guchkovs is absolutely immaterial—it is merely a matter of the sequence
in which these leaders of the bourgeoisie turned their cheeks to receive
the ... “kisses” of Romanov-Purishkevich-Stolypin and the sequence in
which they did receive these ... “kisses”.  

Stolypin disappeared from the scene at the very moment when the
Black-Hundred monarchy had taken everything that could be of use to it from
the counter-revolutionary sentiments of the whole Russian bourgeoisie. Now
this bourgeoisie—repudiated, humiliated, and disgraced by its own
renunciation of democracy, the struggle of the masses and
revolution—stands perplexed and bewildered, seeing the symptoms of a
gathering new revolution. Stolypin helped the Russian people to learn a
useful lesson: either march to freedom by overthrowing the tsarist
monarchy, under the leadership of the proletariat; or sink deeper into
slavery and submit to the Purishkeviches, Markovs and Tolmachovs, under the
ideological and political leadership of the Milyukovs and Guchkovs.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Marshal of the Nobility—the representative of the nobility
of a gubernia or uyezd in tsarist Russia, elected by the local nobility for
each uyezd and gubernia. The Marshal of the Nobility was in

   

charge of all the affairs of the nobility, held an influential post in the
administration and took the chair at the Zemstvo meetings.





[2]
In the Manifesto of October 17, 1905, the tsar, terrified by the
revolution, promised the people civil liberties and a constitution.





[3]
The Party of Peaceful Renovation—a party of big commercial
and industrial capitalists and big landowners; it was formed in 1906 and
united the Left Octobrists and the Right Cadets.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The New Faction of Conciliators, Or the Virtuous






Lenin: The New Faction of Conciliators, Or the Virtuous







V. I.  

      Lenin
The New Faction of Conciliators, Or the Virtuous




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 24, October 18 (31), 1911.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrattext.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 257-277.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README




The Information

Bulletin[7] of the Technical Commission Abroad (No. 1, August 11,
1911) and the message To All Members of the R.S.D.L.P., signed by
“A Group of Pro-Party Bolsheviks”, which appeared almost simultaneously
in Paris, are attacks identical in substance upon “official Bolshevism”
or, according to another expression, upon the “Leninist
Bolsheviks”. These documents are full of ire; they contain more angry
exclamations and declamations than real substance. Nevertheless, it is
necessary to deal with them, for they touch upon the most important
problems of our Party. It is all the more natural for me to undertake the
job of assessing the new faction, first, because it was I who wrote on
these very questions in the name of all the Bolsheviks exactly
a year and a half ago (see Diskussionny Listok,

No. 2[1]

),

and, secondly, because I am fully conscious of my responsibility for
“official Bolshevism”. As regards the expression “Leninist” it is
merely a clumsy attempt at sarcasm, intended to insinuate that it is only a
question of the supporters of a single person! In reality,
everybody knows perfectly well that it is not a question of people sharing
my personal views on this or that aspect of Bolshevism.  

The authors of the message, who sign themselves “pro Party
Bolsheviks”, also call themselves “non-factional Bolsheviks”, remarking
that “here” (in Paris) they are “rather ineptly” called
conciliators. Actually, as the reader will see from what follows, this
name, which gained currency over fifteen months ago, not only in Paris, not
only

    

abroad, but also in Russia, is the only one that correctly expresses the
political essence of the new faction.  

Conciliationism is the totality of moods, strivings and views that are
indissolubly bound up with the very essence of the
historical task confronting the R.S.D.L.P. during the period of the
counter-revolution of 1908–11. That is why, during this period, a number
of Social-Democrats, proceeding from essentially different premises,
“lapsed” into conciliationism. Trotsky expressed conciliationism more
consistently than anyone else. He was probably the only one who attempted
to give the trend a theoretical foundation, namely: factions and factionism
express the struggle of the intelligentsia “for influence over the
immature proletariat”. The proletariat is maturing, and factionalism is
perishing of itself. The root of the process of fusion of the factions is
not the change in the relations between the classes, not the evolution of
the fundamental ideas of the two principal factions, but the observance or
otherwise of agreements concluded between all the “intellectual”
factions. For a long time now, Trotsky—who at one moment has wavered more
to the side of the Bolsheviks and at another more to that of the
Mensheviks—has been persistently carrying on propaganda for an agreement
(or compromise) between all and sundry factions.  

The opposite view (see Nos. 2 and 3 of the Diskussionny

     Listok[2]

)

is that the origin of the factions is to be traced to the relations between
the classes in the Russian revolution. The Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks
only formulated the answers to the questions with which the objective
realities of 1905–07 confronted the proletariat. Therefore, only the inner
evolution of these factions, of the “strong” factions, strong
because of their deep roots, strong because their ideas correspond to
certain aspects of objective reality, only the’ inner evolution of
precisely these factions is capable of securing a real fusion of
the factions, i.e., the creation of a genuinely and completely united party
of proletarian Marxist socialism in Russia. From this follows the practical
conclusion that only a rapprochement in practical work between these two
strong factions—and only insofar as they

    

rid themselves of the non-Social-Democratic tendencies of liquidationism
and otzovism—represents a real Party policy, a policy that really brings
about unity, not easily, not smoothly, and by no means immediately, but in
a way that will produce actual results, as distinguished from the heap of
quack promises of an easy, smooth, immediate fusion of “all” factions.


These two views were observed, even before the Plenary Meeting, when in
my talks I suggested the slogan: “Rapprochement between the two strong
factions, and no whining about dissolving factions”. This was made public
immediately after the Meeting by Golos Sotsial-Demokrata. I
plainly, definitely, and systematically explained these two views in
May 1910, i.e., eighteen months ago; moreover, I did this in the
“general Party” arena, in Diskussionny Listok (No. 2). If the
“conciliators”, with whom we have been arguing on these subjects since
November :1909; have so far not found time to answer that article even
once, and have not made even one attempt to examine this
question more or less systematically, to expound their views more or less
openly and consistently—it is entirely their own fault. They call their
factional statement, which was published on behalf of a separate group, a
“public answer”. But this public answer of those who kept silent
for over a year is not an answer to the question that was raised
long ago, discussed long ago, and answered long ago in two fundamentally
different ways; it is a most hopeless muddle, a most in credible confusion
of two irreconcilable answers. Every proposition the authors of the message
put forward, they immediately refute. In every single proposition, the
alleged Bolsheviks (who in reality are inconsistent Trotskyites)
echo Trotsky’s mistakes.  

Indeed, look at the main ideas contained in the message.  

Who are its authors? They say they are Bolsheviks who “do not share
the organisational views of official Bolshevism”. That looks as if it were
an “opposition” only on the question of organisation, does it
not? Read the next sentence: “... It is precisely the organisational
questions, the questions of building and restoring the Part a are being put
in the forefront now, as was the case eighteen months ago.” This is quite
untrue, and constitutes the very error

    

of principle which Trotsky made, and which I exposed a year and a half
ago. At the Plenary Meeting, the organisational question probably
seemed of paramount importance only because, and only insofar as, the
rejection of liquidationism by all factions was
taken to be real, because the Golos and the Vperyod
representatives “signed” the resolutions against liquidationism
and against otzovism to “console” the Party. Trotsky’s error was in
continuing to pass off the apparent for the real after
February 1910, when Nasha Zarya finally unfurled the banner of
liquidationism, and the Vperyod group—in their notorious school
at

X[8]—unfurled the banner of defence of otzovism. At the Plenary
Meeting, the acceptance of the apparent for the real may have been
the result of self-delusion. But after it, ever since the spring of 1910,
Trotsky has been deceiving the workers in a most unprincipled and
shameless manner by assuring them that the obstacles to unity were
principally (if not wholly) of an organisational nature. This deceit is
being continued in 1911 by the Paris conciliators; for to assert now that
the organisational questions occupy the first place is sheer mockery of the
truth. In reality, it is by no means the organisational question that is
now in the forefront, but the question of the entire programme, the entire
tactics and the whole character of the Party, or rather a question of
two parties—the Social-Democratic Labour Party and the
Stolypin labour party of Potresov, Smirnov, Larin, Levitsky,
and their friends. The Paris conciliators seem to have been asleep for the
eighteen months that have elapsed since the Plenary Meeting, during which
time the entire struggle against the liquidators shifted,
both in our camp and among the pro-Party Mensheviks, from
organisational questions to questions of whether the Party is to be a
Social-Democratic, and not a liberal, labour party. To argue now, let
us say, with the gentlemen of Nasha Zarya about organisational
questions, about the relative importance of the legal and illegal
organisations, would be simply putting on an act, for these gentlemen may
fully recognise an “illegal” organisation like Golos, which is
subservient to the liquidators! It has been said long ago that the Cadets
are recognising and maintaining an illegal organisation that serves
monarchist liberalism. The conciliators call themselves Bolsheviks,

    

in order to repeat, a year and a half later (and specifically stating
moreover that this was done in the name of Bolshevism as a
whole!), Trotsky’s errors which the Bolsheviks had exposed. Well, is
this not an abuse of established Party titles? Are we not obliged, after
this, to let all and sundry know that the conciliators are not Bolsheviks
at all, that they have nothing in common with Bolshevism, that they are
simply inconsistent Trotskyites?  

Read a little further: “One may disagree with the way official
Bolshevism and the majority of the editors of the Central Organ understood
the task of the struggle against liquidationism...”. Is it really possible
seriously to assert that the “task of the struggle against
liquidationism” is an organisational task? The conciliators themselves
declare that they differ from the Bolsheviks not only on
organisational questions! But on what exactly do they differ? They are
silent on this. Their “public answer” continues to remain the answer of
people who prefer to keep silent ... or, shall we say, are irresponsible?
For a year and a half they did not attempt even once to correct
“official Bolshevism” or to expound their own conception of the
task of the struggle against liquidationism! And official Bolshevism has
waged this struggle for exactly three years, since August 1908. In
comparing these well-known dates we involuntarily seek for an explanation
of this strange “silence” of the conciliators, and this quest
involuntarily recalls to our mind Trotsky and

Ionov,[9] who asserted that they too were opposed to the
liquidators, but that they understood the task of combating them
differently. It is ridiculous, comrades—to declare, three years
after the struggle began, that you understand the character of this
struggle differently! Such a difference in understanding amounts
to not understanding it at all!  

To proceed. In substance the present Party crisis undoubtedly reduces
itself to the question whether our Party, the R.S.D.L.P., should completely
dissociate itself from the liquidators (including the Golos group)
or whether it should continue the policy of compromise with them. It is
doubtful whether any Social-Democrat at all familiar with the case would
deny that this question constitutes the essence of the entire
Party situation today. How do the conciliators answer this question?  
 

They write in the message: “We are told that thereby [i.e., by
supporting the Meeting] we are violating the Party forms and are causing a
split. We do not think so [sic!]. But even if this were the case,
we would not be afraid of it.” (Then follows a statement to the effect
that the plenary meeting was sabotaged by the Central Committee Bureau
Abroad, that the “Central Committee is the object of a gamble”, that
“Party forms have begun to be filled in with a factional content”, etc.)


This answer can truly be called a “classical” specimen of ideological
and political helplessness! Think of it: they are being accused, they say,
of causing a split. And so the new faction, which claims to be able to show
the way the Party should go, declares publicly and in print: “We do not
think so” (i.e., you do not think that there is or that there will be a
split?), “but” ... but “we would not be afraid of it”.  

You can be sure no other such example of confusion is to be
found in the history of political parties. If you “do not think” that
there is or that there Will be a split, then explain why! Explain
why it is possible to work with the liquidators! Say outright that
it is possible, and therefore necessary, to work with them.  

Our conciliators not only do not say this; they say the opposite. In
the leading article of the Bulletin, No. 1 (it is specifically
stated in a footnote that this article was opposed by a Bolshevik who was
an adherent of the Bolshevik platform, i.e., of the resolution of the
Second Paris Group), we read the following: 

“It is a fact that joint work with the liquidators in Russia, is
impossible”, while somewhat earlier it is admitted that it is “becoming
more and more difficult to draw even the finest line of demarcation”
between the Color group and the liquidators.  

Who can make head or tail of this? On the one hand, a highly official
statement is made on behalf of the Technical Commission (in which the
conciliators and the Poles, who now support them, constitute a majority
against us Bolsheviks) that joint work is impossible. In plain
language this means declaring a split. The word split has no other
meaning. On the other hand, the same Bulletin, No. 1,

    

proclaims that the Technical Commission was set up “not for the purpose of
bringing about a split, but for the purpose of averting it”—and the
selfsame conciliators write that they “do not think so” (that there is or
that there will be a split).  

Can one imagine a greater muddle?  

If joint work is impossible—that can be explained to
Social-Democrats and justified in their eyes either by an
outrageous violation of Party decisions and obligations on the part of a
certain group of persons (and then a split with that group of persons is
inevitable), or by a fundamental difference in principle, a
difference which causes the entire work of a certain trend to be
directed away from Social-Democracy (and then a split with the
whole trend is inevitable). As we know, we have both these things; the
Plenary Meeting of 1910 declared it impossible to work with the
liquidationist trend, while the split with the Golos
group, which violated all its obligations and definitely went over to
the liquidators, is now taking place.  

Anyone who consciously says that “joint work is impossible”—anyone
who has given any thought to this statement and has grasped its fundamental
principles, would inevitably concentrate all his attention and efforts on
explaining these principles to the broadest masses so that those masses
might be spared as soon and as completely as possible all futile and
harmful attempts to maintain any relations whatsoever with those
with whom it is impossible to work. But anyone who makes this
statement and at the same time adds “we do not think” there will be a
split, “but we would not be afraid of it”, reveals by his confused and
timid language that he is afraid of himself, afraid of the step he
has taken, afraid of the situation that has been created! The message of
the conciliators produces just such an impression. They are trying to
vindicate themselves for something, to appear to be “kind-hearted” in the
eyes of someone, to give someone a hint.... Later on we shall learn the
meaning of their hints to Vperyod and Pravda. We must
first finish with the question of how the conciliators interpret the
“results of the period that has elapsed since the Plenary Meeting”, the
results summed up by the Meeting of the members of the Central Committee.

 

It is really necessary to understand these results, to under
stand why they were inevitable, otherwise our participation in events will
be spontaneous, helpless, casual. Now see how the conciliators
understand this. How do they answer the question of why the work
and the decisions of the Plenary Meeting, which primarily were meant to
bring about unity, resulted in a split between the Central Committee Bureau
Abroad (==liquidators) and the anti-liquidators? Our inconsistent
Trotskyites have simply copied the answer to this from Trotsky and Ionov,
and I am forced to repeat what I said in last

 May[3]

against those consistent conciliators.  

The conciliators answer by saying: it is the fault of factionalism, the
factionalism of the Mensheviks, the Vperyod group, and of
Pravda (we enumerate the factional groups in the order in which
they appear in the message), and, finally, of the “official
representatives of Bolshevism” who “have probably outdone all these
groups in their factional efforts”. The authors of the message openly and
definitely apply the term non-factional only to themselves, the
Paris conciliators. All are wicked, they are virtuous. The conciliators
give no ideological reasons in explanation of the phenomenon in
question. They do not point to any of the organisational or other
distinguishing features of the groups that gave rise to this
phenomenon. They say nothing, not a word, to explain matters,
except that factionalism is a vice and non-factionalism a virtue. The only
difference between Trotsky and the conciliators in Paris is that the latter
regard Trotsky as a factionalist and themselves as non-factional, whereas
Trotsky holds the opposite view.  

I must confess that this formulation of the question, in which
political phenomena are explained only by the wickedness of some
and the virtue of others, always calls to mind those outwardly benevolent
faces of which one cannot help thinking, “Probably a rogue 

What do you think of the following comparison? Our conciliators are
non-factional, virtuous; we Bolsheviks have outdone all groups in our
factional efforts, i.e., we are the most wicked. Therefore, the
virtuous faction supported

    

the most wicked, the Bolshevik faction in its fight against the Central
Committee Bureau Abroad!! There is something wrong here, comrades! You are
confusing matters more and more with every statement you make.  

You make yourselves ridiculous when you and Trotsky hurl accusations of
factionalism at one another, as if you were playing at ball; you do not
take the trouble to think:

what is a faction? Try to give a definition, and we predict that you will
entangle yourselves still more; for you your selves are a faction—a
vacillating, unprincipled faction, one that failed to understand what took
place at the Plenary Meeting and after it.  

A faction is an organisation within a party, united, not by its place
of work, language or other objective conditions, but by a particular
platform of views on party questions. The authors of the message are a
faction, because the message constitutes their platform (a very bad one;
but there are factions with wrong platforms). They are a faction, because
like every other organisation they are bound by internal discipline; their
group appoints its representative to the Technical Commission and to the
Organising Commission by a majority of votes; it was their group that drew
up and published the message-programme, and so on. Such are the
objective facts which show that outcries against factionalism are bound to
be hypocrisy. Yet Trotsky and the “inconsistent Trotskyites
maintain that they are not a faction because ... “the only”
object of their uniting (into a faction) is to abolish factions and to
advocate their fusion, etc. But all such assurances are merely self-praise
and a cowardly game of hide-and-seek, for the simple reason that the
fact that a faction exists is not affected by any (even the most
virtuous) aim of the faction. Every faction is convinced
that its platform and its policy are the best
means of abolishing factions, for no one regards the existence of factions
as ideal. The only difference is that factions with clear, consistent,
integral platforms openly defend their platforms, while
unprincipled factions hide behind cheap shouts about their virtue,
about their non-factionalism.  

What is the reason for the existence of factions in the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party? They exist as the continuation of the split
of 1903–05. They are the result

    

of the weakness of the local organisations which are powerless to
prevent the transformation of literary groups that express new trends, big
and small, into new “factions”, i.e., into organisations in which
internal discipline takes first place. How can the abolition of factions
really be guaranteed? Only by completely healing the split, which
dates from the time of the revolution (and this will be brought about
only by ridding the two main factions of liquidationism and
otzovism), and by creating a proletarian organisation strong enough to
force the minority to submit to the majority. As long as no such
organisation exists, the only thing that might accelerate
the process of their disappearance is an agreement by all the
factions. Hence, both the ideological merit of the Plenary Meeting and its
conciliationist error become clear. Its merit was the rejection of
the ideas of liquidationism and otzovism; its mistake was the agreement
concluded indiscriminately with persons and groups whose deeds are not in
accordance with their promises (“they signed the resolution”). The
ideological rapprochement on the basis of the fight against liquidationism
and otzovism goes ahead—despite all obstacles and difficulties. The
conciliationist mistake of the Plenary

       Meeting[4]

quite inevitably brought about the failure of its conciliatory decisions,
i.e., the failure of the alliance with the Golos
group. The rupture between the Bolsheviks (and later also between the
Meeting of the members of the Central Committee) and the Central Committee
Bureau Abroad corrected the conciliationist mistake of the Plenary
Meeting. The rapprochement of the factions which are actually
combating liquidationism and otzovism will now proceed
despite the forms decided on by the Plenary Meeting, for these
forms did not correspond to the content. Conciliationism in general, as
well as the conciliationism of the Plenary Meeting, came to grief because
the content of the work separated the liquidators from the
Social-Democrats, and all the forms, diplomacy, and games of the
conciliators could not overcome this process of separation.  

From this, and only this point of view, which I developed in May 1910,
everything that took place after the Plenary Meeting becomes
intelligible, inevitable, resulting

    

not from the “wickedness” of some and the “virtue” of others, but from
the objective course of events, which isolates the liquidationist
trend and brushes aside all the intermediate major and minor
groups.  

In order to obscure this undoubted political fact, the complete
failure of conciliationism, the conciliators are forced to resort
to a downright distortion of facts. Just listen to this: “The factional
policy of the Leninist Bolsheviks was particularly harmful because they had
a majority in all the principal Party institutions, so that their factional
policy justified the organisational separatism of other trends and armed
those trends against the official Party institutions”.  

This tirade is nothing but a cowardly and belated
“justification” of ... liquidationism, for it is precisely the
representatives of that tendency who have always justified them selves by
references to the “factionalism” of the Bolsheviks. This justification is
belated because it was the duty of every real Party member (in
contrast to persons who use the catch word “pro-Party” for
self-advertisement) to act at the time when this “factionalism”
began, and not a year and a half later! The conciliators, the defenders of
liquidationism, could not and did not act earlier, because they
had no facts. They are taking advantage of the present “time of
troubles” in order to give prominence to the unfounded arguments of the
liquidators. But the facts are explicit and unambiguous; immediately after
the Plenary Meeting, in February 1910, Mr. Potresov unfurled the banner of
liquidationism. Soon after, in February or March, Messrs. Mikhail, Roman,
and Yuri betrayed the Party. Immediately after that, the Golos
group started a campaign for Golos (see Plekhanov’s Diary
the day following the Plenary Meeting) and resumed the publication
of Golos. Immediately after that, the Vperyod people
began to build up their own “school”. The first
factional step of the Bolsheviks, on the other hand, was to found
Rabochaya Gazeta in September1910, after
Trotsky’s break with the representatives of the Central Committee.  

Why did the conciliators resort to such a distortion of well-known
facts? In order to give a hint to the liquidators, and curry favour with
them. On the one hand, “joint work with the liquidators is
impossible”. On the other hand—they

    

are “justified” by the factionalism of the Bolsheviks!? We ask
any Social-Democrat not contaminated with émigré diplomacy,
what political confidence can be placed in people who are themselves
entangled in such contradictions? All they deserve are the bouquets with
which Golos publicly rewarded them.  

By “factionalism” the conciliators mean the ruthlessness of
our polemics (for which they have censured us thousands of times at general
meetings in Paris) and the ruthlessness of our exposure of the
liquidators (they were against exposing Mikhail, Yuri, and
Roman). The conciliators have been defending and screening the liquidators
all the time but have never dared to express their defence openly,
either in the Diskussionny Listok or in any printed public
appeal. And now they are using their impotence and cowardice to put a spoke
in the wheel of the Party, which has begun emphatically to dissociate
itself from the liquidators. The liquidators say, there is no
liquidationism, it is an “exaggeration” on the part of the Bolsheviks
(see the resolution of the Caucasian

liquidators[10] and Trotsky’s speeches). The conciliators say, it is
impossible to work with the liquidators, but... but the
factionalism of the Bolsheviks provides them with a “justification”. Is
it not clear that this ridiculous contradiction of subjective opinions has
one, and only one, real meaning: cowardly defence of liquidationism, a
desire to trip up the Bolsheviks and lend support to the liquidators?  

But this is by no means all. The worst and most malicious distortion of
facts is the assertion that we had a “majority” in the “principal
Party institutions”. This crying untruth has only one purpose: to
cover up the political bankruptcy of conciliationism. For, in
reality, the Bolsheviks did not have a majority in any of
the “principal Party institutions” after the Plenary Meeting. On the
contrary, it was the conciliators who had the majority. We challenge anyone
to attempt to dispute the following facts. After the Plenary
Meeting there were only three “principal Party institutions”:

(1) the Central Committee Bureau in Russia—composed chiefly of

conciliators[5]

;

(2) the Central Committee

    

Bureau Abroad—on which, from January to November 1910, the Bolsheviks
were represented by a conciliator; since the Bundist and the
Latvian officially adopted the conciliationist standpoint, the
majority, during eleven months following the Plenary Meeting, was
conciliationist;

(3) the Editorial Board of the Central Organ—on which two “Bolshevik
factionalists” were opposed by two Golos sup porters; without the
Pole there was no majority.  

Why did the conciliators have to resort to a deliberate lie? For no
other purpose than that of camouflage, to cover up the political
bankruptcy of conciliationism. Conciliationism predominated at the Plenary
Meeting; it had a majority in all the principal practical centres
of the Party after the Plenary Meeting, and within a year and a half it
suffered complete collapse. It failed to “reconcile” anyone; it
did not create anything anywhere; it vacillated helplessly from side to
side, and for that it fully deserved the bouquets of Golos.  

The conciliators suffered the most complete failure in Russia,
and the more assiduously and demagogically the Paris conciliators refer to
Russia the more important is it to stress this. The leit-motif of
the conciliators is that Russia is conciliationist in contrast with what we
have abroad. Compare these words with the facts, and you
will see that this is just hollow, cheap demagogy. The facts show that for
more than a year after the Plenary Meeting there were
only conciliators on the Central Committee Bureau in Russia; they
alone made official reports about the Plenary Meeting and officially
negotiated with the legalists; they alone appointed agents and sent them to
the various institutions; they alone handled all the funds that were sent
unquestioningly by the Central Committee Bureau Abroad; they alone
negotiated with the “Russian” writers who seemed promising contributors
to the muddle (i.e., in respect of conciliationism), etc.  

And the result?  

The result is nil. Not a single leaflet, not a single pronouncement,
not a single organ of the press, not a single “concillation”.

    

As against this the Bolshevik “factionalists” have put their
Rabochaya Gazeta, published abroad, on its feet after two issues
(to say nothing of other matters about which only Mr. Martov speaks openly,
thereby helping the secret police). Conciliationism is nil, words, empty
wishes (and attempts to trip up Bolshevism on the basis of these
“conciliatory” wishes); “official” Bolshevism has proved by deeds that
it is absolutely preponderant precisely in Russia.  

Is this an accident? The result of arrests? But arrests “spared” the
liquidators, who did no work in the Party, while they mowed down
Bolsheviks and conciliators alike.  

No, this is not an accident, or the result of the luck or success of
individuals. It is the result of the bankruptcy of a political
tendency which is based on false premises. The very
foundation of conciliationism is false—the wish to base the
unity of the party of the proletariat on an alliance of all
factions, including the anti-Social-Democratic, non-proletarian factions;
false are its unprincipled “unity” schemes which lead to nothing; false
are its phrases against “factions” (when in fact a new faction
is formed)—phrases that are powerless to dissolve the anti-Party
factions, but are intended to weaken the Bolshevik faction which bore
nine-tenths of the brunt of the struggle against liquidationism and
Otzovism.  

Trotsky provides us with an abundance of instances of scheming to
establish unprincipled “unity”. Recall, for example (I take one of the
most recent instances), how he praised the Paris Rabochaya

Zhizn,[11] in the management of which the Paris conciliators and
the Golos group had an equal share. How wonderful!—wrote
Trotsky—“neither Bolshevik, nor Menshevik, but revolutionary
Social-Democrat”. The poor hero of phrase-mongering failed to notice a
mere bagatelle—only that Social-Democrat is revolutionary who understands
how harmful anti-revolutionary pseudo-Social-Democracy can be in a
given country at a given time (i.e., the harm of liquidationism and
otzovism in the Russia of the 19O8–10 period), and who knows how
to fight against such non-Social-Democratic tendencies. By his praise of
Rabochaya Zhizn which had never fought against the
non-revolutionary Social-Democrats in Russia, Trotsky was merely
revealing the plan of the liquidators whom he serves
faithfully—parity
    

on the Central Organ implies the termination of the struggle
against the liquidators; the liquidators actually enjoy full freedom to
fight the Party; and let the Party be tied hand and foot by the
“parity” of the Golos and Party men on the Central Organ (and on the
Central Committee). This would assure complete victory for the liquidators
and only their lackeys could pursue or defend such a line of action.  

Instances of unprincipled “unity” schemes that promise peace and
happiness without a long, stubborn, desperate struggle against the
liquidators were provided at the Plenary Meeting by Ionov, Innokentiev, and
other conciliators. We saw another such instance in the message of our
conciliators who justify liquidationism on the grounds of Bolshevik
“factionalism”. A further example is to be found in their speeches about
the Bolsheviks “isolating” themselves “from other trends
[Vperyod, Pravda] which advocate an illegal
Social-Democratic party”.  

The italics in this remarkable tirade are ours. Just as a small drop of
water reflects the sun, so this tirade reflects the utter lack of principle
in conciliationism, which is at the root of its political impotence.  

In the first place, do Pravda and Vperyod represent
Social-Democratic trends? No, they do not; for Vperyod represents
a non-Social-Democratic trend (otzovism and Machism) and
Pravda represents a tiny group, which has not given an
independent and consistent answer to any important fundamental
question of the revolution and counter-revolution. We can call a
trend only a definite sum of political ideas which have become
well-defined in regard to all the most important questions of
both the revolution (for we have moved away but little from it and
are dependent on it in all respects) and the counter-revolution;
ideas which, moreover, have proved their right to existence as a trend by
being widely disseminated among broad strata of the working class. Both
Menshevism and Bolshevism are Social-Democratic trends; this has been
proved by the experience of the revolution, by the eight years’ history of
the working-class movement. As for small groups not representing any
trend—there have been plenty during this period, just as there were
plenty before. To confuse a trend with minor groups means condemning
oneself to intrigue in Party politics. The emergence

    

of unprincipled tiny groups, their ephemeral existence, their efforts to
have “their say”, their “relations” with each other as separate
powers—all this is the basis of the intrigues taking place
abroad: and from this there is not nor can there be any salvation, except
that of strictly adhering to consistent principles tested by experience in
the long history of the working-class movement.  

Secondly—and here we at once observe the practical transformation of
the conciliators’ lack of principle into intrigue—the message of the
Parisians is telling a downright and deliberate lie when it declares:
“Otzovism no longer finds open adherents and defenders in our
Party”. This is an untruth, and everybody knows it. This untruth is
refuted by documentary evidence in Vperyod, No. 3 (May 1911) which
openly states that otzovism is a “perfectly legitimate
trend within our Party” (p. 78). Or will our very wise conciliators
assert that such a declaration is not a defence of otzovism?  

It is when people cannot justify their close association with this or
that group on grounds of principle that they are compelled to resort to a
policy of petty lies, petty flattery, nods, hints, i.e., to all those
things which add up to the concept “intrigue”. Vperyod praises
the conciliators; the conciliators praise Vperyod and falsely
reassure the Party with regard to otzovism. As a result there is bargaining
and haggling over positions and posts with the defenders of
otzovism, with the violators of all the decisions of the
Plenary Meeting. The fate of conciliationism and the substance of its
impotent and miserable intriguing, is secretly to assist both the otzovists
and the liquidators.  

Thirdly—“... joint work with the liquidators in Russia is
impossible”. Even the conciliators had to admit this truth. The question
is—do the Vperyod and Pravda groups admit this truth?
Far from admitting it, they state the very opposite, they openly
demand “joint work” with the liquidators, and they openly engage in
such work (see, for example, the report of the Second Vperyod
School). Is there even a grain of principle and of honesty in the
proclamation of a policy of rapprochement with groups which give
diametrically opposite answers to fundamental
questions?—we ask, because an unambiguous and unanimous resolution of the

    

Plenary Meeting recognised the question of liquidationism to be a
fundamental one. Obviously not; we are confronted with an ideological
chasm, and irrespective of the most pious intentions of X or Z all their
attempts to span it with a bridge of words, with a bridge of diplomacy,
inevitably condemn them to intrigues.  

Until it has been shown and proved by reliable facts and a review of
the most important questions that Vperyod and Pravda
represent Social-Democratic trends (and no one, during the year
and a half following the Plenary Meeting has even tried to prove this since
it cannot be proved), we shall not tire of explaining to the workers the
harmfulness of those unprincipled stratagems, of those under handed
stratagems, which are the substance of rapprochement with Vperyod
and Pravda as preached by the conciliators. It is the first
duty of revolutionary Social-Democrats to isolate these
non-Social-Democratic and unprincipled groups that are aiding the
liquidators. The policy which has been and is being pursued by Bolshevism
and which it will pursue to the end despite all obstacles is to appeal to
the Russian workers who are connected with Vperyod and
Pravda, over the heads of these groups and against them.  

I have said that after a year and a half of domination in the
Party centres, conciliationism has suffered complete political
bankruptcy. The usual answer to this is yes, but that is because you
factionalists were hampering us (see the letter of the
conciliators—not Bolsheviks—Hermann and

Arkady[12] in Pravda, No. 20).  

The political bankruptcy of a tendency or a group lies
precisely in the fact that everything “hampers” it, every
thing turns against it; for it has wrongly estimated this
“everything”, for it has taken as its basis empty words, sighs, regrets,
whimpers.  

Whereas in our case, gentlemen, everything and
everybody came to our assistance—and herein lies the guarantee
of our success. We were assisted by the Potresovs, Larins, Levitskys—for
they could not open their mouths without confirming our
arguments about liquidationism. We were assisted by the Martovs, Dans and
others—for they compelled everyone to agree with our view that
the Golos group and the liquidators are one and the same. We were
assisted by

    

Plekhanov to the very extent that he exposed the liquidators,
pointed out the loopholes” left open “for the liquidators” (by the
conciliators) in the resolutions of the Plenary Meeting, and ridiculed
the “puffy” and “integralist” passages in these resolutions (passed
by the conciliators against us). We were assisted by the Russian
conciliators whose “invitation”, extended to Mikhail, Yuri, and Roman,
was accompanied by abusive attacks upon Lenin (see Golos), thereby
confirming the fact that the refusal of the liquidators was not
due to the insidiousness of the “factionalists”. How is it, my dear
conciliators, that, notwithstanding your virtue everybody hampered you,
whereas everyone helped us in spite of all our factional wickedness?  

It was because the policy of your petty group hinged only on
phrase-mongering, often very well-meaning and well-intentioned
phrase-mongering, but empty nonetheless. A real approach to unity is
created only by a rapprochement of strong factions,
strong in their ideological integrity and an influence over the
masses that has been tested by the experience of the revolution.


Even now, your outbursts against factionalism remain mere words,
because you yourselves are a faction, one of the worst, least
reliable, unprincipled factions. Your loud, sweeping pronouncement (in the
In formation Bulletin)—“not a centime for the factions”—was
mere words. Had you meant it seriously, could you have spent your
“centimes” on the publication of the message-platform of a new
group? Had you meant it seriously, could you have kept quiet at the sight
of such factional organs as Rabochaya Gazeta and The
Diary of a Social-Democrat? Could you have abstained from publicly
demanding that they be closed

down?[6]

Had you demanded this, had you seriously stipulated such a condition, you
would simply have been ridiculed. However, if, being well aware of this,
you confine yourselves to languid sighs, does it not prove over and over
again that your conciliationism remains suspended?  
 

The disarming of the factions is possible only on the basis of
reciprocity—otherwise it is a reactionary slogan, extremely harmful to
the cause of the proletariat; it is a demagogical slogan, for it only
facilitates the uncompromising struggle of the liquidators against
the Party. Anyone who advances this slogan now, after the attempt
of the Plenary Meeting to apply it has failed, after the attempt
to amalgamate (the factions) has been thwarted by the Golos and
Vperyod factions—anyone who does this without even daring to
repeat the condition of reciprocity, without even trying to state it
clearly, to determine the methods of control over its actual
fulfilment, is simply becoming intoxicated by sweet-sounding words.  

Bolsheviks, unite—you are the only bulwark of a consistent and
decisive struggle against liquidationism and otzovism.  

Pursue the policy of rapprochement with anti-liquidationist Menshevism,
a policy tested by practice, confirmed by experience—such is our
slogan. It is a policy that does not promise a land flowing with the milk
and honey of “universal peace which cannot be attained in the period of
disorganisation and disintegration, but it is a policy that in the process
of work really furthers the rapprochement of trends which
represent all that is strong, sound, and vital in the
proletarian movement.  

The part played by the conciliators during the period of
counter-revolution may be described as follows. With immense efforts the
Bolsheviks are pulling our Party waggon up a steep slope. The
Golos liquidators are trying with all their might to drag it
downhill again. In the waggon sits a conciliator; he is a picture
of meekness. He has such an angelic sweet face, like that of Jesus. He
looks the very incarnation of virtue. And modestly dropping his eyes and
raising his hands he exclaims: “I thank thee, Lord, that I am not as
these men are”—a nod in the direction of the Bolsheviks and
Mensheviks—“insidious factionalists who hinder all progress”. But the
waggon moves slowly forward and in the waggon sits the conciliator. When
the Bolshevik factionalists smashed the liquidationist Central
Committee Bureau Abroad, thereby clearing the ground for the building of a
new house, for a bloc (or at least a temporary alliance)

    

of Party factions, the conciliators entered this house and
(cursing the Bolshevik factionalists) sprinkled the new abode with the holy
water of sugary speeches about non-factionalism!  

What would have become of the historically memorable work of the old
Iskra, if, instead of waging a consistent, implacable, principled
campaign against Economism and Struveism, it had agreed to some bloc,
alliance or “fusion” of all groups large and small which were as
numerous abroad in those days as they are today?  

And yet the differences between our epoch and the epoch of the old
Iskra considerably increase the harm done by unprincipled and
phrase-mongering conciliationism.  

The first difference is that we have risen to a far higher level in the
development of capitalism and of the bourgeoisie as well as in the clarity
of the class struggle in Russia. Certain objective soil already
exists (for the first time in Russia) for the
liberal labour policy of Potresov, Levitsky, Larin, and their
friends. The Stolypin liberalism of the Cadets and the Stolypin labour
party are already in process of formation. All the more harmful in practice
are conciliationist phrases and intrigues with those groups abroad which
support the liquidators.  

The second difference is the immeasurably higher level of development
of the proletariat, of its class-consciousness and class solidarity. All
the more harmful is the artificial support given by the
conciliators to the ephemeral petty groups abroad (Vperyod,
Pravda, etc.), which have not created and are unable to
create any trend in Social-Democracy.  

The third difference is that during the Iskra period there
were illegal organisations of Economists in Russia, which had to be smashed
and split up in order to unite the revolutionary Social-Democrats against
them. Today, there are no parallel illegal organisations; today it
is only a question of fighting legal groups that have segregated
themselves. And this process of segregation (even the conciliators are
forced to admit it) is being hindered by the political
game of the conciliators with the factions abroad that are
unwilling to work and incapable of working for such demarcation.

 

Bolshevism has “got over” the otzovist sickness, the sickness of
revolutionary phrase-mongering, the playing at “Leftism”, the swinging
from Social-Democracy to the left. The otzovists came out as a faction when
it was no longer possible to “recall” the Social-Democrats from
the Duma.  

Bolshevism will also get over the “conciliationist” sickness, the
wavering in the direction of liquidationism (for in reality the
conciliators were always a plaything in the hands of the liquidators). The
conciliators are also hopelessly behindhand. They came out as a faction
after the domination of conciliationism had exhausted itself
during the eighteen months following the Plenary Meeting and there was no
one left to conciliate.  

P.S. The present feuilleton was written more than a month ago. It
criticises the “theory” of the conciliators. As for the “practice” of
the conciliators, which found expression in the hopeless, absurd, futile,
and shameful squabbles which fill the pages of the conciliators’ and the
Poles’ Bulletin No. 2, it is not worth wasting a single word on.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 16, “Notes of a
Publicist. II”.—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 16, “Notes of a Publicist” and “The
historical Meaning of the Inner-Party Struggle in Russia”.—Ed.


[3]
See present edition, Vol. 16, “Notes of a
Publicist. II”.—Ed.  

[4]
See Diskussionny Listok, No. 2. (See present edition, Vol. 16,
“Notes of a Publicist. II”.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[5]
Of course, not all conciliators are alike, and surely not all the
former members of the Russian Bureau could (and would) accept

   

responsibility for all the pompous stupidities of the Paris conciliators
who are merely echoing Trotsky.  —Lenin

[6]
In fairness it should be stated that the Paris conciliators, who have
now issued their message, were opposed to launching of
Rabochaya Gazeta; they walked out of the first meeting to
which they were invited by its editors. We regret that they did not help us
(to expose the futility of conciliationism) by openly denouncing
Rabochaya Gazeta.  —Lenin
 



[7]
The Information Bulletin of the Technical Commission Abroad
was published in Paris, two issues appearing (in August and
October 1911). The conciliators made it their factional organ, in which
they conducted an unscrupulous struggle against Bolshevism.





[8]
This school was held in Capri, in 1909, and was the factional centre of
the otzovists; it was organised by A. A. Bogdanov.





[9]
Ionov (F. M. Koigen)—one of the Bund leaders.





[10]
Lenin is referring to the resolution “On Liquidationism” adopted by
the “Conference of Transcaucasian Social-Democratic Organisations”, which
was really a conference of Caucasian liquidators. The anti-Party nature of
the “conference” was exposed in correspondence published in No. 24 of
Sotsial-Demokrat of October 18 (31), 1911.





[11]
Rabochaya Zhizn (Workers’ Life)—a monthly
newspaper, organ of the Menshevik Golos group and the
conciliators. It was published in Paris from February 21 (March 6) to
April 18 (May 1), 1911.  Three issues appeared.





[12]
Hermann—K. K. Danishevsky,

Arkady—F. I. Kalinin.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Election Campaign and the Election Platform









Lenin: The Election Campaign and the Election Platform







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Election Campaign and the Election Platform




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 24, October 18 (31), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 278-286.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The elections to the Fourth Duma are due to be held next
year. The Social-Democratic Party must launch its election campaign at
once. In view of these forthcoming elections a “livening-up” of
all parties is already noticeable. The first phase of the period of
counter-revolution has obviously come to an end. Last year’s
demonstrations, the student movement, the famine in the countryside, and,
last but not least, the strike wave, are all unmistakable symptoms showing
that a turn has set in, that we are at the beginning of a new phase of the
counter-revolution. Intensified propaganda, agitation, and organisation are
on the order of the day, and the forthcoming elections provide a natural,
inevitable, topical “pretext” for such work.

[It should be noted in parentheses that those who, like the small
Vperyod group among the Social-Democrats, are still hesitant with
regard to these elementary truths which have been fully corroborated by
reality, by experience, and by the Party, those who maintain that
“otzovism” is a “legitimate shade of opinion” (Vperyod, No. 3,
May 1911, p. 78), thereby forfeit every claim to be regarded in
any way as a serious tendency or trend in the Social-Democratic movement.]


To begin with—a few remarks about the organisation and conduct of the
election campaign. In order to launch it at once, it is necessary
for the illegal nuclei of the R.S.D.L.P. to start work immediately
on their own initiative throughout the country, in all and sundry
legal and semi-legal organisations, in all the big factories, among all
sections and groups of the population. We must look sad reality straight in
the face. In most places there are no strictly

    

defined Party organisations at all. There is the working-class vanguard,
which is devoted to Social-Democracy. There are isolated individuals, and
there are small groups. Therefore the first task of all Social-Democrats is
to take the initiative in organising nuclei (a word excellently expressing
the idea that the objective conditions call for the formation of small,
very flexible groups, circles, and organisations); it is the task of
all Social-Democrats, even where there are only two or three of
them, to gain some “foothold”, establish connections of one kind or
another, and start work that is systematic even if very modest.  

In view of the present situation in our Party, there is nothing more
dangerous than the tactics of “waiting” for the time when an influential
centre will, have been formed in Russia. All Social-Democrats know that the
work of forming such a centre is going on, that everything
possible toward this end has been done by those who are primarily
responsible for this work; but all Social-Democrats must also be aware of
the incredible difficulties created by the police—they must not lose
heart at the first, second or third failure!—and all should know that
when such a centre has been formed, it will take it a long time to
establish reliable connections with all the local organisations, and the
centre will have to confine itself to general political guidance
for some considerable time. There must be no delay in the organisation of
local nuclei of the R.S.D.L.P., nuclei that will act on their own
initiative in a strictly Party spirit, function illegally, start at once on
the preparatory work for the elections, and immediately take every possible
step to develop propaganda and agitation (illegal printing-presses,
leaflets, legally published organs, groups of “legally functioning”
Social-Democrats, transport facilities, etc., etc.)—any delay
would jeopardise the whole work.  

The principal question for Social-Democrats who value the elections
primarily as a means for the political enlightenment of the people, is, of
course, the ideological and political content of all the propaganda and
agitation to be carried on in Connection with them. That is what is meant
by an election platform. To every party at all worthy of the name a
platform is something that has existed long before the elections; it is not
something specially devised “for the

    

elections”, but an inevitable result of the whole work of the
party, of the way the work is organised, and of its whole trend in the
given historical period. And the R.S.D.L.P., too, already has a platform;
its platform already exists and has been naturally and inevitably
determined by the Party’s principles and by the tactics which the Party has
already adopted, has already applied, and is still
applying, during the entire period in the political life of the nation
which in a certain respect is always “summed up” by elections. The
platform of the R.S.D.L.P. is the sum total of the work which
revolutionary Marxism and the sections of the advanced workers who remained
faithful to it have accomplished in the 1908–11 period, the period of the
orgy of counter revolution, the period of the June Third, Stolypin regime.


The three main items that make up this total are: (1) the programme of
the Party; (2) its tactics; (3) its appraisal of the dominant-ideological
and political trends of the given period, or the most widespread of them,
or those which are most harmful for democracy and socialism. Without a
programme a party cannot be an integral political organism capable of
pursuing its line whatever turn events may take. Without a tactical line
based on an appraisal of the current political situation and providing
explicit answers to the “vexed problems” of our times, we might have a
circle of theoreticians, but not a functioning political entity. Without an
appraisal of the “active”, current or “fashionable” ideological and
political trends, the programme and tactics may degenerate into dead
“clauses” which can by no stretch of the imagination be put into effect
or applied to the thousands of detailed, particular, and highly specific
questions of practical activity with the necessary understanding of
essentials, with an understanding of “what is what”.  

As for the ideological and political trends typical of the 4908-11
period and of particular importance for a proper understanding of the tasks
of Social-Democracy, the most prominent among them are the Vekhi
trend, which is the ideology of the counter-revolutionary liberal
bourgeoisie (an ideology fully in line with the policy of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party, no matter what its diplomats say), and
liquidationism, which is the expression of the same decadent and
bourgeois influences in a group which has contact with

    

the working-class movement. Away from democracy, as far away as possible
from the movement of the masses, as far away as possible from the
revolution, that is the theme of the trends of political thought that hold
sway in “society”. As far away as possible from the illegal Party, from
the tasks of the hegemony of the proletariat in the struggle for
liberation, from the tasks of championing the revolution, that is the theme
of the Vekhi trend among the Marxists, the trend that has built a
nest for itself in Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni. No
matter what is said by narrow-minded practical workers or by people who
wearily turn away from the difficult struggle for revolutionary Marxism in
our difficult epoch, there is not a single question of “practical
activity”, not a single question of the illegal or legal work of
the Social-Democratic Party in any sphere of its activity, to which the
propagandist or agitator could give a clear and complete answer, unless he
understood the full profundity and significance of these “trends of
thought” typical of the Stolypin period.  

Very often it may be useful, and sometimes even essential, to give the
election platform of Social-Democracy a finishing touch by adding a brief
general slogan, a watch word for the elections, stating the most cardinal
issues of current political practice, and providing a most Convenient and
most immediate pretext, as well as subject matter, for comprehensive
socialist propaganda. In our epoch only the following three points can make
up this watchword, this general slogan: (1) a republic; (2) confiscation of
all landed estates, and (3) the eight-hour day.  

The first point is the quintessence of the demand for political
liberty. In expressing our Party’s stand on questions of this nature, it
would be wrong to confine ourselves to the term political liberty or some
other term such as “democratisation”, etc., wrong because our propaganda
and agitation must consider the experience of the revolution. The
dissolution of two Dumas, the organisation of pogroms, support for the
Black-Hundred gangs and clemency for the heroes of the Black Hundreds,
Lyakhov’s exploits in

Persia,[1] the coup d’état of June 3, and a number of further
“minor coups d’état” which followed it (Article 87, etc.)—is a
far from complete record of the deeds of our monarchy

    

as represented by Romanov, Purishkevich, Stolypin and Co. Situations do
arise and have arisen in history, when it has been possible for a monarchy
to adapt itself to serious democratic reforms, such, for instance, as
universal suffrage. Monarchy in general is not uniform and immutable. It is
a very flexible institution, capable of adapting itself to the various
types of class rule. But it would be playing fast and loose with the
requirements of historical criticism and treachery to the cause of
democracy if one were to proceed from these indisputable abstract
considerations and draw conclusions from them with regard to the actual
Russian monarchy of the twentieth century.  

The situation in our country and the history of our state power,
particularly during the past decade, clearly show us that none other than
the tsarist monarchy is the centre of the gang of Black-Hundred landowners
(with Romanov at their head) who have made Russia a bogey not only for
Europe, but now even for Asia—the gang which has developed tyranny,
robbery, venality of officials, systematic acts of violence against the
“common herd”, the persecution and torture of political opponents, etc.,
to the inordinate dimensions we know today. Since this is the real
face, the real economic basis and political physiognomy of our
monarchy, to make the demand for, say, universal suffrage the central issue
in the struggle for political liberty would not be so much opportunism as
sheer nonsense. Since it is a question of choosing a central issue to be
made the general slogan of the elections, the various democratic demands
must be arranged in some sort of likely perspective and proportion. After
all, one might only raise laughter among educated persons and create
confusion in the minds of the uneducated if one were to demand of
Purishkevich that he behave decently toward women and that he should
realise the impropriety of using “unprintable” language, or if one were
to demand tolerance of

Illiodor,[2] altruism and honesty of Gurko and Reinbot, respect for
law and order of Tolmachov and Dumbadze, and democratic reforms of Nicholas
Romanov!  

Consider the question from, so to speak, the general historical
standpoint. It is obvious (to all, except Larin and a handful of
liquidators) that the bourgeois revolution in Russia has not been
consummated. Russia is heading for

    

a revolutionary crisis. We must prove that revolution is necessary
and preach that it is legitimate and “beneficial”. This being the case,
we must conduct our propaganda for political liberty so as to pose the
question in all its aspects, formulate the goal for a movement that is bent
on victory and not one that stops half-way (as was the case in 1905); we
must issue a slogan capable of arousing enthusiasm among the masses who can
no longer endure life as it is in Russia, who suffer because they are
ashamed of being Russians, and are striving for a really free and really
renewed Russia. Consider the question from the standpoint of practical
propaganda. You cannot help making clear even to the most benighted muzhik
that the state must be governed by a Duma which is more freely elected than
the First Duma, by a Duma elected by the whole people. But how are we to
ensure that the Duma cannot be dispersed? Only the destruction of the
tsarist monarchy can guarantee this.  

It may be objected that to issue the slogan of a republic as the
watchword of the entire election campaign would mean precluding the
possibility of conducting it legally, and thereby show that recognition of
the importance and necessity of legal work is not seriously intended. Such
objections, however, would be sophisms, worthy of the liquidators. We
cannot legally advocate a republic (except from the restrum of the Duma, from which republican propaganda
can and should be carried on fully within the bounds of legality);
but we can write and speak in defence of democracy in such a way
that we do not in the least condone ideas about the compatibility of
democracy with the monarchy; in such a way as to refute and
ridicule the liberal and Narodnik monarchists; in such a way as to
make sure that the readers and the audiences form a clear idea of the
connection between the monarchy, precisely as a monarchy, and the despotism
and arbitrary rule reigning in Russia. Russians have gone through a long
school of slavery—they have learnt to read between the lines and add what
the speaker has left unsaid. “Do not say ‘I can’t’—say ‘I
shan’t’”—that is the reply we must give Social-Democrats who
are working legally, should they plead that it is “impossible” to make
the demand for a republic a central point in our propaganda and agitation.

 

It is hardly necessary to dwell at particular length on the importance
of the demand for the confiscation of all landed estates. At a time when
the Russian villages never cease groaning under the burden of the Stolypin
“reform”, when an extremely fierce struggle is going on between the mass
of the population on the one hand and the “new land owners” and the rural
police on the other, and when, according to the testimony of extremely
conservative people hostile to the revolution, bitterness such as has never
before been seen is making itself felt ever more strongly—at such a time
the demand must be made a central plank of the whole democratic
election platform. We shall only point out that this is the very demand
that will draw a clear line of demarcation between consistent proletarian
democracy and not only the landlord liberalism of the Cadets, but also the
intellectual-bureaucratic talk about “standards “consumption standards”,
“production standards”, “equalitarian distribution”, and similar
nonsense, of which the Narodniks are so fond, and at which every sensible
peasant laughs. For us it is not a question of “how much land does the
muzhik need”; the Russian people need to confiscate the entire
land of the landowners, so as to throw off the yoke of feudal oppression in
the entire economic and political life of the country. Unless this
measure is carried out, Russia will never be free, and the Russian peasant
will never eat anything like his fill, nor will he ever be truly literate.


The third point—the eight-hour day—stands even less in need of
comment. The counter-revolutionary forces are frantically robbing the
workers of the gains of 1905; and all the more intense, therefore, is the
struggle of the workers for better working and living conditions, chief
among which is the introduction of the eight-hour day.  

To sum up, the substance and mainspring of the Social-Democratic
election platform can be expressed in three words: for the
revolution! Shortly before his death Lev Tolstoi said—in a tone of
regret typical of the worst aspects of “Tolstoi-ism”—that the Russian
people had “learned how to make a revolution” all too quickly. We regret
only the fact that the Russian people have not learned this science
thoroughly enough, for without it they may remain the slaves of
the Purishkeviches for many centuries to come. It is

    

true, however, that the Russian proletariat, in its striving to achieve the
complete transformation of society on socialist lines, has given the
Russian people in general, and the Russian peasants in particular,
indispensable, lessons in this science. Neither the gallows
erected by Stolypin, nor the efforts of Vekhi, can make them
forget these lessons. The lesson has been given, it is being assimilated,
it will be repeated.  

The basis of our election platform is the programme of the R.S.D.L.P.,
our old programme of revolutionary Social-Democracy. Our programme gives a
precise formulation of our socialist aims, of the ultimate goal of
socialism; and it is a formulation, moreover, which is particularly
emphatic in its opposition to opportunism and reformism. At a time when in
many countries, including our own, reformism is raising its head and when,
on the other hand, there is a growing number of indications that in the
most advanced countries the period of so-called “peaceful
parliamentarianism” is drawing to a close and a period of revolutionary
unrest among the masses is setting in—at such a time our old programme
assumes even greater significance (if that is possible). With regard to
Russia the programme of the R.S.D.L.P. sets the Party the immediate aim of
“over throwing the autocratic tsar and establishing a democratic
republic”. The special sections of our programme dealing with the
questions of government, finances, and labour legislation, and with the
agrarian question, provide exact and definite material to guide the
entire work of every propagandist and agitator, in all its many
aspects; they should enable him to particularise on our election platform
in speaking before any audience, on any occasion, and on any subject.  

The tactics of the R.S.D.L.P. during the period of 1908–11 have been
determined by the resolutions adopted in December 1908. Endorsed
by the Plenary Meeting held in January 1910, and tested by the
experience of the whole “Stolypin period”, these resolutions provide
an exact appraisal of the situation and of the tasks dictated by that
situation. Just as before, the old autocracy is still the main enemy; just
as before, a revolutionary crisis is inevitable, and Russia is again
heading for such a crisis. But the situation is not the same as before;
autocracy has taken “a step in the transformation into a bourgeois
monarchy”; it is trying to strengthen

    

feudal landed proprietorship by a new, bourgeois agrarian policy; it is
trying to arrange alliances between the feudal-minded landowners and the
bourgeoisie in the reactionary and servile Duma; it is making use of
widespread counter revolutionary (Vekhi) sentiments among the
liberal bourgeoisie. Capitalism has advanced a few steps, class
contradictions have sharpened, the split between the democratic elements
and the Vekhi type liberalism of the Cadets has become more
pronounced, and the activity of the Social-Democrats has extended to new
spheres (the Duma and “legal opportunities”), which enables them to
broaden the scope of their propaganda and agitation despite the
counter-revolution and even though the illegal organisations have been
badly “battered”. The old revolutionary tasks and the old, tested methods
of revolutionary mass struggle, that is what our Party champions in this
period of disorganisation and disintegration, when it is often necessary
“to start from the beginning”, when, in view of the changed
circumstances, it is necessary to resort not only to old methods, but also
to conduct the work of preparation and gather forces for the impending
period of new battles in a new way, and by new methods.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lyakhov, V. P.—colonel in the tsarist army, was in command
of the Russian troops that suppressed the revolutionary movement in Persia
in 1908.





[2]
Monk Illiodor (S. M. Trufanov, born 1889)—one of the leaders
of the Black Hundreds.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (October 18, 1911)









Lenin: From the Camp of the Stolypin 'Labour' Party (October 18, 1911)







V. I.  

      Lenin
From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (October 18, 1911)




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 24, October 18 (31), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 287-291.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Nos. 6, 7, and 8 of Nasha Zarya are in the main
devoted to the election campaign and the election platform. In the articles
dealing with these subjects the essence of the liquidators’ views is
concealed behind an extraordinary number of inordinately inflated,
laboured, high-sounding phrases about “the fighting mobilisation of the
proletariat”, “the widespread and open mobilisation of the masses”,
“political mass organisations of independent active workers”, “self
governing groups”, “class-conscious workers”, etc., etc. Yuri Chatsky
even went so far as to declare that the platform must be a “product” not
only of “deep thought” but also of “keen feeling”.... These phrases,
which, doubtlessly, arouse the enthusiasm of high-school boys and girls,
are in tended to stun the readers, to “produce a smoke-screen”, so as to
make it easier for the writers to smuggle in their contraband.  

Mr. Yuri Chatsky, for instance, extols the significance of a platform
and the importance of having a single platform. “We attach the greatest
importance,” he writes, “to the sanction [of the platform] by the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma; but at the same time we absolutely
insist on the condition that the latter does not follow the line of least
resistance by sanctioning a platform imposed upon it by circles abroad.”


These are the words as they appear in print. Nor are they printed in a
Black-Hundred publication which specialises in Jew and émigré
baiting, but in a “Social-Democratic” magazine! How low these gentlemen
must have fallen if, instead of explaining the difference in principle
between their platform and the platform of “circles abroad”,
they raise a howl against those abroad!  
 

Yuri Chatsky goes about it so clumsily that he betrays the name of the
circle on whose behalf he is pursuing his liquidationist line. “The
element of possible centralisation,” he writes, “is the group of
Social-Democratic [?] functionaries who are closely connected with the open
workers’ movement [you mean, through Nasha Zarya, don’t you?] and
are acquiring ever greater stability... [and an ever more pronounced
liberal appearance].... We refer particularly to St. Petersburg.”...  

Why not speak out more plainly, gentlemen! It is unbecoming and foolish
to play here at blind-man’s-buff; when you speak of “the element of
centralisation”, or simply the centre (of liquidationism), you mean, and
properly so, the group of contributors to the St. Petersburg Nasha
Zarya. The truth will out.  

L. Martov is trying to hide the truth by paraphrasing those postulates
of the Social-Democratic programme that are legal and offering them as the
basis for an election platform. Nor does he spare fine words to the effect
that we need not “renounce” or “curtail” anything. He says this on
page 48 of No. 7–8. But on page 54, in the concluding paragraph of his
article, we read: 

“We [? apparently Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni] must
conduct the entire election campaign under the banner [sic!] of
the struggle of the proletariat for the freedom of its political
self-determination, of the struggle for its right to have a class party of
its own and to develop its activities freely, for the right to take part in
political life as an independent organised force. This principle must
govern both the content and tactics of the election campaign and the
methods to be used for organisational work.”  

What a splendid exposition of a liberal labour platform! A
worker Social-Democrat will “conduct the campaign under the banner” of
the struggle for the freedom of the whole people, for a democratic
republic. A worker who is a liberal is fighting “for the right to have a
class party [in the Brentano, social-liberal sense] of its own”. To make
this the governing principle means betraying the democratic cause. The
liberal bourgeois and the astute agents of the government desire nothing
better than that the workers should fight for the freedom of their
“political self-determination”,

    

but not for the freedom of the whole country. Martov has merely paraphrased
Levitsky’s formula: “Not the hegemony of the proletariat, but a class
party”! Martov has formulated a slogan of pure “Neo-Economism”. The
Economists said that the workers should confine themselves to the economic
struggle, leaving the political struggle to the liberals. The
Neo-Economists, the liquidators, say that the whole content of the election
campaign should be subordinated to the principle: the struggle of the
workers for the right to have a class party of their own.  

Is Martov aware of the import of these words of his? Does he realise
that they imply the renunciation of the revolution by the
proletariat?—“liberal gentlemen, in 1905 we opposed you and roused the
masses in general, and the peasants in particular, to revolution, we fought
for the freedom of the people in spite of liberal efforts to halt the
movement, to confine it to the achievement of semi-freedom. From now on we
will no longer allow ourselves to be ‘carried away’; we will fight for the
freedom of the workers to have a class party of their own”. That is
actually all the Vekhi-type, counter-revolutionary liberals
(cf. particularly the writings of Izgoyev) demand of the workers. The
liberals do not deny the workers’ right to have a class party of their
own. What they do deny is the “right” of the proletariat, which is the
only consistently revolutionary class, to rouse the masses of the
people to the struggle in spite of and even against the liberals.  

Vowing not to “renounce” and not to “curtail”, Martov has so
curtailed the Social-Democratic platform as to fully satisfy
Larin, Potresov, Prokopovich, and Izgoyev.  

See how Martov criticises the resolution of the Party on tactics
(adopted in December 1908). With regard to the phrase—“a step in the
transformation into a bourgeois monarchy”—he says that it is “an
unfortunate formula”, for “it fails to account for the actual step
back toward division of power between the protagonists of
absolutism and the landowning nobility”, and “it takes no account of the
decisive collision between classes”—meaning, apparently, between the
bourgeois liberals and the feudal-minded land owners! Martov forgets that
in 1905–07 the liberal bourgeois feared a “decisive collision”
with the feudal landowners,

    

preferring a “decisive collision” with the workers and peas ants (just as
the liberals forget about this and accuse the workers of
“excesses”). Martov sees the “step back” of autocracy toward the
feudal-minded landowners. (This step is explicitly mentioned in
the resolution of the Party in the words: “... to preserve the power and
revenue of the feudal-minded landowners”.) But Martov jails to
see the “step back” taken by the liberal bourgeois from
democracy to “law and order”, to the monarchy, to a rapprochement with
the landowners. Martov fails to see the connection between The
“step towards a bourgeois monarchy” and the counter
revolutionary character of the liberal bourgeoisie with its Vekhi
mentality. He fails to see it because he is himself “a Vekhi
advocate among Marxists”. Like a liberal who dreams of a “decisive
collision” between the liberal bourgeois and the feudal-minded landowners,
he throws over board the historic reality of the revolutionary
collision between the workers and peasants on the one hand and the
feudal-minded landowners on the other, notwithstanding the
vacillations of the liberals, notwithstanding even their desertion to the
party of law and order.  

Here, too, we get the same result: Martov rejects the resolution of the
Party from the viewpoint of a liberal labour policy, but,
unfortunately, he does not oppose it by any resolution of his own on
tactics (although he is compelled to admit that tactics must be based on an
appraisal of “the historical meaning of the June Third period”!).  

It is therefore quite obvious why Martov writes: “The workers’ party
should strive ... to prevail upon the proper tied classes to take one step
or another toward the democratisation of legislation and an extension of
constitutional guarantees...”. Every liberal concedes that it is quite
legitimate for the workers to strive “to prevail upon the proper tied
classes” to take one step or another; all that the liberal stipulates
is that the workers should not dare to prevail upon the
non-propertied to take “steps” which are not to the
liberals’ liking. The entire policy of the British liberals, who
have so profoundly corrupted the British workers, is to allow the workers
to try “to prevail upon the propertied classes”, but not to allow the
workers to win for themselves the leadership of a movement of the
whole people.  
 

Similarly it is quite obvious why Chatsky, Martov, and Dan hate the
tactics of a “Left bloc”. They see in it not just a “Left bloc” for the
elections, but the general tactics established by the London
Congress—to wrest the peasants (and the petty bourgeois in
general) away from the influence of the Cadets and compel the
Narodnik groups to choose between the Constitutional-Democrats and
the Social-Democrats. To reject these tactics Is tantamount to
renouncing democracy. Only Stolypinite Social-Democrats could fail
to see this today, after the “Stolypin period”, after the
exploits of the “Stolypin liberalism of the Cadets” (Milyukov’s London
slogan—“His Majesty’s Opposition”!), after the publication of
Vekhi 

There should be no illusions—we have two election platforms,
that is a fact. It is a fact that cannot be argued away by
phrase-mongering, lamentations, wishes. One is the platform explained
above, based on the decisions of the Party. The other is the Potresov-Larin
platform, developed and supplemented by Levitsky, Yuri Chatsky and Co., and
touched up by Martov. The latter platform, which claims to be
Social-Democratic is actually the platform of a liberal labour
policy.  

Anyone who fails to understand the difference, the irreconcilable
difference, between these two platforms of working-class policy
cannot conduct the election campaign intelligently. He is sure to
be haunted at every step by disappointments, “misunderstandings”, and
comic or tragic mistakes.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Grand Total




Lenin: The Grand Total






V. I. Lenin
The Grand Total




Published:
Zvezda, No. 26, October 23, 1911.

      Signed: V. F..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 292-296.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The controversy between Witte and Guchkov was eagerly
seized upon by both Rech and Russkiye Vedomosti, who made
use of it in their election campaign. The nature of the controversy is
evident from the following tirade in Rech: 


   “How often the Octobrist fraternity, with Guchkov at their head,
   joined hands with Mr. Durnovo’s colleagues in order to please the powers
   that be. How often, with their eyes riveted on the powers that be, did
   they turn their backs on public opinion!”  


This is written because in October and November 1905 Witte conferred
with Messrs. Urusov, Trubetskoi, Guchkov, and M. Stakhovich regarding the
formation of a Cabinet, and the three last-mentioned were categorically
opposed to Durnovo’s candidature for the post of Minister of the Interior.


While reproaching the Octobrists, the Cadet gentlemen, however, reveal
an amazingly poor memory about their own past. The Octobrists “joined
hands with Mr. Durnovo’s colleagues”. That is true. And it goes to prove,
beyond any doubt, that it would be ridiculous to talk about the democratic
nature of the Octobrists. The Octobrists lay no claim to democracy. But the
Cadets call themselves “Constitutional-Democrats”. Were not these
“democrats” who, in the person of Mr. Urusov, supported Durnovo’s
candidature at the conferences with Witte, among those who “joined hands
with Mr. Durnovo’s colleagues”? Weren’t the Cadets, as a party, in the
First and Second Dumas among those who, “with their eyes riveted on the
powers that be, turned their backs on public opinion”?  

How can one forget or try to distort facts that are generally known?
Recall the discussion in the First Duma on the organisation of local land
committees. It was precisely
    

“to please the powers that be” that the Cadets opposed this. On this
issue (one of the most important political issues in the period of the
First Duma) the Cadets were definitely among those who, “with their eyes
riveted on the powers that be, turned their backs on public opinion”. For
the Trudoviks and the worker deputies, who represented nine-tenths of
Russia’s population, were at that time in favour of local land
committees. A similar division of the parties in the First and Second Dumas
was observed on scores of other occasions as well.  

It is hard to imagine how the Cadets could dispute these facts. Can
they really assert that they did not disagree with the Trudoviks and the
worker deputies in the First and Second Dumas, or that in all those cases
they did not go hand in hand with the Heydens, the Octobrists, and the
powers that be? Or that the Trudoviks and the worker deputies, because of
the existing electoral system, did not represent the vast majority of the
population? Or by public opinion do our “democrats” mean the opinion of
the “educated public” (educated in the sense of possessing official
diplomas), but not the opinion of the majority of the population?  

An historical appraisal of the period during which Stolypin held the
post of Prime Minister, i.e., the five years from 1906 to 1911, provides
incontrovertible proof that neither the Octobrists nor
the Cadets were democrats. And since only the Cadets claim this title, it
is precisely their self-deception, and their deception of “public
opinion”, of the opinion of the masses on this score, that is particularly
obnoxious and harmful.  

We do not mean to imply, of course, that the Octobrists and the Cadets
represent “one reactionary mass”, or that the Octobrists are not less
liberal than the Cadets. What we do mean to tell them is that liberalism
and democracy are two different things. It is natural for liberals to
regard as “public opinion” the opinion of the bourgeoisie, but not that
of the workers and peasants. A democrat cannot accept that point of view,
and whatever illusions he may at times entertain regarding the interests
and aspirations of the masses, the democrat has faith in the
masses, in the action of the masses, in the legitimacy of their
sentiments and the expediency of their methods of struggle.  
 

The greater the abuse of the name of democrat, the more insistently
must this difference between liberalism and democracy be borne in mind. In
all bourgeois countries elections serve as a means of gaining publicity for
the bourgeois parties. From the working-class point of view, elections and
the election campaign must serve the aim of political enlightenment, of
bringing out the true nature of the various parties. Political
parties cannot be judged by their names, declarations or programmes; they
must be judged by their deeds.  

The controversy between Witte and Guchkov, which touched upon the
question of how Stolypin was started on his ministerial career
(incidentally, Guchkov testifies that in the autumn of 1905 none
of the “public figures” objected to Stolypin’s candidature), raises a
number of other, much more important and pertinent, questions.  

The first time Stolypin was mentioned as candidate for the post of
Minister of the Interior (in the autumn of 1905) was at a conference Witte
held with representatives of the liberal bourgeoisie. Even during the
period of the First Duma, Stolypin, in his capacity of Minister of the
Interior, “on two occasions, with Kryzhanovsky acting as intermediary,
... made overtures to Muromtsev, proposing to discuss the possibility of
forming a Cadet Cabinet”. That is what Rech wrote in an editorial
on September 6, prefacing this statement with the cautious and evasive
reservation that “there are indications” that Stolypin did act in that
way. It is sufficient to recall that the Cadets had previously either
maintained silence on this score, or met any such “indications “with
abuse. Now they themselves refer to these indications, thereby obviously
confirming their accuracy.  

Let us go further in this matter. After the dissolution of the First
Duma, when Stolypin became Prime Minister, direct offers to join the
Cabinet were made to Heyden, Lvov, and M. Stakhovich. After the failure
of this “combination”, “P. A. Stolypin, during the first interim between
two Dumas, established intimate political connections with Guchkov”, and,
as we know, these connections were maintained up to 1911.  

What is the sum total of all this? Stolypin’s candidature for the post
of Minister was discussed with the representatives

    

of the bourgeoisie; then, during his entire ministerial career, from 1906
to 1911, Stolypin made “overtures” to one set of representatives of the
bourgeoisie after another, initiating, or trying to initiate, political
relations first with the Cadets, then with the Party of Peaceful
Renovation, and, finally, with the Octobrists. First Stolypin, as candidate
for the post of Minister, was “proposed” to the “public figures”, i.e.,
to the leaders of the bourgeoisie; then Stolypin—during the whole of
his career in his capacity as Minister—made “overtures” to the
Muromtsevs, Heydens, and Guchkovs. Stolypin’s career came to an end (it is
a well-known fact that Stolypin’s resignation was imminent) when he had
exhausted the whole list of bourgeois parties and groups to whom
he could make “overtures”.  

The conclusion to be drawn from these facts is clear. If the Cadets and
the Octobrists are now wrangling over the question as to who was more
sycophantic in the negotiations about ministers or with ministers—Urusov
or Guchkov, Muromtsev or Heyden, Milyukov or Stakhovich and so on and so
forth—it is nothing but a petty squabble which only serves to distract
the attention of the public from a vital political question. This vital
question is obviously the necessity to understand the conditions and
meaning of that particular epoch in the history of the Russian political
regime, when ministers were compelled systematically to make “overtures”
to the leaders of the bourgeoisie, when ministers could find at
least some common ground with those leaders, a common ground for frequently
conducting negotiations. What is important is not the question as to who
was more sycophantic during those negotiations—X or Z—but, first, the
fact that the old landowning class could no longer rule without making
“overtures” to the leaders of the bourgeoisie; and,, secondly, that the
diehard landowner and the bourgeois found a common ground for
negotiations, and that common ground was their
counter-revolutionism.  

Stolypin was not merely a minister of the landowners who had
experienced the year 1905; no, he was also a minister during the period of
counter-revolutionary sentiments among the bourgeoisie, when the landowners
had to make overtures to them, and could make them because of their common
hatred for “nineteen-five”. These sentiments of the

    

bourgeoisie—even if we take only the Cadets, the most Left of the
“liberal” parties—were expressed in the sermons of Vekhi,
which showered abuse on democracy and the movement of the masses, and in
Milyukov’s “London” slogan, in the numerous unctuous speeches by
Karaulov, in the speech of Berezovsky the First on the agrarian question,
etc.  

It is this particular aspect of the matter that all our liberals, the
entire liberal press, and the liberal labour politicians tend to
forget. Yet this aspect of the matter is the most important; it explains
the historical distinction between the conditions under which landowners
were made governors and ministers in the nineteenth century or in the
beginning of the twentieth century, and those obtaining after
1905. In its altercation with Guchkov, the Cadet Rech writes
(September 30): “Russian society well remembers Octobrism’s record of
service”.  

Of course they do! The liberal public well remember the petty squabble
“between friends”—between the Urusovs and Milyukovs on the one hand and
the Heydens, Lvovs, and Guchkovs on the other. But Russian democracy in
general, and working-class democracy in particular, remember very
well the “record” of the entire liberal bourgeoisie, the
Cadets included; they remember very well that the great upheaval of 1905
drove the landowners and the landowners’ bureaucracy to seek the support of
the bourgeoisie, and that the bourgeoisie took advantage of its position in
a remark ably fitting manner: it fully agreed with the landowners that
local land committees are unnecessary—nay, harmful; and it differed from
them on an exceptionally vital question, truly a question of
principle—namely: Durnovo or Stolypin!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Two Centres









Lenin: Two Centres







V. I.  

      Lenin
Two Centres




Published:
Zvezda, No. 28, November 5, 1911.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 297-299.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The opening of the last session of the Third Duma
immediately raised the question as to the results of the work of that
body. One of the principal results maybe formulated in the words of
Rech, which recently stated in a leading article: 

“A number of votes recently taken in the Duma actually reflect the
domination of a ‘Left Centre’ in that body.... The real activity of the
Duma, that concerns the vital interests and demands of life, from the very
beginning of the session has invariably and systematically proceeded along
the lines of a Left Centre (non-existent, of course).”  

And, as if to catch out the Prime Minister himself, Rech
exclaims in a transport of rejoicing: “Mr. Kokovtsov did not hesitate [in
his first speech] to declare three times that he was fully in agreement
with the arguments of [the Cadet] Stepanov”.  

It is an indisputable fact that a “Left Centre” actually does
exist. Only, it is open to question whether this fact is a symptom of
“life” or of stagnation.  

From the very beginning there have been two possible majorities in the
Third Duma. As far back as the end of 1907, before this Duma began its
“activities”, the Marxist estimate of the situation and of the Third Duma
centred around the recognition of the existence of these “two possible
majorities” and their characterisation.  

One majority is the Black-Hundred and Right-Octobrist combination, the
other—that of the Octobrists and Cadets. The Third Duma was elected on
the basis of a law so devised as to produce these two possible
majorities. Our liberals pretend in vain that they do not see this.  
 

It was neither accident nor the, cunning calculation of individuals,
but the entire course of the class struggle in the 1905–07 period, that
forced the government to take this path, and no other. Events had shown
that it was impossible to bank on the mass of the population. Previously,
before the “events”, it had been possible to maintain the illusion of an
official “popular policy”, but that illusion had been shattered by the
events. It had become necessary to bank openly and cynically on one ruling
class—the class of the Purishkeviches and Markovs—and on the sympathy
or the fright of the bourgeoisie. The dominating tendency among some
sections of the bourgeoisie was an eager desire to render systematic
support (the Octobrists); among other sections it was sympathy for
so-called “law and order” or fright (the Cadets)—the difference was of
no material importance.  

The change referred to in the entire political system of
Russia was already indicated by the conversations which Witte, Trepov, and
Stolypin had conducted since the end of 1905 with Urusov, Trubetskoi,
Guchkov, Muromtsev, and Milyukov. This change became fully defined and
assumed a state-constitutional form in the Third Duma with its two possible
majorities.  

There is no need to dwell upon the reason why the present political
regime is in need of the first majority. But people are wont to forget that
it stands in just as much need of the second—that of the Octobrists and
the Cadets. Without the “bourgeois plaintiff” the government could not be
what it is. Unless it comes to terms with the bourgeoisie it cannot
exist. Without attempts to reconcile the Purishkeviches and Markovs with a
bourgeois system and with the bourgeois development of Russia, neither the
Ministry of Finance nor all the ministries combined can survive.  

And if today the “Left Centre”, despite its unassuming character,
proves to be dissatisfied, it testifies, of course, to the growing
conviction among the bourgeoisie as a whole that its sacrifices on
the altar of the Purishkeviches have been made in vain.  

But “the vital interests and demands of life” cannot be satisfied by
these lamentations and complaints of the “Left Centre”; they can only be
satisfied if all the forces of democracy are aware of the causes of the
impotence and wretched

    

position of the Centre. This is because the entire Centre, including the
Loft, is counter-revolutionary: the Purishkeviches make them groan but the
Centre will not and cannot dispense with them. That is why theirs
is such a bitter lot, that is why the Left Centre cannot boast a single
victory, not even a shred of a victory.  

The “Left Centre” of which Rech speaks, represents death and
not life—at decisive moments of Russian history, all those belonging to
it became scared of democracy and turned their backs on it. But the cause
of democracy is a live cause, the most vital in Russia.  

The vital interests and demands of life are asserting them selves in
spheres that are far removed from the “Left Centre” which occupies the
whole attention of the Cadets. On reading, for instance, the reports on the
Duma debate on the secret political police, the thoughtful reader naturally
could not help noticing that the presentation of the question in the
speeches of Pokrovsky the Second and, particularly, of Gegechkori, was
vastly different from that of Rodichev and his colleagues, as different as
earth and sky, as life and death.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Old and New (November 5, 1911)









Lenin: Old and New (November 5, 1911)







V. I.  

      Lenin
Old and New (November 5, 1911)
Notes of a Newspaper Reader




Published:
Zvezda, No. 28, November 5, 1911.

      Signed: V.F..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 300-303.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

You take up a batch of newspapers and at once you are
completely surrounded by the atmosphere of “old” Russia. You read of a
trial held in connection with a pogrom in Armavir: people beaten up with
the knowledge and complicity of the authorities; a trap set by the
authorities; “a massacre of the Russian intelligentsia in the broad sense
of the term suggested and ordered by someone” (the words of the plaintiff
in the civil suit). The old but ever new picture of Russian life, a bitter
ridicule of the “constitutional” illusions.  

Bitter, yet useful ridicule! For it is clear, and the young generation
in Russia realises it ever more clearly, that condemnations and resolutions
are of no avail. It is a question of the political system as a
whole. Historical truth is paving a way for itself through the haze of
deceptive dreams that it is possible to pour new wine into the old bottles.


Famine.... People selling cattle, selling girls; throngs of beggars,
typhus, death from starvation. “The population have but one privilege—to
die quietly and unobtrusively,” writes one correspondent.  

“The Zemstvo authorities, to put it bluntly, are scared that they may
find themselves, with their estates, surround ed by starved and embittered
people who have lost all hope of any improvement.” (A report from Kazan
Gubernia.)  

There can hardly be anything more docile than the present-day Zemstvos;
yet even they are wrangling with the government over the amount of credit
appropriations. They asked for 6,000,000 rubles (in Kazan Gubernia) and the
government gave them 1,000,000. They asked for 600,000 rubles (Samara) and
received 25,000!  
 

Everything as of old!  

At a Zemstvo meeting in Kholm

Uyezd,[1]

Pskov Gubernia, even rural superintendents opposed Zemstvo agronomical aid
intended only for farmers who had left the village commune! In the Kuban
area, at a gathering of Cossack village elders all present unanimously
opposed the Third Duma plan to make the peasants’ land allotments their
private property.  

In Tsaritsyn, the Uyezd Assembly resolved not to prose cute an elder
who had tortured a woman (“with the object of ascertaining the whereabouts
of a criminal”). The gubernia court rescinded that decision.  

In the neighbourhood of St. Petersburg, workers caught the manager of
Mr. Yakovlev’s factory, threw a sack over his head and dragged him towards
the Neva. The police dispersed the workers. Eighteen of them were arrested.


Small wonder therefore that, faced with such pictures of real life,
even Rech is obliged to speak of the “great humiliation of the
public”. And Mr. Kondurushkin, in his letters from Samara on the

       famine,[2]

complains: “Russian society seems to me as yielding as rubber, or
dough. It can be knead ed and pressed by word or deed. But as soon as it is
let alone, it resumes its shape as of old”.  


   “He, this Russian average citizen and intellectual, rich or poor,
   is unperturbed. But when people begin to ‘swell’ from hunger, he will
   then exult, and rejoice with tears in his eyes. When he sets out to
   render aid he will absolutely insist on doing so with tears in his eyes
   and ‘noble’ feelings in his breast. He will not miss the splendid
   opportunity to do something for the salvation of his soul. Without
   feelings and tears, work is not real work, nor is aid real aid. Unless
   there is an opportunity for him to shed tears, he will not think the
   cause worthy of his attention and will not lift a finger. No, he must
   first excite his emotions, make himself cry and blow his nose into a
   clean handkerchief. But stern calculation, a sound and sober realisation
   of state necessity—that is tedious, there is no soft
   moodiness in that.”  


To be sure, it is very much worth while preaching “sternness” in a
world of “dough” and “rubber”. Only our liberal does not notice
from what aspect he is doing his preaching;

    

“a sound and sober realisation of state necessity”—didn’t you copy that
from Menshikov, Mr. Kondurushkin? Is not such talk about state necessity
possible only where there is “dough” and “rubber”, only where there is
a soft and lachrymose moodiness? It is just because there are dough-like
people that the heralds of “sound and sober state necessity” feel so
confident.  

“Russian society is as yielding as rubber,” says Mr. Kondurushkin as
of old. There are different kinds of society. There was a time
when the word “society” included everything and covered everything, when
it implied the heterogeneous elements of the population that were waking to
conscious activity, and it was also taken to mean only the so-called
“educated” people. 

But it is in this very respect that things in Russia are no longer what
they used to be. At the time when we could speak of society in general, the
finest representatives of that society advocated stern struggle, not
“sound and sober realisation of state necessity”.  

But today we can no longer speak of “society” in general. A variety
of new forces have revealed themselves in old Russia. The old disasters,
like famine, etc., which, as of old, are again looming up in Russia,
accentuating the old questions, demand that we take stock of how these new
forces have manifested themselves during the first decade of the twentieth
century.  

“Society” is soft and lachrymose because of the impotence and
irresolution of the class towards which it gravitates, and to which
nine-tenths of it belong. The preaching of “stern calculation, a sound and
sober realisation of state necessity” serves but to justify the domination
of the “authorities” over this flabby society.  

The last decade, however, has brought forward elements of the
population who do not belong to “society” and are not distinguished by
softness and lachrymosity....  

Everything in Russia is “as of old”—at the top. But there is also
something new—at the bottom. He whom “the melancholy of the universal
Russian bleakness” helps to discern, find, and ascertain this hard new
element which is neither lachrymose nor dough-like, will be able to
discover the road that leads to deliverance from the old.  
 

But he who intersperses his lamentations about this melancholy with
talk about “sound and sober realisation of state necessity”, will surely
remain forever a component part of the “dough” that permits itself to be
“kneaded and pressed”. Such people are “kneaded and pressed” for the
sake of that very “sound and sober state necessity”—and it serves them
right.  

If, out of a hundred persons who are subjected to that operation, one
member of “society” grows hard, that will be a useful result. There will
be nothing good without demarcation.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See footnote to p. 88.—Ed.  

[2]
In the throes of “the melancholy of the universal Russian bleakness”.
—Lenin
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Speech Delivered in the Name of the R.S.D.L.P. at the Funeral of Paul and Laura Lafargue November 20 (December 3), 1911









Lenin: Speech Delivered in the Name of the R.S.D.L.P. at the Funeral of Paul and Laura Lafargue November 20 (December 3), 1911







V. I.  

      Lenin
Speech Delivered in the Name of the R.S.D.L.P. at The Funeral of Paul and Laura Lafargue November 20 (December 3), 1911




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 304-305.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Comrades, on behalf of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party I wish to convey our feelings of deep sorrow on the death of Paul
and Laura Lafargue. Even in the period of preparation for the Russian
revolution, the class-conscious workers and all Social-Democrats of Russia
learned profound respect for Lafargue as one of the most gifted and
profound disseminators of the ideas of Marxism, ideas that were so
brilliantly confirmed by the class struggle during the Russian revolution
and counter-revolution. United under the banner of those ideas, the
vanguard of the Russian workers waged an organised mass struggle and dealt
a blow to absolutism, it upheld, as it continues to uphold, the cause of
socialism, the cause of the revolution, the cause of democracy despite the
treachery, vacillation, and irresolution of the liberal bourgeoisie.  

For the Russian worker Social-Democrats Lafargue symbolised two eras:
the era in which the revolutionary youth of France, animated by republican
ideas, marched shoulder to shoulder with the French workers to attack the
Empire, and the era in which the French proletariat, under Marxist
leadership, waged a sustained class struggle against the en tire bourgeois
system and prepared for the final battle against the bourgeoisie to win
socialism.  

We, Russian Social-Democrats, who have experienced all the oppression
of an absolutism impregnated with Asiatic barbarity, and who have had the
good fortune, through the writings of Lafargue and his friends, directly to
draw on the revolutionary experience and revolutionary thought of

    

the European workers—we can now see with particular clarity how rapidly
we are nearing the triumph of the cause to which Lafargue devoted all his
life. The Russian revolution ushered in an era of democratic revolutions
throughout Asia, and 800 million people are now joining in the democratic
movement of the whole of the civilised world. In Europe, too, there are
increasing signs that the era of so-called peaceful bourgeois
parliamentarianism is drawing to an end, to give place to an era of
revolutionary battles by a proletariat that has been organised and educated
in the spirit of Marxist ideas, and that will overthrow bourgeois rule and
establish a communist system.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Hyndman on Marx









Lenin: Hyndman on Marx







V. I.  

      Lenin
Hyndman on Marx




Published:
Zvezda, No. 31, November 26, 1911.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 306-312.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The voluminous memoirs of one of the founders and leaders
of the British Social-Democratic Party, Henry Mayers Hyndman, have recently
been published. The book of nearly five hundred pages is entitled The
Record of an Adventurous

      Life[1]

and represents the reminiscences, written in lively fashion, of the
author’s political activity and of the “celebrities” he knew. Hyndman’s
book provides a great deal of interesting material for the characterisation
of British socialism and for an appraisal of certain important problems
affecting the entire international working-class movement.  

We therefore think it timely to devote a few articles to Hyndman’s
book, particularly in view of the fact that the Flight-wing Cadet
Russkiye Vedomosti published (on October 14) an article by the
liberal Dioneo, which provides an admirable example of how the liberals
throw light, or rather darkness, on these problems.  

Let us start with Hyndman’s reminiscences of Marx. Hyndman made his
acquaintance only in 1880, when ho apparently knew very little about Marx’s
teachings and about socialism in general. It is characteristic of British
relationships that, born in 1842, Hyndman, until the moment we are speaking
of, was a “democrat” of an indefinite hue who had contacts and sympathies
with the Conservative Party (Tories). Hyndman turned to socialism after
reading Capital (in the French translation) during one of his
numerous voyages to America between 1874 and 1880.  
 

Accompanied by Karl Hirsch, Hyndman, on his way to visit Marx, mentally
compared him to—Mazzini!  

The level at which Hyndman makes this comparison can be judged from the
fact that he describes Mazzini’s influence on those around him as
“personal and individually ethical”, and considered Marx’s influence to
be “almost wholly intellectual and scientific”. Hyndman went to Marx as
to a “supreme analytical genius” and was eager to learn from him; what
attracted him in Mazzini was his character and his “elevation of thought
and conduct”. But that Marx “was far the more powerful mind cannot be
disputed”. Nor can it be disputed that Hyndman very poorly understood in
1880 (and does not quite understand even now—but of that later) the
difference between a bourgeois democrat and a socialist.  


   “The first impression of Marx as I saw him,” writes
   Hyndman, “was that of a powerful, shaggy, untamed old man, ready; not
   to say eager, to enter into conflict, and rather suspicious himself of
   immediate attack. Yet his greeting to us was cordial and his first
   remarks to me, after I had told him what a great pleasure and honour I
   felt it to be to shake hands with the author of Capital, were
   agreeable enough; for he told me that he had read my articles on

India[2]

   with pleasure and had commented on them favourably in his newspaper
   correspondence.  

   “When speaking with fierce indignation of the policy
   of the Liberal Party, especially in regard to Ireland, the old warrior’s
   small deep-sunk eyes lighted up, his heavy brows wrinkled, the broad,
   strong nose and face were obviously moved by passion, and he poured out
   a stream of vigorous denunciation, which displayed alike the heat of his
   temperament and the marvellous command he possessed over our
   language. The contrast between his manner and utterance when thus deeply
   stirred by anger and his attitude when giving his views on the economic
   events of the period was very marked. He turned from the role of prophet
   and vehement denunciator to that of the calm philosopher without any
   apparent effort, and I felt from the first that on this latter ground
   many a long year might pass before I ceased to be a student in the
   presence of a master.  
 

   “I had been surprised in reading Capital, and still more
   when perusing his smaller works, such as is pronouncement on the Commune
   of Paris, and his Eighteenth Brumaire, how he combined the
   ablest and coolest examination of economic causes and social effects
   with the most bitter hatred of classes and even of individual men such
   as Napoleon III or M. Thiers, who, according to his own theories, were
   little more than flies upon the wheels of the great Juggernaut car of
   capitalist development. Marx, or course, was a Jew, and to me it seemed
   that he combined in his own person and nature, with his commanding
   forehead and great overhanging brow, his fierce glittering eyes, broad
   sensitive nose and mobile mouth, all surrounded by a setting of
   untrimmed hair and beard, the righteous fury of the great seers of his
   race, with the cold analytical powers of Spinoza and the Jewish
   doctors. It was an extraordinary combination of qualities, the like of
   which I have known in no other man.  

   “As I went out with Hirsch, deeply impressed by the great
   personality we had left, Hirsch asked me what I thought of
   Marx. ‘Well,’ I replied, ‘I think he is the Aristotle of the nineteenth
   century.’ And yet as I said it, I knew that this did not cover the
   ground. For one thing it was quite impossible to think of Marx as acting
   the courtier to Alexander (of Macedonia) while carrying on the profound
   studies which have so deeply influenced later generations, and besides
   he never so wholly segregated himself from immediate human
   interests—notwithstanding much that has been said to the contrary—as
   to be able to consider facts and their surroundings in the cold hard
   light of the greatest philosopher of antiquity. There can be no doubt
   what ever that his hatred of the system of exploitation and wage slavery
   by which he was surrounded was not only intellectual and philosophic but
   bitterly personal.  

   “I remember saying to him once that as I grew older, I thought I
   became more tolerant. ‘Do you,’ he said, ‘do you?’ It was quite
   certain he didn’t. It has been, I think, Marx’s deep animosity to the
   existing order of things and his scathing criticism of his opponents
   which has prevented many of the educated well-to-do class from
   appreciating his masterly life-work at its full value and has rendered
   third-rate sciolists and logomachers like Böhm-Bawerk, such heroes
   in their eyes, merely because they have misrepresented and attempted to
   ‘refute’ him. Accustomed as we are nowadays, especially in England, to
   fence always with big soft buttons on the point of our rapiers, Marx’s
   terrible onslaughts with naked steel upon his adversaries appeared so
   improper that it was impossible for our gentle manly sham fighters and
   mental gymnasium men to believe that this unsparing controversialist and
   furious assailant of capital and capitalists was really the deepest
   thinker of modern times.”  


In 1880 Marx was practically unknown to the British public. His health
was then failing. His strenuous exertions (sixteen hours a day and more of
mental labour!) had sapped his constitution. He was now forbidden by his
doctors to do any work in the evenings and, Hyndman relates, “at the

    

close of 1880 and the beginning of 1881, I had the advantage of very
frequent conversations with the Doctor”.  


   “Our method of talking was peculiar. Marx had a habit when at all
   interested in the discussion of walking actively up and down the room as
   if he were pacing the deck of a schooner for exercise. I had acquired on
   my long voyages (to America, Australia, etc.) the same tendency of
   pacing to and fro when my mind was much occupied. Consequently, master
   and student could have been seen walking u an down on opposite sides of
   the table for two or three hours in succession, engaged in discussing
   the affairs of the past and the present.”  


Hyndman does not give anything like a detailed account of the position
Marx took on even a single one of the questions he discussed with
him. From what is quoted above it can be seen that Hyndman concentrated
mostly, almost exclusively, indeed, on the anecdotal side; this is
in line with the rest of his book. Hyndman’s autobiography is the life
story of a British bourgeois philistine who, being the pick of his class,
finally makes his way to socialism, but never completely throws off
bourgeois traditions, bourgeois views and prejudices.  

While repeating the philistine reproaches against Marx and Engels that
they were “autocrats” in “what was sup posed to be a democratic”
International, that they did not understand practical affairs, did not know
people, etc., Hyndman never makes an attempt to test a single one of these
reproaches on the basis of an exact, concrete analysis of the circumstances
at the periods concerned.  

The result is anecdote and not Marxist historical analysis. Marx and
Engels fought against the unification of German Social-Democracy (with the

Lassalleans[3]), whereas this unity was necessary! That is all that
Hyndman says. He does not say a word about Marx and Engels having been a
thousand times right in principle in their opposition to Lassalle and the
Lassalleans. He does not even raise the question. He does not even ask
himself whether “democracy” (organisational) in the period of the
International was not a screen for bourgeois sects engaged in disrupting
the work of building up proletarian Social-Democracy.  

As a result, the story of Hyndman’s rupture with Marx is told in such a
way that we get absolutely nothing but

    

gossip (in the spirit of the Dioneos). Engels, you see, was “exacting,
suspicious, jealous”; Marx’s wife is alleged to have told Hyndman’s wife
that Engels was Marx’s “evil genius” (!); Engels, whom Hyndman never even
met (despite what Mr. Dioneo has written in Russkiye Vedomosti),
was “not disinclined to give full weight to the exchange value of his
ready cash in his relations with those whom he helped” (with money; Engels
was very rich, Marx very poor). Engels is said to have caused a quarrel
between Marx and Hyndman, out of fear that Hyndman, a wealthy man at that
time, would take Engels’s place as Marx’s rich friend!  

Of course, the liberals derive pleasure from rehashing such
inexpressible vulgarities. And of course if is not at all in the interests
of the liberal hacks at least to acquaint themselves with the letters (of
Marx and

Engels[4]) to Sorge, referred to by Hyndman himself, and to try and
understand the point at issue. They do not take the trouble to do
that!  And yet a reference to these letters and a comparison between them
and Hyndman’s “memoirs” would immediately settle the matter.  

In 1881 Hyndman published a pamphlet entitled England for All
in which he adopts socialism but remains a very, very confused bourgeois
democrat. The pamphlet was writ ten for the Democratic Federation (not
socialist) which had then been founded and to which a large number of
anti-socialist elements belonged. Hyndman paraphrases and copies from
Capital in two chapters of this pamphlet, but does not mention
Marx; however, in the preface he speaks vaguely of a certain “great
thinker” and “original writer” to whom he is greatly indebted,
etc. Hyndman tells us that it was over this that Engels caused a
“breach” between him and Marx, and at the same time quotes a letter Marx
had written to him (dated December 8, 1880), in which Marx says that,
according to Hyndman, he, Hyndman, “does not share the views of my
[Marx’s] party for England”.  

It is clear what the difference was—a difference not understood,
noticed, or appreciated by Hyndman. It was that Hyndman at that time (as
Marx plainly wrote to Sorge on December 15, 1881) was a “well-meaning,
petty-bourgeois writer”, “half-bourgeois, half-proletarian”. Obviously
if a man who makes the acquaintance of Marx, becomes

    

intimate with him, calls himself a student of his, later forms a
“democratic” federation and writes a pamphlet for it in which he
misrepresents Marxism and does not mention Marx, the latter could not let
it pass without making a “furious” protest. Evidently the protest was
made, for Marx in the same letter to Sorge quotes extracts from letters of
apology in which Hyndman excuses himself on the ground that “the English
don’t like to be taught by foreigners” and that “my [Marx’s] name was so
much detested” (!), etc. (Hyndman himself states that he destroyed nearly
all of Marx’s letters to him, so that the discovery of the truth from this
side is not to be expected.)  

Fine apologies, are they not! Well, at a time when the question of the
then existing differences between Hyndman and Marx has been cleared up
quite definitely, and when even the whole of Hyndman’s present book shows
that there is much of the philistine and bourgeois in his views (for
example, the arguments with which Hyndman defends capital punishment for
criminals!), what is offered as the explanation of his rupture with Marx is
the “intrigues” of Engels, who for forty years, followed a common line of
principle with Marx. Even if all the rest of Hyndman’s book were a barrel
of honey, this one spoonful of tar would be enough to spoil it!  

The differences between Marx and Hyndman at that time are most
characteristically revealed by what Hyndman tells us about Marx’s opinion
of Henry George. Marx’s appraisal of Henry George is known from his letter
to Sorge dated June 20, 1881. Talking with Marx, Hyndman defended Henry
George using the following argument: “George will teach more by
inculcating error than other men can impart by complete exposition of the
truth”.  

“Marx,” writes Hyndman, “would not hear of this as a sound
contention. The promulgation of error could never be of any good to the
people, that was his view. ‘To leave error unrefuted is to encourage
intellectual immorality. For ten who go farther, a hundred may very easily
stop with George, and the danger of this is too great to run!’”
That was what Marx said!  

Yet Hyndman tells us that, on the one hand. he still holds to his
previous opinion of Henry George, and that,

    

on the other hand, George was a boy with a bright farthing dip fooling
around within the radius of a man using an electric searchlight.  

An excellent comparison, only ... only it was risky for Hyndman to make
this excellent comparison side by side with his miserable gossip about
Engels.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
The Record of an Adventurous Life, by Henry Mayers Hyndman,
London (Macmillan & Co.), 1911.  —Lenin

[2]
Until he recently turned to jingoism, Hyndman was a determined enemy of
   British imperialism, and from 1878 carried on a noble campaign of
   exposure against the shameful acts of violence, outrage, plunder, and
   indignity (including the flogging of political “criminals”) for which
   Britishers of all parties in India, including the “educated” and
   “radical” author, John Morley, have long made themselves famous.
   —Lenin
 



[3]
Lassalleans—supporters of the German petty-bourgeois
socialist Ferdinand Lassalle (1825–1864), members of the General
Association of German Workers founded in 1863 at the Congress of Workers’
Organisations, held in Leipzig, to counterbalance the bourgeois
progressists who were endeavouring to gain influence over the working
class. The first Chairman of the Association was Lassalle, who formulated
its programme and tactics. The Association’s

   

political programme was the struggle for universal suffrage, and its
economic programme, the struggle for the workers’ production associations,
subsidised by the state. In their practical activities, Lassalle and his
followers adapted themselves to the hegemony of Prussia and supported the
Great-Power policy of Bismarck. “Objectively”, wrote Engels to Marx on
January 27, 1865, “this was a base action and a betrayal of the whole
working-class movement to the Prussians”. Marx and Engels frequently and
sharply criticised the theory, tactics, and organisational principles of
the Lassalleans as an opportunist trend in the German working-class
movement.





[4]
This refers to the letters, quoted below by Lenin, of Marx to Sorge of
June 20 and December 15, 1881.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto









Lenin: A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto








V. I.  

      Lenin
A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto




Published:
Zvezda, No. 32, December 3, 1911.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Printed according to the Zvezda text, verified with the text of the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism, 1914.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 313-324.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I
  313



II
  317



III
  321

 
 
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## I









Lenin: 1911/lilapman: I







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto



    
 
I

The above would be a fit title for N. R-kov’s article in
Nasha Zarya,

No. 9–1O.[1] 

Painful though it is for Marxists to lose in the person of N. R-kov, a
man who, in the years when the movement was on the upgrade served the
workers’ party faithfully and energetically, the cause must take precedence
over all personal or factional considerations, and over all recollections,
however “pleasant”. The interests of the cause compel us to admit that
thanks to the straightforwardness, clarity, and completeness of its views,
the manifesto of this new liquidator serves a very useful purpose. N. R-kov
enables and compels us to pose the extremely important and cardinal
question of “two parties” irrespective of any material relating
to the “conflict” and to do so on a purely ideological basis, largely
outside even the division into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks. After R-kov’s
article, liquidationism can no longer be discussed as formerly for
he has definitely raised the question to a higher plane. Further more,
after N. R-kov’s article, liquidationism cannot be merely
discussed; for what we have before us is the most comprehensive plan
imaginable of immediate practical action.  

N. R-kov begins with an exposition of the “principal objective task in
Russia”; he then passes on to an appraisal of the revolution, after which
he analyses the present situation and in this connection discusses every
class in clear and precise terms, and winds up with a quite explicit
description of the entire nature of the new “open political workers’
association”, which, he says, must be formed and “actually put into
effect” without delay. In short, R-kov

    

begins at the very beginning and by consecutive stages arrives at the very
end, as is to be expected of anyone who has any realisation of the serious
political responsibility he bears for his words and deeds. And it must be
said in fairness to R-kov that from beginning to end he most consistently
substitutes liberalism for Marxism.  

Take the starting-point of his arguments. He regards it as “absolutely
beyond doubt or dispute” that “the principal objective task in Russia at
present is the completion of the change from grossly predatory semi-feudal
economic practices to civilised capitalism”. In his opinion it is
debatable whether Russia has reached a position in which, “although the
possibility of social upheavals is not excluded, these upheavals are not
indispensable or inevitable in the near future 

We consider it to be absolutely beyond doubt or dispute that this is a
purely liberal way of presenting the question. The liberals confine
themselves to the question of whether we are going to have a “civilised
capitalism” or not, whether there are going to be “upheavals” or
not. The Marxist refuses to confine himself to this. He demands an analysis
that will show which classes, or strata of classes in the
bourgeois society that is emancipating itself, are pursuing this or that
definite line in this emancipation—what, for example, are the political
forms of the so-called “civilised capitalism” which they are
creating. Both in times of “upheaval” and during their undoubted absence,
Marxists pursue a line different in principle from liberalism—that of
creating truly democratic ways of life, not just “civilised” ways in
general. We are all striving for “civilised capitalism”, say the
liberals, posing as a party that stands above classes. We Marxists,
however, must tell the workers and democrats that our understanding of the
term “civilisation” differs from that of the liberals.  

R-kov presents us with an even more vivid and typically
“professorial” distortion of Marxism when he criticises the “superficial
observers” who “think that our revolution has failed”. “The weak-nerved
intelligentsia as a whole,” says R-kov, “has always and everywhere
indulged in snivelling and whining, followed by moral prostration,
renegacy, and mysticism.” The “thoughtful observer”, on the other hand,

    

knows that “the raging of reaction often expresses profound social
change”, that “new social groups and forces take shape and mature in the
epoch of reaction”.  

Thus reasons R-kov. In presenting the question of “renegacy” he has
managed to display so much philistinism (even though accompanied by learned
verbiage) that no trace is left of the connection between the
counter-revolutionary sentiments in Russia and the position and interests
of definite classes. Not a single Vekhi contributor,
i.e., the most rabid counter-revolutionary liberal, will dispute the fact
that new forces are maturing in the period of reaction; not a single
contributor to the liquidationist five-volume publication, which the best
of the Mensheviks turned away

from,[2] will refuse to subscribe to this. The actual face and the
class character of our counter-revolution have vanished from the arguments
of our historian, and only hackneyed and hollow phrases remain about some
intellectuals being weak-nerved while others are thoughtful
observers. R-kov failed to take notice of a question of the utmost
importance to a Marxist—namely, how our revolution demonstrated the
various methods of action and the various aspirations of the different
classes, and why this has given rise to a “renegade” attitude towards the
struggle for “civilisation” on the part of other bourgeois classes.  

Let us turn to the main issue—R-kov’s appraisal of the present
situation based on an estimate of the position of all the classes. He
begins with the “representatives of our big landowning class”, of whom he
says: “Not so long ago the bulk of them were [were!] real feudal
landowners, typical landed aristocrats. At present only a few of these last
Mohicans have survived. This small handful is still grouped around
Purishkevich and Markov the Second, and are impotently [!] spluttering the
venom of despair.... The majority of our big landowners, noblemen and
commoners, who are represented in the Duma by the Nationalists and the
Right Octobrists, are gradually and steadily being converted into an
agricultural bourgeoisie.”  

Such is R-kov’s “appraisal of the situation”. It is obvious that this
appraisal is a mockery of reality. In actual fact, the “handful
... grouped around Purishkevich and Markov the Second” are not powerless,
but all-powerful. It is precisely

    

their power and their revenue that the present social and political
institutions of Russia protect; it is their will that prevails in the last
analysis; it is they who constitute the element determining the entire line
of activity and the entire character of the so-called bureaucracy from top
to bottom. All this is so generally known, the actual domination in Russia
by this very handful is so striking and common, that it requires a truly
boundless liberal self-delusion to forget it. R-kov’s error is, first, in
ridiculously exaggerating the “conversion” of feudal economy into
bourgeois economy, and, secondly, in forgetting a “trifle”—just the
sort of “trifle” that distinguishes a Marxist from a liberal—namely the
intricacy and spasmodic nature of the process of adaptation of the
political superstructure to economic transformation. To explain these two
errors of R-kov’s it is sufficient to cite the example of Prussia where to
this day, despite the considerably higher level of development of
capitalism in general, and of the conversion of the old landowning economy
into bourgeois economy in particular, the Oldenburgs and the Heidebrands
are still omni potent and control state power, their social substance
permeating, as it were, the entire Prussian monarchy, the entire Prussian
bureaucracy! To this day, sixty-three years after 1848, and despite the
unprecedentedly rapid development of capitalism, the law governing the
Landtag elections in Prussia is still so framed as to ensure the domination
of the Prussian Purishkeviches. Yet for Russia, six years after 1905, R-kov
paints an Arcadian idyll of the “powerlessness” of the Purishkeviches!


The point is that painting an Arcadian idyll about the “steady”
conversion of the Purishkeviches and the “triumph of a quite moderate
bourgeois progressism” is the main theme of all of R-kov’s
reflections. Take his ideas on present-day agrarian policy. “There is no
more striking and widespread illustration” of the conversion (of feudal
economy into bourgeois economy) than this policy, declares R-kov. The
system of splitting farms into strips isolated from each other is being
abolished, and “the elimination of land hunger in twenty agricultural
gubernias in the black-earth belt presents no difficulties to speak of, it
constitutes one of the urgent tasks of the day, and apparently it will

    

be settled by a compromise among various groups of the bourgeoisie 


   “This anticipated inevitable compromise on the agrarian question
   already has a number of precedents.”  


Here you have a complete sample of R-kov’s method of political
reasoning. He begins by eliminating the extremes, without any supporting
data, merely because of his liberal complacency. Then he goes on to declare
that a compromise among the various groups of the bourgeoisie is not
difficult, and is likely. Then he winds up by saying that such a compromise
is “inevitable”. By this method one could prove that “upheavals” were
neither likely nor indispensable in France in 1788 and in China in 1910. To
be sure, a compromise among the various groups of the bourgeoisie presents
no difficulties, if we assume that Markov the Second has been
eliminated not only in R-kov’s complacent imagination. But to assume this
would mean adopting the stand point of the liberal who is afraid to
dispense with the Markovs and who thinks that everybody will always share
his fear.  

To be sure, a compromise would be “inevitable” if (the first “if”)
there were no Markovs; and if (the second “if”) we assume that the
workers and the peasants who are being ruined are politically sound
asleep. But then, again, would not such an assumption (the assumption of
the second condition) mean accepting the liberals’ wish as reality?  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The reference is to N. Rozhkov’s article “The Present Situation in
Russia and the Main Task of the Working-Class Movement at the Present
Moment”. Another article by Lenin, “From the Camp of the Stolypin
‘Labour’ Party”, is also a criticism of Rozhkov (see pp. 354–59 of this
volume).





[2]
This refers to The Social Movement in Russia;



 
  


|

II

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## II









Lenin: 1911/lilapman: II







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto



    

II

Since we are not inclined to accept the liberal wishes or
liberal conjectures as reality, we have reached a different
conclusion. Without doubt the present agrarian policy is bourgeois in
character. But since it is the Purishkeviches who are directing this
bourgeois policy, who remain masters of the situation, the result is such a
tremendous accentuation of the contradictions that, for the immediate
future, at any rate, the likelihood of a compromise must be considered
entirely out of the question.  

Another important social process, says R-kov in continuing his
analysis, is the process of the consolidation of the

    

big industrial and commercial bourgeoisie. Correctly indicating the
“mutual concessions” of the Constitutional-Democrats and the Octobrists,
the author draws the conclusion: “We must not cherish any illusions—what
we see in the offing is the triumph of a quite moderate bourgeois
‘progressism’”.  

Trumph?—Where? Over whom? Is it at the elections to the Fourth Duma
of which R-kov has just spoken? If that is what he means, then it will be a
“triumph” within the narrow confines of the election law of June 3,
1907. Hence one of two conclusions is inevitable: either the “triumph”
will not set up a wave and thus the actual domination of the Purishkeviches
will in no way be changed; or this “triumph” will indirectly be the
expression of a democratic revival which is bound to come into sharp
conflict with the above-mentioned “narrow confines” and with the
domination of the Purishkeviches.  

In either case the triumph of moderation at elections conducted within
moderate bounds will not bring about the least triumph of moderation in
real life. The point is, how ever, that R-kov has already lapsed into a
state of “parliamentary cretinism”, which enables him to confuse
elections conducted on the basis of the June Third law with reality! To
demonstrate this incredible fact to the reader we must quote R-kov in full:



   “And this triumph is all the more probable since the mass of the urban
   petty bourgeoisie which, in its philistine way, is dejectedly contemplating
   its shattered illusions, will helplessly gravitate to wards moderate
   progressism, and the peasantry will be all too weak at the elections
   because the peculiar features of our electoral system enable the landowners
   who predominate in the gubernia panels of electors to elect ‘Rights’ to
   represent the peasants. Such is the picture of the social changes that are
   taking place in Russia at present, if, for the time being, we leave the
   working class out of consideration. It is by no means a picture of
   stagnation or of regression. New, bourgeois, Russia is undoubtedly gaining
   in strength and is advancing. The State Duma, based on the electoral system
   established on June 3, 1907, will provide the political sanction for the
   coming domination of the moderately progressive industrial and commercial
   bourgeoisie that will share power with the conservative rural
   bourgeoisie. (England, pure and simple! We Omit the comparison with France
   and Prussia, on which we shall dwell below.) Thus, in summing up every
   thing that has just been said, we must admit that there exist all the
   prerequisites for a slow, extremely painful for the masses, but
   nevertheless

    

   certain advance of the bourgeois social and political system in Russia. The
   possibility of storms and upheavals is, naturally, not out of the question,
   but they will not become something indispensable and inevitable, as was the
   case before the revolution.”  


An intricate philosophy, that one cannot deny. If we leave the
peasantry out of account, because it is “weak at the elections”, and if
“for the time being, we leave the working class out of consideration”,
then, of course, there is absolutely no possibility of upheavals! But what
it amounts to is that one who examines Russia from a liberal viewpoint can
see nothing but liberal “progressism”. Remove your liberal blinkers and
the picture becomes an entirely different one. Since the part played by the
peasantry in life is quite different from the part it plays in the June
Third electoral system, the fact that it is “weak at the elections”—far
from opening the gates to a “moderate progressism”—accentuates the
antagonism between the peasantry as a whole and the entire system. Since
the working class cannot be left “out of consideration” either
in a capitalist country in general, or in Russia after the experience of
the first ten years of the twentieth century in particular, R-kov’s
argumentation is entirely useless. Since the dominating factor in Russia
(both in the Third Duma and above it) is Purishkevichism, occasionally
moderated by the grumbling of the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, the talk about
the “impending domination” of the moderately progressive bourgeoisie is
just a liberal lullaby. Since the Guchkovs and Milyukovs by virtue of their
class position can oppose the domination of the Purishkeviches with nothing
but their grumbling, a conflict between the new, bourgeois Russia and the
Purishkeviches is inevitable, and its motive forces will be those whom
R-kov, following the example of the liberals, leaves “out of
consideration”. Just because the Milyukovs and Guchkovs are making
“mutual concessions” in cringing be fore the Purishkeviches, it is all
the more necessary for the workers to draw the line between democracy and
liberalism.  N. R-kov sees neither the conditions giving rise to upheavals
in Russia nor the task just indicated, which is obligatory even in the
definite absence of an upheaval.  

A vulgar democrat may reduce the whole matter to the question whether
there is an upheaval or not. The Marxist

    

is primarily concerned with the line of political demarcation between the
classes, which is the same during an upheaval and in its
absence. R-kov’s statement that “the workers must assume the task of
exercising political hegemony in the struggle for a democratic regime”, is
extraordinary after all he has written in his manifesto. What it means is
that R-kov gets a guarantee from the bourgeoisie to recognise the hegemony
of the workers, while he himself gives the bourgeoisie a guarantee to the
effect that the workers renounce the tasks which constitute the substance
of hegemony! After he has removed this substance, leaving no trace
whatsoever, R-kov naïvely goes on to repeat a hollow phrase. First he
gives an appraisal of the situation from which it is evident that, as far
as he is concerned, the hegemony of the liberals is an accomplished,
irrevocable, and inescapable fact, and then he tries to assure us that he
recognises the hegemony of the working class!  

The “real” significance of the Duma, argues R-kov, “is no less than
that of the French Legislative Corps during the last years of the Second
Empire, or that of the proportional mean between the German Reichstag and
the Prussian Landtag that was characteristic of Prussia in the eighties of
the past century”.  

This kind of comparison is so frivolous that it is mere playing at
historical parallels. In France in the sixties the epoch of bourgeois
revolutions had long since come to an end, a direct clash between the
proletariat and the bourgeoisie was already knocking at the door, and
Bonapartism was the expression of the government’s manoeuvring between
these two classes. It is ridiculous to compare that situation with
contemporary Russia. The Third Duma is more reminiscent of the Chambre

introuvable[1] of 1815! In Prussia, the eighties also marked the
epoch of the consummation of the bourgeois revolution, which had completed
its work by 1870. The entire bourgeoisie, which included both the urban and
rural petty bourgeoisie, was contented and reactionary.  

Perhaps R-kov fancied he saw a comparison between the role of the
democratic and the proletarian deputies in the Legislative Corps and in the
Reichstag, and the role of the deputies of the same classes in the Third
Duma? That would

    

be a legitimate comparison; but, then, it would not prove his point, for
the conduct of Gegechkori and, to a certain extent, also of Petrov the
Third, testifies to such strength, self-confidence, and readiness for
battle on the part of the classes which they represent that a
“compromise” with the Purishkeviches is not only unlikely but appears to
be absolutely out of the question.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Chambre introuvable—the name given by Louis XVIII to the
French counter-revolutionary Chamber of Deputies, elected after the
restoration of the Bourbons in August 1815. Its composition was so
reactionary that Louis XVIII, fearing a new revolutionary outbreak, was
forced to dissolve it.



 
  

I

|

III

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## III









Lenin: 1911/lilapman: III







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Liberal Labour Party Manifesto



    

III

It was necessary to dwell at particular length on R-kov’s
appraisal of the role of the various classes, because here we have the
ideological roots of our unqualified disagreement. The practical
conclusions which R-kov draws, with rare fearlessness and
straightforwardness, it must be said in all fairness to him, are
interesting primarily because they reduce the author’s “theory” to an
absurdity. R-kov is a thousand times right, of course, when he connects the
question of the possibility of an open political organisation of the
workers with an appraisal of the situation, with an estimate of fundamental
alterations in the political system. But the trouble is that instead of
pointing out such alterations in real life, he is only able to
present us with amiable professorial syllogisms: the transition to
“civilised capitalism” “presupposes” the necessity for an open
political organisation of the workers. It is easy to put this on paper, but
in real life the Russian political regime will not become a whit more
“civilised” because of it.  

“Progressism, even if of the most moderate variety, will undoubtedly
have to extend the all too narrow confines existing at present.” To this
we answer: the progressism of the Cadets in the Fourth Duma will not have
to, and can not “extend” anything so long as elements far removed from
the Cadets do not bestir themselves in a manner very dissimilar to that
customary in the Duma.  

“Unless such an organisation exists,” says R-kov, referring to an
open and broad political organisation of the workers, “the struggle is
bound to assume an anarchistic character harmful, not only to the working
class, but to the civilised bourgeoisie as well.”  
 

We shall not dwell on the last part of the phrase, comment will only
spoil this “gem”. As for the first part, it is historically wrong. There
was no anarchism in Germany in 1878–90, although there was no “open and
broad” political organisation in existence.  

Further, R-kov is a thousand times right when he puts forward a
concrete plan for an open political workers’ “organisation” and suggests
that it be inaugurated by the founding of a “political association for the
protection of the interests of the working class”. He is right in the
sense that only empty phrase-mongers can prattle for months and years about
the possibility of an “open” party, with out taking the first
simple and natural step to launch it. R-kov is not a phrase-monger; he is a
man of deeds and, as such, starts at the beginning and goes the whole hog.


But the point is that his “deeds” are liberal deeds, and the
“banner” which he is “unfurling” (see p. 35 of the article we are
quoting) is the banner of a liberal labour policy. It is immaterial that
the programme of the association which R-kov wants to found provides for
“the establishment of a new society based on the public ownership of the
means of production”, etc. Actually, the recognition of this great
principle did not prevent a section of the German Social-Democrats in the
sixties from pursuing a “royal-Prussian labour policy”, nor does it
prevent Ramsay MacDonald (leader of the British “Independent Labour
Party”—meaning independent of socialism) from pursuing a liberal labour
policy. When R-kov speaks of the political tasks of the immediate period,
of our present period, it is a system of liberal principles that he
propounds. The “banner” which R-kov is “unfurling” was unfurled by
Prokopovich, Potresov, Larin, etc., long ago, and the more this banner is
unfurled” the clearer does it become to one and all that what we have
before us is a dirty liberal rag worn to shreds.  

“There is not a grain of utopia in all this,” R-kov tries to persuade
us. We must needs reply with a paraphrase of a well-known saying: “You are
a great utopian, but your utopia is tiny”. Indeed, it would be rather
frivolous perhaps to reply to an obviously frivolous statement other than
with a joke. How is it possible to regard as other than utopian the
suggested foundation of an open workers’

    

association at a time when absolutely peaceful, tame, non-political trade
unions are being suppressed? How can one write about the role of the
various classes in a way that is liberal from A to Z and yet assure the
readers that this does not moan creeping into a regime of renovated
Tolmachovism? The good R-kov goes out of his way to declare:

“There is no advocacy of any violence in this; there is not a word, not a
thought about a violent revolution being necessary, because in reality,
too, no such necessity may ever arise. If anyone, blinded by reactionary
frenzy, took it into his head to accuse the members of such an
‘association’ of striving for violent revolution, the whole burden of an
absurd, unfounded and juridically flimsy accusation of this sort would fall
upon the head of the accuser”!  

N. R-kov has an eloquent pen, just like Mr. P. B. Struve who, in 1901,
hurled similar terrifying thunderbolts “upon the heads” of those who
persecuted the

Zemstvo.[1] What a picture—N. R-kov trying to prove to the accusing
Dumbadzes that, since he now harbours no “thoughts”, the burden of the
juridically flimsy accusations will fall upon the Dumbadzes’ own heads!
Yes, indeed, we have no parliament as yet, but we have parliamentary
cretinism galore. Apparently such members of the new association as the
Marxist Gegechkori or even the non-Marxist but honest democrat Petrov the
Third would be summarily expelled at the very first meeting of the new
association—provided the assembled members are not dispatched, by
mistake, to various chilly places before the meeting opens.  

The Nasha Zarya “liquidators” are rejoicing because R-kov
has joined their ranks. But the enthusiastic liquidators do not realise how
ardent is the embrace which the newly-won liquidator R-kov brings to
them. It is so ardent and so powerful that this much can be vouched
for—liquidationism will be smothered by R-kov’s ardent embrace just as
the labour congress was smothered by Y. Larin’s ardent embrace. Y. Larin
perpetrated that bloodless murder by the simple device of writing a
pamphlet, after which people, primarily out of fear of the embarrassment
involved, began to be wary of defending the idea of a labour
congress. After the new “manifesto” of liquidationism published by R-kov
in Nasha Zarya, people, primarily out of fear of the embarrassment

    

involved, will begin to be wary of defending the idea of an open
liquidationist party.  

And, since we must find at least one point on which to agree with
R-kov, that idea does contain a “grain” of non-utopianism. Remove your
professorial blinkers, my dear sir, and you will then see that the
“association” which you intend to “actually put into effect” (after the
burden of your admonitions has fallen “upon the heads” of the

Mymretsovs[2]) already exists—that it has been in existence
for two years. And you yourself already belong to it! The magazine
Nasha Zarya (not as a collection of so much printed matter, but as
an ideological group) is just such an “association for the protection of
the interests of the working class”. An open and broad organisation of
workers is a utopia; but “open” and frank magazines of opportunist
intellectuals are not a utopia—not by any means. In their own way they
are undoubtedly protecting the interests of the working class; but to
anyone who has not ceased to be a Marxist it is obvious that theirs is an
“association” for protecting, in a liberal manner, the interests of the
working class as conceived by the liberals.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the preface to S. Y. Witte’s “The Autocracy and
the Zemstvo” written by P. B. Struve (signed: R.N.S.) which he criticised
in “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of Liberalism”





[2]
Mymretsov—a character from G. I. Uspensky’s Budka
(The Centry Box) a coarse and boorish type of policeman from an
out-of-the-way small town of tsarist Russia.



 
  

II

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Social-Democratic Group in the Second Duma









Lenin: The Social-Democratic Group in the Second Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Social-Democratic Group in the Second Duma[1]
An Account of the Whole Affair




Written: Written after November 6 (19), 1911 

Published:

      First printed in Russian in 1940, in Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 4.

      Printed in the German, French, and English languages in December 1911 in Bulletin périodique du Bureau socialisie international, No. 8.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the Bulletin text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 325-330.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Four years have passed since all the members of the
Social-Democratic group in the Second Duma, victims of an infamous plot by
our government, were put on trial and sent to penal servitude like, the
worst of criminals. The Russian proletariat fully understood that the
charges against its representatives were based on a forgery, but this was
the period of unbridled reaction and in addition, sentence was passed
behind closed doors so that sufficient evidence of the crime committed by
tsarism was not available. Only quite recently the convincing facts
contained in the confession of Brodsky, an agent of the secret political
police, have thrown full light on the revolting intrigues of our
authorities.  

This is what actually happened.  

Despite the very limited franchise, the Russian proletariat returned 55
Social-Democrats to the Second Duma.  

This Social-Democratic group was not only numerically large, but
outstandingly sound ideologically. It bore the hallmark of the revolution
from which it sprang. Its pronouncements, in which there could still be
heard the echoes of the great struggle that had involved the whole country,
levelled deep and well-founded criticism, not only at the bills submitted
to the Duma, but also at the whole tsarist and capitalist system of
government in general.  

Armed with the invincible weapon of contemporary socialism this
Social-Democratic group was, of all the Left

    

groups, the most revolutionary, the most consistent? and the most deeply
imbued with class-consciousness. It drew the others in its wake and set its
revolutionary seal on the Duma. Our rulers considered the group to be the
last strong hold of the revolution, its last symbol, the living proof of
the powerful influence of Social-Democracy on the proletarian masses and,
consequently, a constant threat to reaction, the last obstacle to its
triumphant march. Therefore, the government considered it essential not
only to rid itself of this too revolutionary Duma, but also to restrict the
electoral rights of the proletariat and of the democratically-inclined
peasantry to the minimum, thus preventing any possibility of the election
of a similar Duma in the future. The best method for the realisation of
such a coup d’état was to get rid of the socialist Duma group, to
compromise it in the eyes of the country—to cut off the head in order to
destroy the body.  

However, some pretext had to be found for this,—for in stance, the
possibility of accusing the group of some serious political crime. The
inventiveness of the police and the secret political police soon found such
an excuse. It was decided to compromise the parliamentary socialist group,
accusing it of close ties with the Social-Democratic combat organisation
and with the Social-Democratic military organisation. With this aim in
view, General Gerasimov, the chief of the secret political police,
suggested to his agent Brodsky that he enter these organisations. (All
these facts are taken from

L’Avenir[2] No. 1. [The Future], issued under the
editorship of Burtsev in Paris, 50, Boulevard St. Jacques.) Brodsky
succeeded in doing so as a rank-and-file member, and later became a
secretary. Several members of the military organisation had the idea of
sending a delegation of soldiers to the socialist parliamentary group. The
secret police decided to use this for its own ends, and Brodsky, having won
the confidence of the military organisation, undertook to execute this
plan. Several soldiers were elect ed; a list of soldiers’ demands was drawn
up and a day was appointed for the delegation to visit the Duma group at
its headquarters, without the group even having been warned. As the
soldiers were not allowed to go there in army uniform they were obliged to
change their clothes. This was

    

actually carried out at the home of one of the agents of the secret police,
where they changed into clothes bought and prepared for them by the secret
police. According to this vile plan of Gerasimov’s, Brodsky was to have
arrived at the premises of the socialist group at the same time as the
soldiers, bringing with him revolutionary documents which would implicate
our delegates even more. Further, it was agreed that Brodsky would be
arrested together with the others, and then, aided by the secret police who
would enable him to effect a sham escape, he would be at liberty. But
Brodsky arrived too late, and when he reached the premises of the group
with the compromising documents, the search had already commenced, and he
was not allowed to enter.  

Such was the setting prepared most thoroughly by the secret police
which allowed reaction, not only to condemn and send to penal servitude the
representatives of the proletariat, but, apart from this, to dissolve the
Second Duma and to carry out its coup d’état of June 3 (16),
1907. Actually, on that date the government announced in its manifesto
(which, like all tsarist manifestos, astounds one with its shameless
hypocrisy) that it was compelled to dissolve the Duma, for, instead of
supporting and aiding the government in its desire to re-establish peace in
the country, the Duma, on the contrary, had acted against all the proposals
and intentions of the government and, incidentally, did not wish to append
its signature to repressive measures against the revolutionary elements of
the country. Furthermore (and I give the text word for word), “acts
hitherto unheard of in the annals of history were committed. The judiciary
discovered a plot by a whole section of the State Duma against the state
and the power of the tsar. When our government demanded the temporary
removal of the 55 members of the Duma accused of the crime until the
conclusion of the trial, and the imprisonment of those most guilty, the
State Duma did not immediately carry out the lawful demands of the
authorities which brooked no delay”.  

Incidentally, the proofs of the tsar’s crime were known not only to the
government and its closest friends. Our dear Constitutional-Democrats, who
never tire of babbling about legality, justice, truth, and so on, who
embellish their Party with such a high-sounding title as “party of
people’s

    

freedom”, have for the past four years also known all the vile details of
this dirty affair which had been kept so secret. They looked on passively
for four long years while our deputies were tried in defiance of all law,
while they suffered penal servitude, while some died and others lost their
reason, and ... they remained cautiously silent. Yet they could have spoken
for they had deputies in the Duma and had many daily newspapers at their
disposal. Caught between reaction and revolution—they feared the
revolution more. For this reason they flirted with the government and by
their silence shielded it for four long years and so became its accomplices
in crime. It is only recently (the sitting of the Duma of the 17th October,
1911) that during debates on the secret police, one of them, Deputy
Teslenko, at last decided to let the cat out of the bag. Here is part of
his speech (word for word according to the Verbatim Report):

“When it was proposed that proceedings be taken against 53

members[3] of the Second State Duma, a commission was set up by the
Duma. This Commission was given all the documents that were to provide
evidence that 53 members of the State Duma had organised a plot to set up a
republic in Russia by means of an armed uprising. The Commission of the
Second State Duma (I made the report on its behalf) came to the conclusion,
a unanimous conclusion, that what was being discussed was not a plot
hatched against the state by the Social-Democrats, but a plot hatched by
the St. Petersburg department of the secret police against the Second State
Duma. When the Commission’s report, based on documents, was ready, on the
eve of the day when all these facts were to be made public from this
rostrum, the Second State Duma was dissolved and it was not possible to
state (from this rostrum) what had been brought to light. When the trial of
the accused commenced, these 53 members of the State Duma demanded that it
be heard in public, and that the public should be told that it was not they
who were the criminals but the St. Petersburg department of the secret
police—the doors were closed and the public was never told the truth.”


Such are the facts. For four years our deputies have been languishing
in chains in terrible Russian prisons, the severity and savagery of which
you are, of course, aware. Many

    

have already died there. One of the deputies has lost his reason, the
health of many others, as a result of unendurable living conditions, has
been impaired and they may die any day. The Russian proletariat can no
longer calmly look on while its representatives, whose only crime is that
they waged an unremitting struggle in its interests, perish in tsarist
prisons. It is even more impossible for it to look on calmly, since from
the legal point of view Brodsky’s admissions provide complete justification
for demanding a fresh trial. A campaign for the release of the deputies has
already commenced in Russia.  

The workers’ paper Zvezda, appearing in St. Petersburg devoted
a considerable part of its issue dated October 29, 1911 to the question. It
appeals to the press, to liberal and Left deputies, to associations and
trade unions, but mostly to the proletariat. “There is not, and cannot
be,” exclaims the paper, “calmness and peace of mind while every hour and
every minute all can hear the clanging of the chains fettering those who
have been immured, deprived of freedom and every political and civil right
only because they had the courage to carry out before the whole country
their duty as men and citizens. The public conscience cannot and should not
remain calm after the exposure of the horrifying truth. No matter what the
difficulties may be they must be over come and a retrial of the deputies to
the Second State Duma demanded! But in the first instance the proletariat
must make its powerful voice heard, for it was its representatives who were
falsely tried, and who at the present moment languish in penal servitude.”


In commencing this struggle, the Russian proletariat appeals to
socialists of all countries to give it support, and together with it to
proclaim loudly to the whole world their indignation at the savagery and
infamy of our present ruling autocracy which, screening itself with a mask
of pitiful hypocrisy, surpasses even the barbarism and uncivilised
behaviour of the Asiatic governments.  

In France, Comrade Charles Dumas has already started the campaign and
in an article printed in the newspaper L’Avenir has called for
energetic support to be given to the Russian proletariat at this difficult
moment. Let socialists of all countries follow this example, let them
everywhere,

    

in parliament, in their press, at their public meetings, express their
indignation and demand a review of the case of the Social-Democratic group
in the Second Duma.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This report was published by the Executive Committee of the
International Socialist Bureau as a supplement to Circular No. 24. The
article and material relating to the affair of the Social-Democratic
deputies to the Second Duma were published in German, French, and English
in the Bulletin périodique du Bureau Socialiste
International, No. 8. After the publication of Lenin’s report the
campaign abroad for the release of the Social-Democratic deputies was
intensified. In an editorial appearing in No. 8 of the Bolshevik newspaper
Rabochaya Gazeta it was stated that “following the call of the
International Socialist Bureau, which sent all parties the report on this
matter by Comrade Lenin, our Party representative on the I.S.B., the
campaign was considerably

   

intensified by Social-Democratic parties abroad. All Social-Democratic
deputies in Germany, France, Belgium, Sweden, Finland, Austria, etc., made
public protests.”  

The heading to the document has been provided by the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.





[2]
L’Avenir (The Future)—a liberal-bourgeois Russian
newspaper which was published in Paris from October 22, 1911 to January 4,
1914 (N.S.) and edited by V. L. Burtsev (some items were published in
French). Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries also contributed to its
columns.





[3]
Fifty-five members of the Social-Democratic group in the Second Duma
were tried, and two of them died shortly after, during imprisonment. It was
for this reason that 53 deputies were referred to at the sitting of the
Duma held on October 17 (30), 1911.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Slogans and Organisation of Social-Democratic Work Inside and Outside the Duma









Lenin: The Slogans and Organisation of Social-Democratic Work Inside and Outside the Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Slogans and Organisation of Social-Democratic Work Inside and Outside the Duma




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 331-341.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question put by the Social-Democratic group in the
Third Duma concerning the dastardly frame-up staged by the secret police
that led to the criminal proceedings being instituted against the
Social-Democrat members of the Second

Duma,[3] apparently marks a certain turn in our entire Party activity,
as well as in the position of democracy in general and in the mood of the
working masses.  

It is probably the first time that such a resolute protest,
revolutionary in tone and content, against the “masters of June Third”
has been heard from the rostrum of the Third Duma, a protest supported by
the entire opposition, including the extremely moderate,
liberal-monarchist, Vekhi variety of “His Majesty’s Opposition”,
i.e., the Cadet Party, and Including even the Progressists. It is probably
the first time since the period of gloom set in (i.e., since 1908), that
the country sees, feels, and is tangibly aware that in connection with the
revolutionary protest voiced by the deputies of the revolutionary
proletariat in the reactionary Duma, the masses of workers are stirring,
that there is a rising spirit of unrest in the working-class districts of
the capital, that workers are holding meetings (meetings again!) at which
revolutionary speeches are delivered by Social-Democrats (the meetings at
the Putilov Works, the Cable Works, and other plants), and that there is
talk and rumour of a political mass strike (see report from St. Petersburg
in the Octobrist Golos Moskvy of November 19).  

To be sure, revolutionary speeches were made by Social-Democrat
deputies in the Third Duma on more than one occasion in the paste too. On
more than one occasion our

    

comrades of the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma did their duty
splendidly and from the platform of the reactionary and servile
Purishkevich “parliament” they spoke plainly, clearly and sharply of the
bankruptcy of the monarchy, of a republic, of a second revolution. These
services rendered by the Social-Democrat members of the Third Duma must be
emphasised all the more strongly, the more often we hear the contemptible
opportunist talk of the sham Social-Democrats of Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata or Dyelo Zhizni who frown upon such
speeches.  

But never before has there been such a combination of political
symptoms indicating a turn—the, entire opposition backing the
Social-Democrats; the liberal-monarchist, “loyal”, “responsible”, and
cowardly Rech stating that the situation is fraught with conflict;
the masses showing unrest in connection with the question in the Duma; and
the censored press reporting the existence of “alarming sentiments” in
the rural districts. Following as it does upon the “Muromtsev” and
“Tolstoi” demonstrations of last year, the strikes in 1910 and 4911, and
last year’s students’ “affair”, the present instance undoubtedly serves
to confirm us in our conviction that the first period of the Russian
counter-revolution—the period of absolute stagnation, of dead calm,
hangings and suicides, of the orgy of reaction and the orgy of renegacy of
every brand, particularly the liberal brand—that this period has
come to an end. The second period in the history of the
counter-revolution has set in: the state of utter dejection and often of
“savage” fright is waning; among the broadest and most varied sections of
the population there is a noticeably growing political consciousness—or,
if not consciousness exactly, at least a feeling that “things cannot go on
as before”, and that a “change” is required, is necessary, is
inevitable; and we see the beginning of an inclination, half instinctive,
often still undefined, to lend support to protests and struggle.  

It would, naturally, be imprudent to exaggerate the significance of
these symptoms and to imagine that the revival is already under way. That
is not yet so. The features that characterise the counter-revolution at
present are not the same as those distinguishing its first period;
but the counter revolution still reigns supreme and imagines itself to be

    

invincible. To quote the December 1908 resolution of the R.S.D.L.P., the
“protracted task of training, educating, and organising” the
proletariat[4] is still, as before, on the order of the day. However,
the fact that a turn has set in compels us to pay particular attention to
the attitude of the Social-Democratic Party to other parties, and to the
immediate tasks of the working-class movement.  

“His Majesty’s Opposition”, including the Cadets and the
Progressists, appeared to recognise for a moment the leading role of the
Social-Democrats and, following the lead of the workers’ deputies, walked
out of the Duma of landowners and Octobrists, the Duma founded by the
Black-Hundred and pogrom-making monarchy of Nicholas Romanov; they walked
out and stayed away during the base trickery of the majority who were
afraid that the story of the frame-up would be made public.  

What does this mean? Have the Cadets ceased to be a
counter-revolutionary party or have they never been one, as is asserted by
the opportunist Social-Democrats?  Ought we to make it our task to
“support” the Cadets and to think of some slogan calling for a “general
national opposition”?  

The enemies of revolutionary Social-Democracy have from time
immemorial, it may be said, resorted to the method of reducing its views to
an absurdity and have, for the convenience of their polemics, drawn a
caricature of Marxism. Thus, in the second half of the nineties of the last
century, when Social-Democracy was just springing up in Russia as a mass
movement, the Narodniks drew a caricature of Marxism which they labelled
“strike-ism”. And, such was the irony of history that there were Marxists
whom that caricature fitted. They were the Economists. It was possible to
save the honour and good name of Social-Democracy only by a ruthless
struggle against Economism. And after the Revolution of 1905, when
Bolshevism, as the adaptation of revolutionary Marxism to the particular
conditions of the epoch, scored a great victory in the working-class
movement, a victory which now even its enemies concede, our adversaries
drew a caricature of Bolshevism, which they labelled “boycottism”,
“combatism”, etc. And, again, such was the irony of history that there
were Bolsheviks whom that caricature fitted. They were the Vperyod
group.  
 

These lessons of history should serve as a warning against attempts to
distort the views of revolutionary Social-Democrats concerning the attitude
towards the Constitutional-Democrats (see, for instance, Vperyod,
No. 2). The Cadets are unquestionably a counter-revolutionary party. Only
absolutely ignorant or unscrupulous persons can deny this; and it is the
bounden duty of Social-Democrats to make this fact known far and wide,
including the rostrum of the Duma. But the Cadets are a party of
counter-revolutionary liberals, and their liberal nature, as has
been emphasised in the resolution on non-proletarian parties adopted at the
London Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (in 1907), makes it our duty to “take
advantage” of the peculiar situation and the particular conflicts or cases
of friction arising from this situation, to take advantage, for instance,
of their sham democracy to advocate true, consistent, and selfless
democracy.  

Since counter-revolutionary liberalism has sprung up in the country,
the forces of democracy in general, and of proletarian democracy in
particular, must do everything to separate themselves from it; not for a
moment must they forget the dividing line between it and them. But it does
not in the least follow from this that it is permissible to confuse
counter-revolutionary liberalism with, say, counter revolutionary
feudalism, or that it is permissible to ignore the conflicts between them,
to hold aloof from these conflicts or brush them
aside. Counter-revolutionary liberalism, for the very reason that it is
counter-revolutionary, will never be able to assume the role of
leader in a victorious revolution; but, for the very reason that it is
liberalism, it will inevitably keep coming into “conflict” with
the Crown, with feudalism, with non-liberal bourgeoisie, and by its
behaviour it will sometimes indirectly reflect the “Left”, democratic
sentiments of the country, or the be ginning of a revival, etc.  

Let us recall the history of France. At the time of the revolution,
bourgeois liberalism had already shown its counter-revolutionary
nature—this subject is dealt with, for instance, in Cunow’s fine book on
revolutionary news paper literature in France, Yet, not only after the
great bourgeois revolution, but even after the revolution of 1848,

    

when the counter-revolutionary nature of the liberals had brought matters
to such a pass that workers were being shot down by republicans—in
1868–70, the last years of the Second Empire—these liberals by their
opposition ex pressed the change of sentiment in the country and the
beginning of the democratic, revolutionary, republican revival.  

If the Cadets are now playing at “eyes left”, as the Octobrists taunt
them, that is one of the symptoms and one of the results of the country
moving “leftward”; it shows that revolutionary democracy is stirring in
the womb of its mother, preparing to come into God’s world again. The womb
of Russia under the rule of the Purishkeviches and Romanovs is such that it
must give birth to revolutionary democracy!  

What is the practical conclusion to be drawn from this? The conclusion
is that we must watch the growth of this new revolutionary democracy with
the greatest attention. Just because it is new, because it is coming into
the world after 1905 and after the counter-revolution, and not before it,
it is sure to grow in a new way; and in order to be able properly
to approach this “new”, to be able to influence it and help it grow
successfully, we must not confine our selves to the old methods, but must
search for new methods as well—we must mingle with the crowds, feel the
pulse of real life, and sometimes make our way not only into the thick of
the crowd, but also into the liberal salon.  

Mr. Burtsev’s sheet L’Avenir, for instance, is very
reminiscent of a liberal salon. There the stupid, liberal, Octobrist-Cadet
slogan calling for “a revision of the Statutes of June 3” is defended in
a liberal manner; there they prattle eagerly about stool-pigeons, police,
agents provocateurs, Burtsev, bombs. Nevertheless, when Mr. Martov
was in a hurry to get into that salon, he might have been accused only of
tactless haste, but not of a fundamental falsehood, if
... if he had not behaved there like a liberal. We may justify,
and sometimes even praise, a Social-Democrat who makes his appearance in a
liberal salon as long as he be haves like a Social-Democrat, But in the
liberal salon Mr. Martov came out with the liberal balderdash about
“solidarity in the struggle for the very freedom of elections and

    

election propaganda”, which is supposed to be maintained “for the period
of the elections”!! (L’Avenir, No. 5).  

A new democracy is growing up—under new conditions, and in a new
way. We must learn to approach it properly—that is beyond doubt. We must
not approach it for the purpose of lisping like liberals, but in order to
uphold and advocate the slogans of true democracy. Social-Democrats must
advocate three slogans to the new democracy, slogans which are
alone worthy of our great cause and which alone correspond to the
real conditions for the attainment of freedom in
Russia. These slogans are: a republic; the eight-hour day; and the
confiscation of all landed estates.  

This is the one correct nation-wide programme of struggle for a free
Russia. Anyone who doubts this programme is not yet a democrat. Anyone who
denies this programme while calling himself a democrat, has understood all
too well how necessary it is for him to hoodwink the people in order to
achieve his anti-democratic (i.e., counter-revolutionary) aims.  

Why is the struggle for the eight-hour working day a natural condition
for the attainment of freedom in Russia? Because experience has shown that
freedom cannot be achieved without a selfless struggle on the part of the
proletariat, and such a struggle is inseparably bound up with the struggle
to improve the workers’ conditions. The eight-hour day is an example of
such improvements and is the banner of struggle for them.  

Why is the struggle for the confiscation of all landed estates a
natural condition for the attainment of freedom in Russia? Because, without
radical measures to help the millions of peasants who have been reduced by
the Purishkeviches, Romanovs, and Markovs to unheard of ruin, suffering,
and death from starvation, all talk of democracy and of “people’s
freedom” is absurd and utterly hypocritical. And unless the landed estates
are confiscated for the benefit of the peasants, there can be no question
of any serious measures to help the muzhik, there can be no
question of any serious determination to put an end to muzhik Russia, i.e.,
to feudal Russia, and to build up a Russia of free tillers of the soil, a
democratic bourgeois Russia.  

Why is the struggle for a republic a natural condition

    

for the attainment of freedom in Russia? Because experience, the great and
unforgettable experience of one of the greatest decades in the history of
Russia—the first decade of the twentieth century—has shown clearly,
conclusively, and incontestably that our monarchy is incompatible
with even the most elementary guarantees of political freedom. The result
of Russia’s historical development and centuries of tsardom is that at the
beginning of the twentieth century there is no other monarchy in Russia,
nor can there be any other, than a Black-Hundred and
pogrom-making monarchy. With social conditions and class relations
what they are, all the Russian monarchy can do is to organise gangs of
murderers to shoot our liberal and democratic deputies from behind, or set
fire to buildings in which meetings are held by democrats. The only answer
the Russian monarchy can give to the demonstrations of the people demanding
freedom is to let loose gangs of men who seize hold of Jewish children by
their legs and smash their heads against stones, who rape Jewish and
Georgian women and rip open the bellies of old men.  

The liberal innocents prattle about the example of a constitutional
monarchy like that of England. But if in a civilised country like England,
a country which has never known anything like the Mongolian yoke or the
tyranny of a bureaucracy, or a military clique riding roughshod over it, if
it was necessary in that country to chop off the head of one crowned robber
in order to impress upon the kings that they must be “constitutional”
monarchs, in a country like Russia we should have to chop off the heads of
at least a hundred Romanovs in order to wean their successors from the
habit of organising Black-Hundred murders and anti-Jewish pogroms.  

If Social-Democracy has learned anything at all from the first Russian
revolution, it must insist that in all our speeches and leaflets we discard
the slogan “Down with the autocracy”, which has proved to be vague and
worthless, and that we advance only the slogan: “Down with the
tsarist monarchy, long live a republic”.  

And let no one try to tell us that the slogan calling for a republic
does not apply to the present stage of the political development of the
workers and peasants. About ten or

    

twelve years ago there were not only some Narodniks who would not dare even
to think of the slogan, “Down with the autocracy”, but even certain
Social-Democrats, the so-called Economists, opposed that slogan as being
inopportune. Yet by 1903–04 the slogan, “Down with the autocracy”, had
become a “household word”! There cannot be even a shadow of doubt that
systematic and persistent republican propaganda is now bound to find very
fertile soil in Russia; for there can be no doubt that the broadest masses,
particularly the peasant masses, are thinking grim, profound thoughts about
the meaning of the dispersal of two Dumas and the connection between the
tsarist government and the landowner-ridden Third Duma, between the tsarist
government and the ruin of the countryside by the Markovs. Nobody today can
tell how quickly the seed of republican propaganda will sprout—but that
is beside the point; the main thing is that the sowing should be done
properly, really democratically.  

since we are discussing the question of the slogans for the forthcoming
elections to the Fourth Duma and those for all our work outside the Duma,
we cannot refrain from mentioning a very important and very incorrect
speech made by the Social-Democrat Kuznetsov in the Third Duma. On
October 17, 1911, the sixth anniversary of the first victory of the Russian
revolution, Kuznetsov spoke in the debate on the workers’ Insurance
Bill. It must be said in fairness to him, that, in general, he spoke very
well. He vigorously championed the interests of the proletariat and made no
bones about telling the truth directly, not only to the majority of the
reactionary Duma, but to the Cadets as well. But, while fully granting this
service rendered by Kuznetsov, we must likewise make no bones about
pointing out the mistake he committed.  

“I think,” said Kuznetsov, “that the workers who have followed
attentively the general debate on these questions, as well as the debate on
individual clauses of the Bill under discussion, will come to the
conclusion that their immediate slogan at present must be: ‘Down with the
June Third Duma, long live universal suffrage!’ Why? Because, I say, the
interests of the working class can be properly taken care of only if and
when that class will, through universal suffrage,

    

send into the legislative body a sufficient number of its deputies; they
alone will be able to provide a proper solution to the problem of insurance
for the working class.”  

It was here that Kuznetsov came a cropper in a way he probably never
suspected, but which we foretold long ago—he came a cropper because the
mistakes of the liquidators coincide with those of the otzovists.  

While launching, from the rostrum of the Duma, a slogan inspired by the
liquidationist magazines Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni,
Kuznetsov did not notice that the first (and most essential) part of this
slogan (“Down with the Third Duma”) fully reproduces the slogan
which the otzovists openly advanced three years ago, and which since then
only Vperyod, that is to say, the cowardly otzovists, have
defended stealthily and covertly.  

Three years ago Proletary, No. 38, of November 1 (14), 1908,
wrote the following in regard to this slogan advanced at the time by the
otzovists: 

“Under what conditions could a slogan like ‘down with the Duma’
acquire meaning? Let us assume that we are faced with a liberal,
reform-seeking, compromising Duma in a period of the sharpest revolutionary
crisis, which had developed to the point of direct civil war. It is quite
possible that at such a moment our slogan might be ‘down with the Duma’,
i.e., down with peaceable negotiations with the tsar, down with the
deceptive institution of ‘peace’, let’s call for a direct attack. Now let
us assume, on the contrary, that we are faced with an arch-reactionary
Duma, elected under an obsolete electoral law, and the absence of any
acutely revolutionary crisis in the country. In that case the slogan ‘down
with the Duma’ might become the slogan of a struggle for electoral
reform. We see nothing of either of these contingencies at the present

       time.”[1]


The supplement to Proletary, No. 44 (of April 4 [17], 1909)
printed the resolution of the St. Petersburg otzovists

    

which demanded outright that “Widespread agitation should be
started among the masses in favour of the slogan ‘Down with the Third
Duma’”. In the same issue Proletary came out against
this resolution and pointed out: “This slogan, which for a time appealed
to some anti-otzovist workers, is wrong. It is either a Cadet
slogan, calling for franchise reform under the autocracy [it so happens
that, although this was written at the beginning of 1909, it is a perfectly
fitting argument against the way Kuznetsov presents the question at the end
of 1911!], or a repetition of words learned by rote during the period when
the liberal Dumas were a screen for counter-revolutionary tsarism designed
to prevent the people from seeing clearly who their real enemy

was.”[2]


Hence the nature of Kuznetsov’s mistake is clear. His generalised
slogan is the Cadet slogan for an electoral reform, which is absolutely
meaningless if all the other charms of the Romanov monarchy—the Council
of State, the omnipotence of bureaucrats, the Black-Hundred pogrom
organisations of the tsar’s clique, etc., are left intact. What Kuznetsov
should have said, assuming that the question is approached in the same way
as he approached it, and assuming that nothing is changed in the general
tone of his speech, is approximately the following: 

“The workers’ Insurance Bill provides the very example which again
proves to the workers that neither the immediate interests of their class
nor the rights and needs of the people as a whole can be defended without
such changes as the introduction of universal suffrage, full freedom of
association, of the press, etc. Is it not obvious, however, that it is
useless to expect the realisation of such changes so long as the present
political system of Russia remains intact, so long as any decisions of any
Duma can be over ruled, and so long as even a single non-elective govern
mental institution is left in the state?”  

We know perfectly well that Social-Democrat deputies succeeded—and
that is to their credit—in making even much plainer and clearer
republican statements from the

    

rostrum of the Third Duma. The members of the Duma have an opportunity to
conduct republican propaganda legally from the floor of the Duma, and it is
their duty to avail themselves of this opportunity. Our example of how
Kuznetsov’s speech could be corrected is merely intended to illustrate how
he could have avoided the mistake, while preserving the general tone of the
speech, and pointing to and emphasising the tremendous importance of such
unquestionably indispensable changes as the introduction of universal
suffrage, freedom of association, etc.  

Wherever a Social-Democrat makes a political speech, it is his duty
always to speak of a republic. But one must know how to speak of a
republic. One cannot speak about it in the same terms when addressing a
meeting in a factory and one in a Cossack village, when speaking at a
meeting of students or in a peasant cottage, when it is dealt with from the
rostrum of the Third Duma or in the columns of a publication issued
abroad. The art of any propagandist and agitator consists in his ability to
find the best means of influencing any given audience, by presenting a
definite truth, in such a way as to make it most convincing, most easy to
digest, most graphic, and most strongly impressive.  

Never for a moment must we forget the main thing: a new democracy is
awakening to a new life and a new struggle in Russia. It is the duty of
class-conscious workers, the vanguard of the Russian revolution and leaders
of the popular masses in the struggle for freedom, to explain the tasks of
consistent democracy: a republic, the eight-hour day, and the confiscation
of all landed estates.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Proletary then went on to defend the slogan, “Down with the
autocracy”. This slogan, as we have already pointed out, must now give way
to the slogan: “Down with the tsarist monarchy, long live a
republic”. (See present edition, Vol. 15, “The Assessment of the Present
Situation”.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 15, “A Caricature of
Bolshevism”.—Ed.  
 



[3]
The question put by the Social-Democratic group was discussed on
November 15 (28), 1911 and it was again discussed on three occasions behind
closed doors; the question was then handed over to a commission by which it
was rejected.





[4]
This quotation is from the resolution of the Fifth (All-Russia)
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1908 “The Present Moment and the Tasks of
the Party”.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Agency of the Liberal Bourgeoisie









Lenin: Agency of the Liberal Bourgeoisie







V. I.  

      Lenin
Agency of the Liberal Bourgeoisie




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 191i.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      page 342.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This issue was almost complete when we received
L’Avenir, No. 9. We have called this paper a liberal salon. It
appears that sometimes agents of the Russian liberal bourgeoisie take the
floor in this salon in order to gain control over the revolutionaries. An
agent of this kind wrote the leader in No. 9 welcoming the
decision of the Cadets to form a bloc with the Octobrists! “We could
wish,” write the liberals with bombs, “that all Left parties, including
the socialist and revolutionary parties, would express them selves in
the same spirit and be guided by similar principles.”  

Of course, why shouldn’t the counter-revolutionary liberal want this to
happen! Only it is necessary for the public to know what it is all about;
when the leader in L’Avenir says “we socialists”, “we
revolutionaries”, it must be read as meaning “we liberals”.  

We have just received the papers with the news that Voiloshnikov has
been barred from fifteen sessions of the

Duma.[1] The Cadets were in favour of his exclusion from
five sessions!! Long live the Cadet-Octobrist bloc—for the
exclusion of democrats and Social-Democrats from ten sessions!!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

A. A. Voiloshnikov, member of the Social-Democratic group in the Third
Duma, spoke on December 2 (15), 1911 at the 35th sitting of the Duma during
the discussion of the Bill on Amendments to the Regulations on Military
Service. He described the tsarist army as a police army, and urged the
arming of the people in place of the standing army. The Chairman of the
Dump there upon recommended that he be barred from five Duma
sittings. After a second statement by A. A. Voiloshnikov at the same
sitting, the number of exclusions from sittings was raised to 45. The
Cadets voted for the first proposal of the Chairman.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Climax of the Party Crisis









Lenin: The Climax of the Party Crisis







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Climax of the Party Crisis




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 343-353.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Two years ago one could find statements in the
Social-Democratic press about a “unity crisis” in the

Party.[1]

The disorganisation and disintegration of the period of counter revolution
caused new re-groupings and splits, a new intensification of the struggle
abroad, and many who lacked faith or who were weak-nerved lost heart in
face of the difficult situation within the Social-Democratic Labour
Party. Now, with the formation of the Russian Organising Commission

(R.O.C.),[5] we are obviously approaching, if not the end of the
crisis, then at any rate a new and decisive turn for the better in the
development of the Party. The moment is, therefore, opportune to attempt a
general review of the past period of inner Party evolution and of the
prospects for the immediate future.  

After the revolution the R.S.D.L.P. consisted of three separate,
autonomous, national, Social-Democratic organisations, and two factions
that were Russian in the narrow sense of the word. The experience of the
years 1905, 1906, and 1907, which were unprecedented for their wealth of
events, demonstrated that these factions had deep roots in the trends
governing the development of the proletariat, in its general way of life
during this period of the bourgeois revolution. The counter-revolution
again threw us from the heights to which we had already climbed, down into
the valley. The proletariat had to re-group its ranks and gather its forces
anew surrounded by Stolypin’s gallows and the jeremiads of Vekhi.


The new situation gave rise to a new grouping of tendencies in the
Social-Democratic Party. In both the new factions—under the severe
pressure of the adverse times—a process of segregation commenced, the
segregation of the

    

least stable Social-Democratic elements, of the various bourgeois
fellow-travellers of the proletariat. Two currents strikingly
expressed this departure from Social-Democracy—liquidationism
and otzovism. And it was these that inevitably gave rise to the tendency to
closer relations between the main cores of both the factions which had
remained true to Marxism. Such was the state of affairs which led to the
Plenary Meeting of January 1910—the source of both positive and negative
results, of the steps forward and of the steps back in the subsequent
development of the Social-Democratic Party.  

To this very day, many people have failed to understand properly the
undeniable ideological merit of the work per formed by the Meeting, and the
great “conciliationist” mistake it committed. But unless this is
understood it is impossible to understand anything at all in the present
Party situation. We must therefore pause again and again to explain the
source of the present crisis.  

The following quotation from an article by a conciliator, written just
before the Plenary Meeting and published immediately after it, may help to
make this clearer than long discussions or quotations from more direct and
more numerous “documents”. One of the leaders of the conciliationism
which dominated the Meeting—Comrade Ionov, a Bundist—wrote the
following in an article “Is Party Unity Possible?”, published in
Discussionny Listok, No. 1 (March 19, 1910; on page 6 we read the
editors’ note: “the article was written before the Plenary Meeting”):



   “However harmful otzovism and liquidationism, as such,
   may be to the Party, their beneficial effect on the factions seems to be
   beyond doubt. Pathology recognises two kinds of abscess—harmful and
   harmless. The harmless type is a disease beneficial to the organism. As it
   grows, it draws various injurious substances from the entire organism and
   thus helps improve the health of that organism. I believe that a similar
   role was played by liquidationism in respect of Menshevism and by
   otzovism-ultimatumism in respect of Bolshevism.”  


Such is the assessment of the case made by a “conciliator” at the
time of the Plenary Meeting; it describes exactly the psychology
and the ideas of the conciliationism that triumphed there. In the above
quotation the main idea is correct, a thousand times correct; and just
because it

    

is correct the Bolsheviks (who even before the Meeting had fully developed
the struggle against both liquidationism and otzovism) could not
break with the conciliators at the Meeting. They could not, because there
was agreement on the main idea; it was only on the question of the form in
which it should be applied that there were differences. The form will
become subordinated to the content—thought the Bolsheviks, and they
proved to be right, though this “adaptation of form to content” has cost
the Party two gears, which have been almost “wasted”, owing to
the mistake committed by the conciliators.  

What was this mistake? It was that the conciliators recognised all and
sundry tendencies on their mere promise to heal themselves, instead of
recognising only those tendencies that were healing (and only insofar as
they were healing) their “abscesses”. The Vperyod and
Golos groups and Trotsky all “signed” the resolution against
otzovism and liquidationism—that is, they promised to “heal their
abscesses”—and that was the end of it! The conciliators “believed” the
promise and entangled the Party with non- Party groups that were,
as they themselves admitted, “abscesses”. From the point of view of
practical politics this was infantile, while from a deeper point of view it
lacked an ideological basis, was unprincipled and full of intrigue. Indeed,
those who were seriously convinced that liquidationism and
otzovism-ultimatumism were abscesses, must have realised that as the
abscesses grew they were certain to draw out and drain injurious
substances from the organism; and they would not contribute to the
poisoning of the organism by attempts to drive inside the poisons gathered
in the “abscesses”.  

The first year after the Plenary Meeting was a practical revelation of
the ideological poverty of the conciliators. As a matter of fact, all Party
work (healing “abscesses”) during the whole of that year was done by the
Bolsheviks and Plekhanov’s group. Both Sotsial-Demokrat and
Rabochaya Gazeta (after Trotsky had expelled the Central
Committee’s representative) prove that fact. Some of the generally known,
legally issued publications of

1910[6] also bear out that fact. These are not words but facts proving
joint work in the leading bodies of the Party.  
 

During that year (1910), the Golos and Vperyod groups
and Trotsky, all in fact, moved away from the Party precisely in the
direction of liquidationism and otzovism-ultimatumism. The “harmless
abscesses” behaved harmfully, since they did not drain away the
“injurious substances” from the organism of the Party, but continued to
Contaminate that organism, keeping it in a diseased condition and rendering
it incapable of doing Party work. This Party work (in literature, which was
accessible to all) was con ducted by the Bolsheviks and the Plekhanovites
in spite of the “conciliatory” resolutions and the collegiums
set up by the Plenary Meeting, not in conjunction with the Golos
and Vperyod groups, but against them (because it was
impossible to work in conjunction with the liquidators and
otzovists-ultimatumists).  

And what about the work in Russia? Not a single meeting of the Central
Committee was held during the whole year! Why? Because the members of the
Central Committee in Russia (conciliators who well deserved the kisses of
Golos

  Likvidatorov[2]

)

kept on “inviting” the liquidators for twelve, for fifteen months but
never got them to “accept the invitation”. At the Plenary Meeting, our
good conciliators unfortunately did not provide for the institution of
“escorts” to bring people to the Central Committee. As a result the Party
found itself in the absurd and shameful position, predicted by the
Bolsheviks at the Meeting when they fought the credulity and
naïveté of the conciliators—work in Russia is at a
standstill, the Party’s hands are tied, while a disgusting stream of
liberal and anarchistic attacks on the Party is pouring forth from the
pages of Nasha Zarya and Vperyod. Mikhail, Roman, and
Yuri, on the one hand, the otzovists and the “god-builders” on the other,
are doing their utmost to ruin Social-Democratic work, while the
conciliationist members of the Central Committee are “inviting” the
liquidators and are “waiting” for them!  

By their “application” of December 5, 1910, the Bolsheviks stated
openly and formally that they cancelled the agreement with all the other
factions. The violation of the

    

“peace” made at the Plenary Meeting, its violation by Golos,
Vperyod, and Trotsky, had become a fully recognised fact.  

About six months were spent (until June 1911) in attempts to convene a
plenary meeting abroad, which under the agreement was to be convened within
three months. The liquidators (Golos-ists—Bundists—Schwartz)
likewise prevented the convening of this meeting. Thereupon the bloc of
three groups—the Bolsheviks, the Poles, and the “conciliators”—made a
final attempt to save the situation:

to call a conference and to form a Russian Organising Commission. As
before, the Bolsheviks were in a minority:

from January 1910 to June 1911, the liquidators were predominant (in the
Central Committee Bureau Abroad they were the Golos-ists—a
Bundist—Schwartz in Russia—those “conciliators” who had been
continually “inviting” the liquidators) from June 1911 to November 1,
1911 (the time-limit fixed by the

trustees),[7] the conciliators, who were joined by the Poles, were
predominant.  

This was the state of affairs: both money and the dispatch of agents
were in the hands of Tyszka and Mark (the leader of the Paris

conciliators)[8]; the only assurance the Bolsheviks received was
agreement that they too would be sent on work. The differences arising out
of the Plenary Meeting reduced themselves to the last point which it was
impossible to evade: whether to work with all one’s energy, without
“waiting” for anyone, without “inviting” anyone (anyone who wishes and
is able to work in a Social-Democratic fashion needs no invitations!), or
whether to continue bar gaining and haggling with Trotsky,
Vperyod, etc. The Bolsheviks chose the first path, a fact which
they had already openly and directly declared at the Paris Meeting of
Central Committee members. Tyszka and Co. chose (and foisted on both the
Technical Commission and the Organising Commission Abroad) the second path,
which, as was shown in detail in the article of Sotsial-Demokrat,

       No. 24,[3]

was objectively nothing but empty and miserable intrigue.  

The result is now clear to all. By November 1, the Russian
Organising Commission was formed. In reality, it was created by the
Bolsheviks and by the pro-Party Mensheviks in

    

Russia. “The alliance of the two strong factions” (strong in their
ideological solidity and in their work of healing “abscesses”), which so
enraged the weak-minded people at the Plenary Meeting and after it (see
Golos, Vperyod, Otkliki

Bunda,[9] Pravda, etc.), became a fact. In such model and
outstanding Social-Democratic organisations as the Baku and the

Kiev[10] organisations were in the Russia of 1910 and 1911, this
alliance, to the great joy of the Bolsheviks, became almost complete
fusion, a single indissoluble organism of pro-Party Social-Democrats.  

After the test of two years’ experience, the snivelling for the
dissolution of “all” factions proved to be but a miserable phrase used by
empty-headed people who had been fooled by the Potresovs and the
otzovists. “The alliance of the two strong factions” performed its work,
and in the above-mentioned model organisations it reached a stage where a
complete merging into a single party could be effected. The waverings of
the pro-Party Mensheviks abroad can no longer alter this accomplished fact.


The two years following the Plenary Meeting, which to many sceptics or
dilettantes in Social-Democracy who do not wish to understand the devilish
difficulty of the task, seem to be years of useless, hopeless, senseless
squabbles, of disorganisation and ruin, were in reality years in which the
Social-Democratic Party was led out of the marsh of liquidationist and
otzovist waverings on to the high road. The year 1910 was a year of joint
work by Bolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks in all the leading
(both official and unofficial, legal and illegal) bodies of the Party; this
was the first step of the “alliance of the two strong factions” towards
ideological preparation, the gathering of the forces under a single banner,
that of anti-liquidationism and anti otzovism. The year 1911 has witnessed
the second step–the creation of the Russian Organising Commission. The
fact that a pro-Party Menshevik presided at its first meeting is
significant: the second step, the creation of an actually functioning
centre in Russia, has now been taken. The locomotive has been raised and
placed on the rails.  

For the first time following four years of ruin and
disorganisation, a Social-Democratic centre has met together in Russia—in
spite of incredible persecution by the police

    

and the unheard-of intrigues of Golos, Vperyod, the conciliators,
the Poles, and tutti quanti. For the first time a leaf let has
appeared in Russia addressed to the Party by that

centre.[11] For the first time the work of re-establishing the local
underground organisations has systematically and thoroughly covered both
capital cities, the Volga Region, the Urals, the Caucasus, Kiev,
Ekaterinoslav, Rostov, Nikolayev. All this has taken place in about three
months, from July to October 1911, for the Russian Organising Commission
met only after all these places had been visited. Its first
meeting took place simultaneously with the restoration of the
St. Petersburg Party Committee and with a series of workers’ meetings
arranged by it, and with the passing of resolutions by the Moscow city
district organisations in favour of the Party, etc.  

Of course it would be unpardonable naïveté to indulge in
light-hearted optimism; we are still confronted with enormous difficulties;
police persecution has increased ten fold since the first leaflet by the
Social-Democratic centre was published in Russia; one may anticipate long
and hard months of work, new arrests and new interruptions. But the main
thing has been accomplished. The banner has been raised, workers’ circles
all over Russia are being drawn to it, and no counter-revolutionary attack
can possibly haul it down.  


How did the conciliators abroad, and Tyszka and Leder, respond to this
gigantic stride forward in the work in Russia? By a final flare-up of
miserable intrigue. The “growth of the abscess”, which was so
prophetically foretold by Ionov on the eve of the Plenary Meeting, is
unpleasant, no doubt. But anyone who does not understand that this
unsightly process makes Social-Democracy healthier should not
apply himself to revolutionary work! The Technical Commission and the
Organising Commission Abroad refuse to submit to the Russian Organising
Commission. The Bolsheviks, of course, turn their backs upon those
intriguing abroad with contempt. Then vacillations set in. At the beginning
of November, a report on the calling together of the Russian Organising
Commission was delivered to the remnants of the

    

Organising Commission Abroad (two Poles and one conciliator). The report
presented such a comprehensive survey of the work that the opponents of the
Bolsheviks, the conciliators whom Golos praised, were
forced to recognise the Russian Organising Commission. The Organising
Commission Abroad resolved on November 13, 1911, “to be guided by the
decisions of the Russian Organising Commission”. Four-fifths of the money
in possession of the Organising Commission Abroad is transferred to the
Russian Organising Commission, which indicates that the Poles and
conciliators themselves are not able to cast a shadow of doubt on
the seriousness of the whole undertaking.  

Nevertheless, a few days later, both the Technical Commission and the
Organising Commission Abroad again refused to submit to the Russian
Organising Commission!! What is the meaning of this game?  

The editors of the Central Organ are in possession of a

document[12] which will be submitted to the conference and which reveals
that Tyszka is agitating for non-participation in the Russian Organising
Commission and for non participation in the conference.  

Is it possible to imagine more vile intrigue than this? In the
Technical Commission and in the Organising Commission Abroad they undertook
to help convene the conference and to form the Russian Organising
Commission. They boast ed that they would invite “all”, but invited no
one (though, being in the majority, they had the right to do so and to
stipulate any conditions). They could find no one to do the work except the
Bolsheviks and the pro-Party Mensheviks. They suffered utter defeat in the
field they themselves had chosen. They sank so low as to attempt to “trip
up” the Russian Organising Commission, to which, as the authorised body,
they had voluntarily handed over four-fifths of their funds for convening
the conference!  

Yes, an abscess is an unpleasant affair, especially when it is in the
process of growth. In No. 24 of the Central Organ it has already been shown
why the theoreticians of an alliance of all and sundry groups abroad can
only engage in intrigues. Now the Russian worker Social-Democrats will make
their choice without any difficulty: whether to defend their Russian
Organising Commission and their conference,

    

or to allow Tyszka, Leder and Co. to sabotage their conference by
intrigues. The intriguers have condemned them selves—that is a fact;
Tyszka and Leder have already passed convicted into the history of the
R.S.D.L.P., but they will never succeed in hindering the conference or in
undermining the Russian Organising Commission.  

What about the liquidators? For eighteen months, from January 1910 to
June 1911, when they had a majority in the Central Committee Bureau Abroad
and faithful “friends” in the persons of the conciliators in the Central
Committee Bureau in Russia, they did nothing, absolutely nothing, to
further the work in Russia! When they were in the majority—work was at a
standstill. But when the Bolsheviks broke up the liquidationist Central
Committee Bureau Abroad and proceeded to convene the conference, the
liquidators began to bestir themselves. The form in which that “stir”
expressed itself is very characteristic. The Bundists, who have always very
faithfully served the liquidators, recently wanted to take advantage of the
present “time of troubles” (among the Latvians, for instance, the issue
of the struggle between the two tendencies—liquidationist and Party—has
not yet been decided); they got hold of a Caucasian somewhere and the whole
company went to the city of

Z[13] to grab signatures for the resolutions drafted by Trotsky and Dan
in Café Bubenberg (in Berne, August 1911). But they failed to find
the leading Latvian organisation; they failed to get the signatures, and no
document with the high-sounding heading “Organising Commission of the
Three Strongest Organisations” was prepared. Such are the

facts.[4]


Let the Russian workers learn about the way the Bundists are trying to
break up the Russian Organising Commission in Russia! Just think: at a time
when the comrades preparing the conference were touring the Urals, the
Volga

    

Region, St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev, Ekaterinoslav, has toy, Tiflis,
Baku—the Bundists “got hold of” a “Caucasian” (probably one of those
committee men who were in possession of the “seal” of the Regional
Caucasian Committee and who, in December 1908, sent Dan and Axelrod as
representatives to the conference of the R.S.D.L.P.) and took a journey in
order to “grab signatures” from the Latvians. Not much more was needed to
cause this gang of intriguers, who serve the liquidators and who are
absolutely alien to all work in Russia, to come out as the “Organising
Commission” of “three organisations” (including the two “strongest”
possessors of the seal!). Or perhaps the Bundist gentlemen and the
Caucasian will please inform the Party what Russian organisations they
visited, when exactly they made these journeys, where they restored the
work, and where they made reports? Do try and tell us, dear fellows!  

And the past masters of diplomacy abroad with the serious mien of
experts, pass judgement: “one must not isolate oneself”, “it is
necessary to talk things over with the Bund and with the Regional Caucasian
Committee”.  

What comedians!  

Let those who are wavering now, who regret the “isolation” of the
Bolsheviks, learn and ponder over the significance of the history of the
Party during these past two years. This isolation makes us feel
better than we have ever felt before now that we have cut off the bunch of
intriguing nonentities abroad, and have helped to consolidate the ranks of
the Russian worker Social-Democrats of St. Petersburg, Moscow, the Urals,
the Volga Region, the Caucasus, and the South!  

Anyone who complains about isolation understands absolutely nothing of
the great ideological work accomplished by the Plenary Meeting or of its
conciliationist mistake. For a year and a half after the Meeting there was
a semblance of unity abroad and complete stagnation of Social-Democratic
work in Russia. For the first time in four or six months of 1911 the
seemingly extreme isolation of the Bolsheviks served as an impetus to
Social-Democratic work in Russia, and restored the Social-Democratic centre
in Russia.  

Those who have not yet understood the ideological danger of such
“abscesses” as liquidationism and otzovism

    

will now understand it from the history of the impotent squabbles and
miserable intrigue to which the wretched Golos and
Vperyod groups have sunk, dragging with them, in their fall, all
those who attempted to defend them.  

To work, comrades, Party Social-Democrats! Shake off the last remnants
of your contacts with non-Social-Democratic tendencies and the groups that
foster them in spite of the decisions of the Party. Rally round the Russian
Organising Commission, help it convene a conference and strengthen local
work. The R.S.D.L.P. has gone through a serious illness; the crisis is
passing.  

Long live the united, illegal, revolutionary Russian Social-Democratic
Labour Party!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 16, “Notes of a Publicist,
II”.—Ed.  

[2]
Voice of the Liquidators, punning on Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata (Voice of a Social-Democrat).—Tr 

[3]
See pp. 257–77 of this volume.—Ed.  

[4]
In addition to the never-lose-heart Bundists, the Vperyod
people also galloped off to snatch resolutions. From that tiny group—by
no means otzovist, heaven forbid!—there galloped off a well-known

otzovist[14]; he “galloped” through Kiev, Moscow, Nizhni-Novgorod,
“reconciled himself” with the conciliators, and went away without
achieving anything anywhere. It is said that the Vperyod group
blames the unsatisfactory god devised by Lunacharsky for its failure and
that it passed a unanimous resolution to devise a better god.  —Lenin
 



[5]
Russian Organising Commission (R.O.C.) for the convening of a
Party conference was formed at the end of September 1911 at a meeting of
representatives of local Party organisations. The meeting opened in Baku
and was guided by G. K. Orjonikidze who had been delegated to call the
conference by the Organising Commission Abroad. Representatives of the
Baku, Tiflis, Ekaterinburg, Kiev, and Ekaterinoslav organisations took
part. Among the delegates were S. G. Shahumyan and S. S. Spandaryan. In
view of police persecution and the danger of those participating in the
meeting being arrested it was transferred to Tiflis. The Meeting discussed
reports from local organisations, the constitution of the R.O.C., relations
with the Organising Commission Abroad, elections to the conference,
representation from legal organisations, and elections from the non-Russian
organisations. A report


   

of the meeting of the Russian Organising Commission was published by
G. K. Orjonikidze in No. 25 of Sotsial-Demokrat, December 8 (21),
1914. The meeting drew up an appeal to the local organisations, and issued
it in leaflet form together with the resolutions of the meeting.





[6]
Lenin is referring to the Bolshevik organs, the newspaper
Zvezda and the magazine Mysl, to which pro-Party
Mensheviks also contributed.





[7]
For more information see Lenin’s article “The Results of the
Arbitration of the ‘Trustees’\thinspace”





[8]
Mark—pseudonym of A. I. Lyubimov.





[9]
Otkliki Bunda (Echoes of the Bund)—an organ of the
Bund committee abroad which appeared at irregular intervals in Geneva from
March 1909 to February 1911. There were five issues.





[10]
The Baku Social-Democratic Party organisation was one of the
most active local bodies during the period of reaction and the years of the
new revolutionary upsurge. At the beginning of 1911 the Baku Bolshevik
Committee and the “leading Menshevik group members” (pro-Party
Mensheviks) united for struggle against otzovism and liquidationism, and
for the revival of the illegal R.S.D.L.P.; they formed the United Baku
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. The Baku Committee supported the decision of
the 1911 June Meeting of members of the Central Committee to convene an
all-Russia Party conference and actively participated in setting up the
Russian Organising Commission.  

The Kiev Social-Democratic Party organisation worked almost
uninterruptedly during the years of reaction. In 1910–11, the Bolsheviks
worked with the pro-Party Mensheviks. The Kiev organisation was the first
to support the June Meeting of the Central Committee members and the idea
of forming the Russian Organising Commission to convene a Party conference,
appointing one of its Committee members to assist the representative of the
Organising Commission Abroad.





[11]
This refers to the leaflet issued by the Russian Organising Commission
in the autumn of 1911.





[12]
Lenin is referring to G. K. Orjonikidze’s letter to the Editorial Board
of Sotsial-Demokrat, published in No. 25 of December 8 (21), 1911,
under the signature of N.





[13]
The city of Z refers to Brussels, where the Social-Democratic
Party of the Latvian Region had its committee abroad.




[14]
This refers to the otzovist Stanislav Volsky (the pseudonym of
A. V. Sokolov).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (December 8, 1911)









Lenin: From the Camp of the Stolypin 'Labour' Party (December 8, 1911)







V. I.  

      Lenin
From the Camp of the Stolypin “Labour” Party (December 8, 1911)




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 354-359.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

An outstanding event in this camp is the article by
N. R-kov published in No. 9–10 of the liquidationist Nasha
Zarya. This article is a real Credo or manifesto of a liberal
labour party. From the very beginning, from his assessment of the
revolution and the role of all the classes involved, and proceeding with
remarkable consistency to the end, to the scheme for a legal workers’ (?)
party, in all his arguments, R-kov substitutes liberalism for Marxism.


What is the real task facing Russia? The complete replacement of
semi-feudal economy by “civilised capitalism”.  

That is not Marxism, however, but Struveism or liberalism, for a
Marxist distinguishes between classes with their Octobrist, Cadet,
Trudovik, or proletarian ideas as to what constitutes “civilised”
capitalism.  

What is the crux of the problem of appraising of the revolution? R-kov
condemns the whining and renegacy of those who shout that the revolution
has “failed” and against them puts forward ... the great professorial
maxim that during periods of “reaction” too, new social forces are
maturing. It is evident that R-kov’s answer disguises the essence
of the matter to the advantage of the counter-revolutionary liberals who
fully acknowledge the maxim newly-discovered by R-kov. The essence of the
question is: which of the classes that took part in the revolution showed
that they were capable of waging a direct, mass revolutionary struggle,
which classes betrayed the revolution and directly or indirectly joined the
counter-revolution? R-kov concealed this essence and was thus able to
ignore the difference between

    

revolutionary democracy and the liberal-monarchist “progressive”
opposition.  

As regards the role of the landlord class, R-kov managed without
further ado to say something absurd. Not so long ago, he says, the
representatives of that class “were” real serf-owners; now “a small
handful are still grouped around Messrs. Purishkevich and Markov the
Second, and are helplessly [U spluttering the venom of despair”. The
majority of the landed nobility, he goes on to say, “are gradually and
steadily being converted into an agricultural bourgeoisie”.  

In actual fact, as everybody knows, the Markovs and the Purishkeviches
have full power in the Duma, still more in the Council of State,
and even more in the tsar’s Black-Hundred clique, and yet more in the
administration of Russia. It is precisely “their power and their revenue”
(resolution of the December 1908 conference) that are guaranteed by a step
in this kind of transformation of tsarism into a bourgeois
monarchy. The conversion of serf economy into bourgeois economy by no means
does away immediately with the political power of these Black-Hundred-type
landowners. This is obvious from the viewpoint of elementary Marxism, and
it also follows from the experience, say, of Prussia after sixty years of
“conversion” (since 1848). According to R-kov there is no absolutism and
no monarchy in Russia! R-kov applies a liberal school method: the benign
elimination (on paper) of social extremes serves as “proof” that a
“compromise is inevitable”.  

Present-day agrarian policy, according to R-kov, indicates an
“imminent and inevitable [!] compromise”—between whom?—“between the
different groups of the bourgeoisie”. But, we ask our “Marxist”, what
social force will compel the Purishkeviches, who wield all the power, to
agree to a compromise? R-kov does not answer this question. But since he
goes on to refer to the process of the consolidation of the big commercial
and industrial bourgeoisie, and “the impending domination of the
moderately progressive” bourgeoisie, there is only one conclusion to be
drawn—R-kov expects that the moderately progressive bourgeoisie will
peacefully take over power from the Purishkeviches and Romanovs.  
 

Incredible as this is, it is a fact. It is precisely this most puerile
of liberal utopias that forms the basis of R-kov’s conception, although he
boasts that “there is not a grain of utopia” in what he says. There is no
actual difference between N. R-kov and the extreme liquidators, all of
whom—from Larin to Cherevanin, Dan, and Martov—set forth, in slightly
different forms and phrases, the very same fundamental idea of a
peaceful assumption of power by the bourgeoisie (with, at most,
pressure exerted from “below”).  

But in real life not in a liberal utopia, we see the domination of
Purishkevichism moderated by the grumbling of the Guchkovs and
Milyukovs. The “moderately progressive” Octobrists and Cadets, far from
undermining this domination, are perpetuating it. The contradiction between
this domination and the unquestionably advancing bourgeois development of
Russia is becoming ever sharper (and not weaker, as the theorists of
“inevitable compromise” think). The motive force in the solution of this
contradiction can only be the masses, i.e., the proletariat with the
peasantry following its lead.  

This former Bolshevik, who has now become a liquidator, dismisses these
masses so readily, that it is as if the Stolypin gallows and the torrent of
filth let loose by Vekhi had eliminated them, not only from the
arena of open politics, not only from the pages of liberal publications,
but also from real life. The peasantry, says our liberal in his
“analysis”, are weak at the elections; and as for the Working class, he
provisionally leaves it “out of consideration”!!  

R-kov undertook to prove that a revolution (“upheaval”) in Russia,
though possible, is not essential. Once the working class and the peasantry
are “left out of consideration”, even if only provisionally, if only
“for the time being”, if only because of their “weakness at the
elections”, a revolution is not, of course, possible, to say nothing of
its being essential. But liberal benevolence cannot conjure away either the
unrestricted power of Purishkevich and Romanov, or the revolutionary
resistance which is growing stronger both among the maturing proletariat
and the starving and tormented peasantry. The trouble with R-kov is that he
has abandoned the Marxist line, the line followed by revolutionary
Social-Democrats, who always, under all circumstances

    

and in every possible form, in speeches at mass meetings, from the rostrum
of the Third Duma, at meetings of Soviets of Workers’ Deputies, or in the
most peaceable and legally functioning workers’ associations, insist that
this resistance must be given support, that it must be strengthened,
developed, and properly directed toward the achievement of complete
victory. In all his arguments N. R-kov has substituted for this line that
of the liberal who refuses to see the force that has been driven
underground, who refuses to see anything but the Purishkeviches who are
being “converted” into “civilised Junkers”, or the “moderately
progressive” Milyukovs.  

That is the specific kind of blindness which is characteristic of the
whole of Nasha Zarya and of the whole Stolypin labour
party. Closely connected with this conception—one due to the blindness
caused by liberal blinkers—is the extraordinarily strong emphasis on the
legalisation of the workers’ party. Since “a compromise is inevitable”,
there is no point in fighting the inevitable, and all that remains for the
working class to do is to follow the example of the other classes of the
fully established bourgeois system and feather for itself a humble little
philistine nest in a nook of this system. That is the real meaning of the
legalists’ propaganda, no matter how much Martov, given that role by the
Potresovs, Yuri Chatskys, Larins, Dans, and others, may hide it behind
“revolutionary” phraseology.  

This real meaning of a legal “association for the protection
of the interests of the working class” is very clearly revealed in R-kov’s
article. It is obvious that the “powers that be” will never permit such
an association, even if it is dominated by the Prokopoviches. It is obvious
that they will never agree to let it be “put into effect”. Only blind
liberals can fail to see this. But an association of intellectuals
who, under the guise of socialism, are spreading liberal
propaganda among the working masses is something that has already been put
into effect. This “association” consists of the contributors to Nasha
Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni. And it is their “banner”, the
ideological banner of liberalism, that R-kov “unfurls” when he asserts
that, unless there exists an open organisation the struggle will inevitably
(!) assume an anarchist character; that the old slogans have become

    

dead letters; that tactics must not be reduced to a “scuffle”; that the
new “association” harbours “no thought [!] of the need for a
forcible revolution”, etc. This liberal, renegade propaganda of
intellectuals is a reality, whereas the talk of an open working-class
association is mere eyewash. An association for the liberal protection of
the interests of the working class as understood by the liberals is a
reality; Nasha Zarya is this “association”, and the “open and
broad political organisation” of workers in present-day Russia, is an
innocuous, empty, misleading liberal dream.  

It is a useful thing to organise legally functioning trade unions, as
long as we are aware that under present conditions they cannot become
either broad, or “political”, or stable. But it is an empty and harmful
occupation to preach liberal concepts of a political workers’ association
that exclude any idea of the use of force.  

In conclusion, here are two amusing bits. The first: “If anyone,”
writes R-kov, “blinded by reactionary frenzy, took it into his head to
accuse the members of such an association of striving for violent
revolution, the whole burden of such an absurd, unfounded, and juridically
flimsy accusation would fall upon the head of the accuser.” We can just
visualise the picture of the burden of juridically flimsy accusations
falling upon the heads of Shcheglovitov and Co.—and it is not Rodichev
but N. R-kov who crushes them under that “burden”. 

The second: “The workers,” writes R-kov, “must assume the task of
political hegemony in the struggle for a democratic system.” R-kov is in
favour of hegemony after he has deprived it of its entire
meaning. “Workers,” says R-kov in effect, “you must not fight
against the ‘inevitable’ compromise, but you must call yourselves
leaders.” But the very thing a leader has to do is to expose the fiction
about a compromise being “inevitable” and to work to organise proletarian
and proletarian-peasant resistance to undemocratic bourgeois compromises.


N. R-kov will be as useful in the struggle against liquidationism, as
Y. Larin was in the struggle against the false idea of a labour
congress. N. R-kov and Y. Larin have had the courage to appear
... naked. R-kov is an honest liquidator. By his fearlessness he will
compel people to think about

    

the ideological roots of liquidationism. He will provide ever more
corroboration of the correctness of the December 1908 resolutions of the
R.S.D.L.P., for he regularly poses (and invariably gives wrong answers to)
the very problems which those resolutions analysed and answered
correctly. R-kov will help the workers to obtain a particularly clear idea
of the wretchedness of those liquidationist diplomats who, like the editors
of Nasha Zarya (or of Golos), twist and turn, piling up
reservation upon reservation, and disclaiming responsibility for “certain
passages” in R-kov’s article, or for the “detailed exposition” of his
plan. As if it were a question of separate passages, and not of a uniform,
integral, and consistent line—the line of a liberal labour policy!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Trotsky's Diplomacy and a Certain Party Platform









Lenin: Trotsky's Diplomacy and a Certain Party Platform







V. I.  

      Lenin
Trotsky’s Diplomacy and a Certain Party Platform




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 360-364.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Trotsky’s Pravda, No. 22, which appeared recently
after a long interval in which no issue was published, vividly illustrates
the decay of the petty groups abroad that attempted to base their existence
on their diplomatic game with the non-Social-Democratic trends of
liquidationism and otzovism.  

The publication appeared on November 29, New Style, nearly a month
after the announcement issued by the Russian Organising
Commission. Trotsky makes no mention of this whatsoever!  

As far as Trotsky is concerned, the Russian Organising Commission does
not exist. Trotsky calls himself a Party man on the strength of the fact
that to him the Russian Party centre, formed by the overwhelming majority
of the Social-Democratic organisations in Russia, means nothing. Or,
perhaps it is the other way round, comrades? Perhaps Trotsky, with his
small group abroad, is just nothing so far as the Social-Democratic
organisations in Russia are concerned?  

Trotsky uses the boldest type for his assertions—it’s a wonder he
never tires of making solemn vows—that his paper is “not a factional but
a Party organ”. You need only pay some little attention to the contents of
No. 22 to see at once the obvious mechanics of the game with the
non- Party Vperyod and liquidator factions.  

Take the report from St. Petersburg, signed S. V., which advertises the
Vperyod group. S. V. reproaches Trotsky for not having published
the resolution of the St. Petersburg Vperyod group against the
petition

campaign,[1] sent to him some time ago. Trotsky, accused by the
Vperyod group of “narrow factionalism” (what black
ingratitude!), twists and

    

turns, pleading lack of funds and the fact that his paper does not appear
often enough. The game is too obvious:

We will do you a good turn, and you do the same for us—we (Trotsky) will
keep silent about the fight of the Party people against the otzovists and,
again, we (Trotsky) will help advertise Vperyod, and you (S. V.)
give in to the liquidators on the question of the “petition
campaign”. Diplomatic defence of both non-Party factions—isn’t that the
sign of a true Party spirit?  

Or take the florid editorial grandly entitled
“Onward!”. “Class-conscious workers!” we read in that editorial. “At
the present moment there is no more important [sic!]  and comprehensive
slogan [the poor fellow has let his tongue run away with him] than freedom
of association, assembly, and strikes.” “The Social-Democrats,” we read
further, “call upon the proletariat to fight for a republic. But if the
fight for a republic is not to he merely the bare [!!] slogan of a select
few, it is necessary that you class-conscious workers should teach the
masses to realise from experience the need for freedom of association and
to fight for this most vital class demand.”  

This revolutionary phraseology merely serves to disguise and justify
the falsity of liquidationism, and thereby to befuddle the minds of the
workers. Why is the slogan calling for a republic the bare slogan
of a select few when the existence of a republic means that it
would be impossible to disperse the Duma, means freedom of association and
of the press, means freeing the peasants from violence and plunder by the
Markovs, Romanovs, and Purishkeviches? Is it not clear that it is just the
opposite—that it is the slogan of “freedom of association” as a
“comprehensive” slogan, used independently of the slogan of a
republic, that is “bare” and senseless?  

It is absurd to demand “freedom of association” from the tsarist
monarchy, without explaining to the masses that such freedom cannot be
expected from tsarism and that to obtain it there must be a republic. The
introduction of bills into the Duma on freedom of association, and
questions and speeches on such subjects, ought to serve us Social-Democrats
as an occasion and material for our agitation in favour of a republic.

 

The “class-conscious workers should teach the masses to realise from
experience the need for freedom of association”! This is the old song of
old Russian opportunism, the opportunism long ago preached to death by the
Economists. The experience of the masses is that the ministers are
closing down their unions, that the governors and police officers are daily
perpetrating deeds of violence against them—this is real experience
of the masses. But extolling the slogan of “freedom of association”
as opposed to a republic is merely phrase-mongering by an opportunist
intellectual who is alien to the masses. It is the phrase-mongering of an
intellectual who imagines that the “experience” of a “petition” (with
1,300 signatures) or a pigeon-holed bill is something that educates the
“masses”. Actually, it is not paper experience, but something different,
the experience of life that educates them; what enlightens them is the
agitation of the class-conscious workers for a republic—which is the sole
comprehensive slogan from the standpoint of political democracy.  

Trotsky knows perfectly well that liquidators writing in legal
publications combine this very slogan of “freedom of
association” with the slogan “down with the underground party, down with
the struggle for a republic”. Trotsky’s particular task is to conceal
liquidationism by throwing dust in the eyes of the workers.  


It is impossible to argue with Trotsky on the merits of the issue,
because Trotsky holds no views whatever. We can and should argue with
confirmed liquidators and otzovists; but it is no use arguing with a man
whose game is to hide the errors of both these trends; in his case the
thing to do is to expose him as a diplomat of the smallest calibre.  

It is necessary, however, to argue with the authors of the theses of
the platform that got into No. 22 of Pravda. The error they are
committing is due either to their not being familiar with the December 1908
resolutions of the R.S.D.L.P., or to their not having rid themselves
completely of some liquidationist and Vperyod waverings of
thought.  

The first thesis says that the regime established on June 3, 1907,
represents, “in fact, the unrestricted domination of

    

the feudal-type landed nobility”. It goes on to point out that they are
“disguising the autocratic and bureaucratic nature of their domination
with the pseudo-constitutional mask of a State Duma that actually possesses
no rights”.  

If the landowners’ Duma “actually possesses no rights”—and that is
true—how, then, can the domination of the landowners be “unrestricted”?


The authors forget that the class character of the tsarist monarchy in
no way militates against the vast independence and self-sufficiency of the
tsarist authorities and of the “bureaucracy”, from Nicholas II down to
the last police officer. The same mistake, that of forgetting the autocracy
and the monarchy, of reducing it directly to the “pure”
domination of the upper classes, was committed by the otzovists in 1908–09
(see Proletary, supplement to

No. 44),[2] by Larin in 1910, it is now being committed by some
individual writers (for instance,

M. Alexandrov[3]), and also by N. R-kov who has gone over to the
liquidators.  

The analysis of the domination of the feudal landowners assisted by the
bourgeoisie, given in the December (1908) resolutions, strikes at the roots
of this error.  

The second thesis refers to the minimum programme of the R.S.D.L.P.,
and in this connection “a particularly prominent place” is given to many
demands, such as the demand for freedom of association and for the
confiscation of the landed estates, but no mention is made of a
republic. In our opinion, this is wrong. While we fully admit that it is
absolutely necessary to agitate for freedom of association, we consider
that the slogan calling for a republic must be given the greatest
prominence.  

The third thesis: “The necessity of new revolutionary action on the
part of the masses”, without which our demands cannot be achieved.  

This last statement is absolutely true, but it is only half the
truth. Marxists cannot confine themselves to a reference to the
“necessity” of new action on the part of the masses; they must first show
the causes that give rise (if they do give rise) to a new revolutionary
crisis. Unless there is such a crisis, “action”—which, indeed, is
always “necessary”—is impossible.  

The authors are actuated by the best of revolutionary

    

intentions, but there is some defect in their method of thought. The
December (1908) resolutions deduce the “necessity” of new action by a
process of reasoning that is not so simple, but that is, however, more
correct.  

The fourth thesis: “The possibility of such new revolutionary action
on the part of the masses in the more or less Immediate future, and
relentless criticism ... of the counter revolutionary role of the
bourgeoisie”, etc.  

Criticism is always necessary, irrespective of “the
possibility of action”, even at a time when action on the part of the
masses is definitely impossible. To tie up the possibility of action with
criticism means confusing the Marxist line, which is
always obligatory, with one of the forms of the struggle
(a particularly high form). That is the first error. And the second error
may be described by the saying:

“Don’t halloo until you are out of the wood”. It is pointless to talk of
the possibility of action, this must be proved by deeds. In a platform it
is sufficient to note that a revival has set in, and to emphasise the
importance of carrying on agitation and paving the way for the action of
the masses. Events will show whether the action of the masses will become a
fact in the near or not so distant future.  

The fifth thesis is splendid, for it stresses the immense importance of
the State Duma as a platform from which to carry on agitation.  

We do not know who the authors of the platform are. But if (judging by
certain indications) they are Russian Vperyod-ists they should be
warmly congratulated on having got rid of one error of the Vperyod
group. They are Vperyod-ists with the conscience of Party people, for they
give a straight forward and clear answer to one of the “vexed”
questions. The Vperyod group, however, is deceiving the Party in
the most unscrupulous manner; for it is defending and screening otzovism,
and to this day, December 1911, it has not given a straight answer to the
question of participation in the Fourth Duma. To treat such a group as
Social-Democratic is a mockery of Social-Democracy.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The petition campaign refers to a fuss created by the
liquidators and Trotsky for agitational purposes around a petition drawn up
by the St. Petersburg liquidators in December 1910. The petition, which
demanded freedom to organise unions, to hold meetings, and to strike, was
to be sent to the Third Duma in the name of the workers. However, the
petition campaign was not a success among tile workers, only 1,300
signatures having been collected. The Bolsheviks exposed the
“liquidationist” character of tile petition campaign, and the Resolution
of the Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. “The
‘Petition Campaign’\thinspace” defined the attitude of the Bolsheviks (see
pp. 479–80 of this volume).





[2]
Lenin is referring to the resolution put forward by the St. Petersburg
otzovists at the extended meeting of the St. Petersburg Committee prior to
the December All-Party Conference, 1908 (the Fifth Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P.). The resolution was published in the supplement to No. 44 of
Proletary, on April 4 (17), 1909. A critical analysis of this
document made by Lenin appears in the same supplement, in an article
entitled “A Caricature of Bolshevism”





[3]
M. Alexandrov—the Bolshevik M. S. Olminsky. Here and else
where, Lenin is referring to his pamphlet The State, Bureaucracy and
Absolutism in the History of Russia, St. Petersburg, 1910.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Results of the Arbitration of the “Trustees”









Lenin: The Results of the Arbitration of the 'Trustees'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Results of the Arbitration of the “Trustees”




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 25, December 8 (21), 1911.

      Published according to the Sotsial-Demokrat text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 365-367.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee in
January 1910, the representatives of the Bolshevik faction (recognised as
the representatives of that faction by all participants in the Meeting)
concluded, as is well known, an agreement with all the other factions of
our Party. This agreement was published in No. 11 of the Central Organ, and
its purport was that the Bolsheviks agreed to dissolve their faction and
transfer its property to the Central Commit tee, on condition that
all the other factions did the same and followed the Party line, that is to
say, an anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist line. The agreement, which
was endorsed by the Central Committee, definitely provided that in the
event of violation of these conditions the funds were to be returned to the
Bolsheviks (see the resolution, published in No. 11 of the Central Organ).


The generally known facts of the violation of that agreement by the
other factions compelled the Bolsheviks, a year ago, on December 5, 1910,
to file an application, i.e., to declare that the agreement was null and
void, and to demand the return of their funds.  

This demand had to be submitted to the “trustees”—Kautsky, Mehring,
and Zetkin—for arbitration. The court of arbitration ruled that,
provisionally, up to November 1, 1911, part of the funds were to be turned
over for account able expenditure to the Technical Commission and the
Organising Commission Abroad composed of representatives of the Bolsheviks,
conciliators, and the Poles.  

In October 1911, two of the arbitrators, Mehring and Kautsky, resigned
their posts. After this the third arbitrator

    

had not the right to exercise authority alone, and after some hesitation
also resigned.  

Thus it turned out that after November 2, 1911, the Bolshevik faction,
which had, on December 5, 1910, annulled the agreement with the other
factions, was no longer bound by any contractual relations with the former
trustees. Therefore it took possession of its printing-plant and is now
taking possession of its other property.  

Naturally, having freed itself from the “ties” with the
liquidationist, otzovist, and simply intrigue-mongering groups abroad, the
Bolshevik faction will devote all its energy, as has already been proved by
the efforts of its members in forming the Russian Organising Commission, to
rallying all the pro-Party elements around the Russian Organising
Commission and the general Party conference which it is convening.  

The representatives of the Bolshevik faction, who concluded the
agreement at the Plenary Meeting in

January 1910.[1] 

P. S. The above statement had already been submitted to the Editorial
Board of the Central Organ, when we read the leaflet of the so-called
Central Committee Bureau Abroad containing a letter from two of the former
arbitrators, dated November 18, 1911. Whom are Igorev and Lieber trying to
deceive by posing as the Central Committee Bureau Abroad, when the Letts
and even Tyszka have resigned from it? Why are they silent about
this resignation? Why do they say nothing about the fact that by November
18, two and a half weeks had elapsed since the court of arbitration had
ceased to exist, and that therefore the letter of November 18, 1911, has no
significance whatever, nor can it have any?  Or, are we, perhaps, to
conclude that prior to November 1, 1911, Igorev and Martov did
not recognise the court of arbitration? Then say so, gentlemen,
and prove it! Perhaps you recognise the court of arbitration after
November 1, 1911? Prior to November 1, 1911, you stood condemned
by the universally recognised court of arbitration; for, despite all your
entreaties, demands, and “protests”, it refused to give a centime to
either you or Trotsky. Now the gentlemen who were condemned by the
legitimate, universally recognised court of arbitration, are trying

    

to shelter behind the private opinion of former members of the court which
is no longer binding on anyone. Since the First of November, 1911,
no court of arbitration has existed, and in this respect we have all gone
back to the situation which existed prior to the Plenary Meeting. If the
former trustees now attempted to hold up the Bolshevik funds, that would be
an unlawful act.  

But the point is that all that Igorev and Lieber are after is to create
a “sensation”; they are afraid, however, to set forth the history of the
arbitration on the basis of exact documents. Unless you cheat you won’t
sell—that is their motto.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The signatures of Lenin and others follow.

    







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma









Lenin: The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma




Published:
Zvezda, Nos. 33, 34, 36, and 1 (37), December 10, 17, 31, 1911, and January 6, 1912.

      Signed: William Frey and W. Frey.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 368-387.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I. FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF PRINCIPLE
  368



II. THE ROLE OF WORKER ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN
  372



III. THE PEASANTRY AND THE PEASANT ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN
  380



IV. CONCLUSIONS BASED ON THE EXPERIENCE OF THE ELECTIONS TO THE THIRD DUMA
  384

 
 
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Questions of
      Principle









Lenin: 1911/ce4thd: I. FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF PRINCIPLE







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma



    
 

I. FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF PRINCIPLE

The Cadet Party, which, of all the so-called opposition parties is most
favourably situated because of its legal status, has just taken an
extremely important step by defining its policy in the election
campaign. To judge by the evidence of sources sympathising with the Cadets
and most accessible to us, its policy has been defined as follows: 

1. The Cadets will put up their own candidates wherever they are sure
of being elected.  

2. Wherever a Cadet candidate cannot expect an absolute majority, the
Cadets will support the progressive candidate likely to obtain the
highest vote, irrespective of his party affiliation.  

3. Where an opposition candidate has no chance at all, and there is the
danger of the election of a Black-Hundred candidate, support may be given
to the Octobrist candidate but only on condition that he is a genuine
constitutionalist which, strange as it may seem, they occasionally are.


4. The Cadets will not enter into any election agreements with the
Right Octobrists or with the Nationalists and monarchists. In general,
while not forgetting the interests of the Party, they will not sacrifice to
the latter the supreme interests of the opposition, in the broad sense of
the term.  

Such is Cadet policy. Working-class democracy must examine this policy
with the greatest attention, analysing its true class substance and its
real meaning, which are veiled in the usual conventional phrases. These
phrases about “the higher interests of the opposition”, etc., are

    

the first to strike the eye when we read the Cadet resolutions. The fact of
the matter, however, is that the policy of the Cadets has been fully and
finally defined as the policy of a Cadet-Octobrist bloc. This fact
must be understood, it is the grain that must be separated from the chaff
of official liberal catchwords; 

(1) Not a word about a bloc with the Lefts, with the democrats. (2)
Only blocs with Right Octobrists are forbidden—with the Gololobov

group,[3] who are an insignificant minority among the Octobrists. (3)
In practice the phrase about “the higher interests of the opposition in
the broad sense of the term” can only mean one thing: that as a
general rule blocs with the Octobrists are actually permitted (and
recommended!).  

These three conclusions regarding the real policy of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party must be firmly borne in mind.  

What do they mean? They mean that the “Left Centre” of the bourgeois
liberals has defined its policy as that of a bloc with the Right Centre of
the bourgeois so-called liberals—speaking openly of its hostility to the
Black Hundreds, and expressing its hostility to the Lefts, to the forces of
democracy, by omitting any reference to any blocs with the Trudoviks,
non-party Lefts, and workers’ candidates.  

What we said in Zvezda, No. 28, in the article “Two
Centres”, has been fully

      confirmed.[1]


There are three basic political forces in Russia, and,
consequently, three political lines—the Black Hundreds (representing the
class interests of the feudal landowners) and, alongside of and above,
them, the “bureaucracy”; then, the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, the
Left (Cadet) and Right (Octobrist) “Centre”; finally, the bourgeois
democrats (the Trudoviks, Narodniks, non-party Lefts) and proletarian
democracy. That this, and only this is the case, is confirmed by the entire
experience of the first decade of the twentieth century, which was an
extremely important and eventful decade.  

It goes without saying that all boundaries in nature and in society are
dynamic; they are not static, but, to a certain

    

extent, conditional and changing. Among the parties and groups standing
“on the boundary line” of the main divisions, transitional forms
and fluctuations are inevitable; but the substance of the matter, resulting
from the relations of the class forces in Russia at the beginning of the
twentieth century, is undoubtedly determined by none other than the
indicated “triple” division. The lumping of the bourgeois liberals
(headed by the Cadets) with the bourgeois democrats has caused considerable
harm to the Russian liberation movement, and we must bend every effort to
ensure that the experience of the great decade (1900–10) helps the
democratic movement as a whole to become finally aware that it is a fatal
mistake to lump things together in this fashion. Working-class democracy in
our epoch is, therefore, faced by two inseparably connected tasks: first,
to secure the independent political organisation of the class of
wage-earners, independent of all bosses, big and little, even the most
democratic, and pledging allegiance to the entire international movement of
that class; and, second, to develop and strengthen the forces of Russian
democracy (inevitably head ed by the workers, just as the bourgeois
liberals are inevitably headed by social elements of the Cadet type). The
latter task cannot be fulfilled unless we persistently explain to the
broadest masses the class roots and the political significance of the
difference between bourgeois liberalism (the Cadets) and bourgeois
democracy (the Trudoviks, etc.).  

The liberal bourgeoisie does not want to and cannot dispense with the
Markovs and Purishkeviches, whose domination it only strives to
moderate. Bourgeois democracy and the workers can only strive, more or less
consistently and consciously, to destroy all the economic and political
foundations of that domination.  

That, from the standpoint of working-class democracy, is the main
content of the campaign in connection with the elections to the Fourth
Duma. It is this content that must be primarily emphasised to counteract
the Cadet policy of deliberately confusing all the cardinal questions of
principle by means of stock phrases about “progressism” and
“opposition”.  

The Cadet-Octobrist bloc is nothing new. It was foreseen by Marxists
long ago. They pointed out the inherent class

    

affinity of the two component parts of this bloc as far back as
1905–07. Two possible majorities became defined as soon as the Third Duma
was convened, and by the end of 1907 the Marxists had made this conclusion
the cornerstone of their policy. The five years’ existence of the Third
Duma has confirmed this conclusion. In general outline, the composition of
the Third Duma is as

       follows:[2]






 




Rights . . . . . .
160
} } 


Octobrists . . . . .
124
} } 
284 — First majority

    251 — Second majority


Liberals . . . . . .
127


Democrats . . . . .
29


Total . . . 
440




Throughout its existence the Third Duma relied on these two majorities,
which represent the necessary component parts of the entire system
inaugurated on June 3, 1907. The first majority signifies that the “old”
is to be preserved in power entirely intact; the second majority signifies
“a step toward” a bourgeois monarchy. The first is needed by the June
Third system to preserve the “power and revenue” of the Markovs,
Purishkeviches and Co.; the second is needed to moderate this domination
and to advance in the bourgeois manner (according to the formula; one step
forward, two steps back). Experience has now clearly shown that this kind
of advance is equal to stagnation, and that no progress is being made in
“moderating” Purishkevichism.  

Quite a number of votes taken in the Third Duma were decided by the
“second majority”. Recently, Rech definitely admitted this,
stating that “a number of votes.” at the be ginning of the last session
“actually reproduce the domination of a Left Centre” (read of the
Cadet-Octobrist bloc) in the Duma. Such votes are possible only because the
second majority too, like the first, is a bulwark of
counter-revolution; to illustrate this we need only recall Vekhi,
or Karaulov’s pious speeches, or the “London” slogans.  
 

Where are the results of these “victories” of the second majority?
Where Is the proof of the truly marvellous discovery of the Cadet Party
that there are “genuine constitutionalists” among the Octobrists?
Doesn’t this discovery rather show how paltry is the Cadets’ conception of
“genuine constitutionalism”?  

The first and fundamental question of the election campaign is its
political content, the ideological line it expresses. The resolution of the
Cadet Party proves once more its anti-democratic nature, for the content of
the Cadets’ election campaign reduces itself to further lowering the
concept “constitutionalism” in the eyes of the masses. Instil into the
minds of the people the idea that there are genuine constitutionalists
among the “Left” Octobrists; that is what the Cadet Party is bent on,
that is the meaning of its election policy.  

The task of the democrats is a different one; not to belittle the idea
of constitutionalism, but to explain that as long as power and revenue
remain in the hands of the Markovs and their like it is nothing but a
fiction. The content of the election campaign of the working-class
democrats is determined by the task of bringing out the difference between
liberalism and democracy, of rallying the forces of the latter, and of
closing the ranks of the wage-workers throughout the world.  

The resolutions of their conference imply that the Cadets are departing
still further from democracy. Our task is to rally the forces of democracy
to counter every sort of medievalism, and to counter the Cadet-Octobrist
blocs.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 297–99 of this volume.—Ed 

[2]
The calculation is based on the figures supplied by the official
Handbook for 1910 (Issue II). The Rights include: Rights
proper—51, Nationalists—89, Right Octobrists—11, and 50 per cent of
the independents—9. The liberals include: Progressists—39, Cadets—52,
all the nationality groups—27, and 50 per cent of the
independents—9. The democrats include 14 Trudoviks and 15
Social-Democrats.  —Lenin
 



[3]
The Gololobov group—supporters of Y. G. Gololobov, one of
the extreme Right-wing members of the Union of October Seventeenth
(Octobrists) in the Third Duma.



 
  


|

II. THE ROLE OF WORKER ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Worker
      Electors









Lenin: 1911/ce4thd: II. THE ROLE OF WORKER ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma



    

II. THE ROLE OF WORKER ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION
CAMPAIGN

The campaign for the elections to the Fourth Duma has opened. It was
launched by the government sending out circular instructions on assistance
to the “national” party, and by taking “measures” to provide for the
qualifications of the government candidates, and to eliminate opposition
candidates in general, and democratic candidates in particular.  
 

The opposition press has also entered the election campaign. So has the
Cadet Party, and its first step was the adoption of resolutions providing
for a bloc with the “Left” Octobrists.  

Therefore, working-class democracy must immediately a the utmost
attention to the elections, and promptly, without a single week’s delay
discuss its tactics in all their details, preparing all supporters of
democracy in advance for the important and responsible role they are to
perform.  

In this article we propose to dwell on the role of worker electors. It
is clear that in this case too, as always, we must stress the content of
the work, that is to say, the ideological-political line of the
campaign. Educate and organise the working class, unite it in an
independent party that maintains solidarity with the West-European parties,
explain to the working class its historical aims in changing the basic
conditions of commodity economy and capitalism, segregate its party from
all bourgeois democratic trends, even those that are “Left”,
Narodnik, etc.—such is the basic task.  

This fundamental task is the same for working-class democracy in all
countries. And for this very reason its application in the present epoch in
one country, in Russia, requires that the special and concrete tasks of our
times be taken into consideration for the sake of this general
common task. At the present moment two of these specific tasks of Russian
working-class democracy are indissolubly connected and, because of
objective conditions, require the greatest attention. The first of these
two tasks is to under stand clearly the connection between the
liquidationist trend (represented, as we know, by the magazines
Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni) and the widespread
bourgeois counter-revolutionary Vekhi trend. It is necessary to be
clearly aware of the harm of bourgeois influence upon the proletariat in
order to overcome it and to achieve the immediate aims affecting the very
existence of working-class democracy, which the liquidators
are denying. The second is the task of organising the Left
democrats, clearly bearing in mind the necessity to draw a line between
democracy (bourgeois democracy) and bourgeois liberalism. This is
imperative if

    

working-class democracy is to exercise that leadership which is one of the
indispensable conditions for any step forward by the general movement for
freedom.  

The lumping of the liberals (the Constitutional-Democratic Party) with
the democrats (the Trudoviks, “Narodniks” of the Left persuasion) is
fundamentally wrong in principle, and, in practice, leads to the betrayal
of the interests of democracy. Upon the worker electors devolves the duty
of upholding the correct interpretation of the liberation movement and
explaining the class essence of the various parties (without allowing
themselves to be taken in by “labels”, fine words and fancy names); they
must draw a clear line between the Rights (from the Black Hundreds
to the Octobrists), the bourgeois liberals (the Cadets and their
kind), and the democrats (the Trudoviks and kindred trends are
bourgeois democrats; the Marxists represent proletarian democracy).  

In accordance with the electoral system instituted by the law of
June 3, 1907, the worker electors play a particular role in the gubernia
electoral assemblies. Therefore the immediate practical task is to ensure
that all these electors are staunch and loyal representatives of
working-class democracy.  

As we know, the election of one of the worker electors to the State
Duma is guaranteed in each of the following six gubernias: St. Petersburg,
Moscow, Vladimir, Ekaterinoslav, Kostroma, and Kharkov. But the deputies
are elected by the entire electoral assembly of each gubernia,
which means, as a rule, by the Right electors, landowners and big
bourgeoisie, Octobrists. To secure the election to the Duma of
working-class democrats we must see to it that all the worker electors,
without a single exception, are true working-class democrats and firmly
support one definite candidate from their midst. Even if only one worker
elector turns out to be a deserter, a liberal, a Right, the Octobrists will
be sure to elect him, against the will of the majority of the worker
electors!  

But the enumerated six gubernias are not the only ones having worker
electors in their electoral assemblies. Altogether the law provides for a
total of 112 worker electors in 44 gubernias (out of 53).  
 

What should be the role of these electors? To begin with, they must
always pursue a principled line, endeavouring to organise the forces of
democracy (particularly, the peasantry) and to help them cast off the
influence of the liberals. This is an extremely important field of
activity. Secondly, the worker electors are in a position (and should
strive) to take advantage of the vote being split between the Rights and
the liberals to elect their own candidates to the Duma.  

Here is an example to illustrate the last-named task. Two members of
the Third Duma from Vyatka Gubernia are Social-Democrats—Astrakhantsev
and Putyatin. Yet the law does not provide for a deputy from the worker
curia in Vyatka Gubernia. The gubernia electoral assembly in Vyatka is made
up of 109 electors, of whom four are elected by the workers. How, then, did
four workers (out of 109 electors) manage to send two
deputies to the Duma?  Most likely, the votes in the gubernia electoral
assembly were equally divided, and the liberals could not gain the upper
hand over the Rights without the support of the workers. Compelled to form
a bloc with the workers, the liberals had to share seats in the Duma with
them, and thus they elected two Social-Democrats to the Duma. The
representation from Vyatka in the Duma was constituted as follows: 1
Progressist, 3 Cadets, 2 Trudoviks, and 2 Social-Democrats, or 4 liberals
and 4 democrats. In that gubernia the workers might have gained three seats
had they succeeded in driving a wedge between the democratic electors and
the liberals, provided the former had had a majority over the
latter. Suppose that, out of 109 electors, 54 are Rights (50 out of the 53
electors chosen by the landowners and 4 out of the 17 electors from the
first assembly of urban voters). Let us suppose, further, that out of the
other 55 electors, 20 are liberals (three from the landowner curia, 13 from
the first urban curia, and four from the second urban curia), 35 are
democrats (23 peasant electors, 8 electors from the second urban curia and
4 from the worker curia). Under these circumstances the democrats would
have been bound to obtain 5 seats out of 8, and the workers could have
obtained 3 of these seats, provided they enjoyed the confidence of the
peasant democrats.  
 

In Ufa Gubernia all the seats were captured by the liberals
(including Moslems). Not a single representative of the democrats was
elected. Yet, considering that there were 30 peasant electors, the three
worker electors could undoubtedly have captured seats both for themselves
and the Trudoviks had they shown greater skill in organising the democratic
forces.  

Perm Gubernia is represented in the Third Duma by 6 liberals and 3
democrats, of whom only one is a Social-Democrat. Yet the situation in Perm
was as follows: there were 26 peasant electors, and out of them the
liberals, who had a majority in the gubernia electoral assembly,
elected a Trudovik, which means that the peasant curia was a hundred
per cent Trudovik (and if, among the peasants, there had been a single
deserter from the camp of democracy to the liberals, the latter would have
elected the deserter!). The same applies to the second urban curia (13
electors), because from that curia, too, a Trudovik was elected by the
votes of the liberals. Hence the number of democrats among the
electors may be placed at 26+13+5 workers==44, out of a total of 120
electors, including 59 from the landowner curia and 17 from the first urban
curia. Even assuming that, with the exception of the democrats, all the
electors were liberals, their number was 76, i.e., less than two-thirds. It
is more likely, however, that some of the electors were
Rights. Consequently, the liberals, although comprising less than
two-thirds in the electoral assembly, captured two-thirds of the Perm seats
in the Duma. The inevitable conclusion to be drawn from this is that, had
the democrats been more class-conscious and better organised (and it is
above all the workers who must see to this!), they would not have let the
liberals put anything over on them. The Social-Democrat Yegorov was elected
in Perm Gubernia at the general assembly of the electors, i.e., by the
liberals—which means that the liberals needed the support of the
workers. And it was plainly a mistake on the part of the workers, a direct
infringement of the interests of democracy, to give this support
without securing a proportionate share of the seats in
the Duma for democracy.  

In making these calculations we wish to emphasise that they are merely
meant as examples, to illustrate our idea,

    

for we are not in possession of any exact data regarding the party
affiliations of the electors in general or of the electors in each separate
curia. Actually, matters are more complicated and represent a more motley
picture than might be assumed from our examples. But it is necessary for
the workers to understand the basic relation of forces in the
“intricate mechanism” of elections based on the June Third law. Once they
have assimilated the fundamentals, they will be able to understand the
details as well.  

The two most democratic curias (after the worker curia, of course,
which can and should be completely Marxist, completely anti-liquidationist)
are the peasant curia and the second urban curia. Of these, the first is
more democratic than the second, despite the infinitely greater lack of
freedom at the elections in the rural districts and the infinitely worse
conditions for agitation and organisation among the peasants, as compared
with townspeople.  

Indeed, deputies specially elected at the second assembly of urban
voters to the Third Duma represented 28 gubernias. Among those thus elected
were 16 Rights, 10 liberals, and 2 democrats (Rozanov from Saratov and
Petrov the Third from Perm). Deputies specially elected from the peas ant
curia were sent to the Thud Duma from all the 53 gubernias. They included
23 Rights, 17 liberals, 5 democrats and 8 independents. If we divide the
independents equally between the Rights and the opposition, we obtain the
following comparative data: 





{{{ Members of the Third Duma
{{{ From the Second Urban Curia
{{{ From the Peasant Curia




Rights . . . . . .
16
27


Opposition parties
 12==43 per cent
26==49 per cent




Opposition deputies thus comprised 43 per cent of the deputies elected
by the second urban curia and 49 per cent of the deputies elected by the
peasant curia. Considering that, as we know, the peasant deputies in the
Third Duma introduced an agrarian bill which was in substance more
democratic than the bill introduced by the Cadets, and that the
bill bore the signatures also of independent and Right
    

peasant deputies, it is obvious that the democracy of the peasant curia
surpasses the democracy of the second urban curia to an even greater
extent than would appear from our data.  

Consequently, the workers in general and the worker electors in
particular must devote most of their attention to the peasant curia and the
peasant electors. As the organisers of the forces of democracy the workers
must carry on their activities in the first place among the peasants, and
then among the electors from the second urban curia. In both these curias
the intermingling of the liberals and democrats is particularly pronounced,
is particularly frequent, and is particularly cultivated by the Cadets, who
are taking ad vantage of their experience in “parliamentary deals” and
their “democratic” name (“Constitutional-Democrats”, the
“party of people’s freedom”), which disguises their
anti-democratic, Vekhi, counter-revolutionary substance,
in order brazenly to deceive politically undeveloped people.  

The ideological and political task of the workers at the present stage
of the Russian liberation movement is to organise the forces of
democracy. The technical work of the election campaign must be subordinated
to this task. Hence the necessity to devote special attention to the
peasant curia and then to the second urban curia. In the gubernia electoral
assembly, the first duty of the worker elector is to unite all the
democrats. In order to get himself nominated, the worker elector needs
three votes—he must find two peasant democrats or, if the worst comes to
the worst, persuade two liberals, who would not risk anything by nominating
a worker. The democratic members of the gubernia electoral assemblies
should form blocs with the liberals against the Rights. If it proves
impossible to form such a bloc immediately (and most likely this is what is
going to happen in the majority of cases, because the electors will not be
acquaint ed with each other), the tactics of the democrats should be to
unite first with the liberals to defeat the Rights, and then with the
Rights to defeat the liberals, so that neither are able to secure the
election of their candidates (provided that neither the Rights nor the
liberals command an absolute majority by themselves, for if they do the
democrats cannot hope to get into the Duma). In accordance with Article 119
of the

    

Regulations governing the elections, the assembly adjourns. Then the
democrats, guided by the exact figures of the votes cast, form a bloc with
the liberals, demanding a proportionate share of the seats. In such
cases it is essential that the liberals elect the democrat first and not
the other way round, for history and the entire experience of Europe
show that the liberals have often cheated the democrats, whereas the
democrats have never cheated the liberals.  

If they know which curias send democratic electors, and learn to drive
a wedge between the democrats and the liberals, the worker electors in
44 gubernias can play an enormous role both in organising the
forces of democracy in general and in securing the election of a larger
number of worker democrats and bourgeois democrats (Trudoviks) to the
Duma. In the present Duma there are fifteen of the former and fourteen of
the latter. If the workers pursue correct tactics they can, under
favourable conditions, secure the election of double that number. The
liberals are sure to have a strong group—about a hundred or more
deputies—in the Fourth Duma. They will constitute the “responsible
opposition” (of the London type) capable of forming a bloc with the
Octobrists. We must work to elect a group of several dozen deputies who
will constitute a really democratic opposition, not an opposition of the
Vekhi brand. And this can be achieved.  

The law gives the workers the right to choose electors in 44
gubernias. Class-conscious workers in each factory must at once familiarise
themselves with the law, take careful note of their duties and their
position, and ensure that the electors they send are genuine working-class
democrats, not liquidators.  

If, as a result of class-conscious, careful and systematic work one
hundred and twelve worker electors are elected, they can render very great
service both in rallying the working class, which everywhere in Europe
aspires to achieve lofty aims of world-wide significance, and also in
organising the forces of democracy in Russia.  

Time is short. Every class-conscious worker must shoulder this
difficult, but doubly worth-while task.  
    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

I. FUNDAMENTAL QUESTIONS OF PRINCIPLE

|

III. THE PEASANTRY AND THE PEASANT ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Peasantry and the
      Peasant Electors









Lenin: 1911/ce4thd: III. THE PEASANTRY AND THE PEASANT ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma



    

III. THE PEASANTRY AND THE PEASANT ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION
CAMPAIGN

In the preceding article (Zvezda, No. 34) we
discussed the role of the worker electors in the election campaign. The
long and the short of our reflections was that working-class democrats are
faced by a vital twofold task—to unite the class of wage-workers,
developing their class—consciousness, their understanding of the great
historical objectives of their class, and then to organise the forces of

      democracy.[1]


Let us now examine the question of non-proletarian, i.e., bourgeois,
democracy. What is its principal class basis in Russia? What are its
specific features, its immediate tasks? What is its role in the elections?


The principal class support for Russian bourgeois democracy is the
peasantry. The condition of the great bulk of the peasantry is so
burdensome, the oppression of the landowners so heavy, the economic
conditions so desperately bad, and its lack of civil rights so
extraordinarily great, that democratic feelings and desires are springing
up among them with an elusive spontaneous inevitability. The way out of the
situation which the bourgeois liberals (with the Cadet Party at their head)
picture to themselves—the sharing of power with the Purishkeviches, the
joint rule of the Purishkeviches and the Guchkovs (or the Milyukovs) over
the masses—cannot satisfy the peasant millions. That is why the class
position of the peasantry, on the one hand, and of the big bourgeoisie, on
the other, inevitably creates a wide gulf between democrats and liberals.


As a rule, neither of the two political trends is clearly defined,
neither is a fully conscious one, but it is a fact that the peasants
gravitate towards democracy, the bourgeoisie towards monarchist
liberalism; this was proved to the hilt during the extremely eventful first
decade of the twentieth century in Russia. Not only did the peasant masses
display their democracy in the liberation movement of 1905, and in the
First and Second Dumas, but even in the nobility-dominated Third Duma;
forty-three peasant deputies, including Rights and independents,
introduced an agrarian bill

    

which was more democratic than that introduced by the Cadets.  

In general, the land problem is the main problem of the Russian
peasantry today. Less than 30, 000 landowners in
European Russia possess 70 million dessiatines of land, and practically the
same amount is held by 10 million poor peasant households. On the one hand,
an average of 2,300 dessiatines per farm; on the other, an average of seven
dessiatines. At the present level of Russia’s historical development, this
could lead to but one economic result—the most widespread practice of all
sorts of “labour-service” economy, that is to say, of survivals of the
old corvée system. Peasants held in bondage, poverty such as has not
been seen in Europe for many years, and periodic famines reminiscent of the
Middle Ages, are consequences of this state of affairs.  

The Cadet bourgeoisie seeks to settle the agrarian problem in a liberal
fashion, so as to preserve the landed estates, selling part of the land to
the peasantry at “a fair price”, and giving the landowners the upper hand
over the peasants in the bodies effecting the “reform”. Naturally, the
peasants would certainly prefer a democratic solution of the agrarian
problem. This democratic solution, even if all the land is transferred to
the peasants without compensation, does not and cannot in the least
encroach on the foundations of capitalist society—the power of money,
commodity production, and the domination of the market. The peasants, for
the most part, have a rather hazy idea of the matter and the Narodniks have
created a complete ideology, a whole doctrine, which gave that haze
something of a “socialist” hue, although there is nothing socialist even
in the most radical agrarian revolution.  

But, in practice, as the peasant movement grows in volume and in
strength, the influence of this hazy conception diminishes, and the real,
democratic, substance of the agrarian wishes and demands of the peasants
becomes more pronounced. In this sphere, and even more so in the sphere of
political questions, of paramount importance is the role played by
working-class democracy and its struggle to prevent the submission of the
peasants to liberal leadership. It will be no exaggeration to say that
there is a very close connection between the successes of Russian democracy
as

    

a whole, those of the past and those yet to come, and the transfer of the
political leadership of the peasantry from the liberals to working-class
democracy. Unless this leadership passes to the working class, Russian
democracy cannot hope to attain any more or less serious successes.  

The electoral law of June 3, 1907, as we know, made the greatest
“inroads” upon the suffrage of the peasants. We need only remind the
readers that that law provided for an increase from 1,952 to 2,594, or 32.9
per cent in the number of electors sent by the landowners, while the number
of electors from the peasants and Cossacks was reduced to less than a half,
from 2,659 to 1,168, or by 56.1 per cent. In addition, the law of June 3,
1907, provides that the deputies to the Duma from the peasant curia
(officially designated:

“from conventions of delegates from

       volosts[2]

”)

are not to be chosen by the peasant electors alone, as was the case
previously, but by the entire electoral assembly of each gubernia, that is
to say, by bodies in which landowners and big capitalists predominate.


This being the procedure, the peasant democrats (Trudoviks) can secure
seats in the Duma only if all the peasant electors, without a
single exception, are Trudoviks. In that case the Bight landowners will be
compelled to elect Trudoviks from the peasant curia, just as they have been
compelled to elect Social-Democrats from the worker curia. However,
solidarity, organisation, and class-consciousness are naturally much less
developed among the peasants than among the workers. Thus there still
remains an almost untapped field of serious and rewarding work of political
education. And it is this sphere of activity that should command the main
attention of all democrats and all Marxists who “go among all classes of
the

    population”,[3]

and not that of making advances to and flirting with the counter
revolutionary liberals (the Cadets), a sphere that has become a favourite
one with the liquidators on Nasha Zarya, etc.  

We pointed out in the preceding article that in the elections to the
Third Duma the peasant curia proved to be the most democratic of the
non-proletarian curias. Out of

    

53 deputies elected to the Third Duma from the peasant curia, 26, or 49
per cent, were members of the opposition; whereas in the case of the second
urban curia (the second assembly of urban voters), only 12 out of 28, or 43
per cent, were members of the opposition. The number of democrats elected
to the Third Duma from the peasant curia was 5 out of 53, or 10 per cent;
whereas in the case of the second urban Curia, their number was 2 out of
28, or 7 per cent.  

It is worth while examining which gubernias elected representatives of
the opposition from the peasant curia and what was the composition of all
the deputies elected by each of them to the Third Duma. Of the 53
gubernias, in each of which the law provides for the election of one deputy
from the peasant curia, 23 sent Rights (including Octobrists) as
representatives of the peasant curia, 17 sent liberals (Cadets,
Progressists, and Moslems), and only five sent democrats
(Trudoviks). In eight gubernias independent peasants were elected.  

On closer examination we see that not a single one of the
gubernias which elected a majority of Right deputies to the Third Duma sent
a democrat to represent the peasant curia. Democrats (Trudoviks) were
elected only in those gubernias where no Right deputies were
returned. These five gubernias—Archangel, Vyatka, Perm, Stavropol, and
Tomsk—are represented in the Third Duma by 15 liberals, 8 Trudoviks, and
3 Social-Democrats. There is hardly any room for doubt that, had the
peasants and the workers in these gubernias been more class-conscious and
better organised, it would have been possible to increase, at the expense
of the liberals, the proportion of democrats elected.  

It may not be perhaps amiss to point out here that altogether 24
gubernias sent a majority of opposition deputies to the Third Duma. In 18
of these 24 only opposition deputies were elected. In all, these 24
gubernias are represented in the Duma by 9 Right deputies, 2 independents,
55 liberals, 14 Trudoviks, and 8 Social-Democrats. The reader will thus
readily see that there is a fairly widespread opportunity to increase the
proportion of democratic deputies at the expense of the liberals and, in
general, to win the petty bourgeoisie and the peasantry away from their
influence.  
 

It is interesting to note further that in 10 gubernias out of the 17
which elected liberals from the peasant curia, the Rights gained more seats
than the opposition. We must therefore assume that, as a rule, there
were no Rights at all among the peasant electors in these gubernias,
for if there had been, the Right majorities in the gubernia electoral
assemblies would surely have elected them....  

The duty of the working-class democrats with regard to the peasants in
the elections is perfectly clear. They must carry their purely class
propaganda to a peasantry that is becoming proletarianised. They must help
the peasants to unite their forces in the elections to enable them, even on
the basis of the June Third electoral law, to send to the Fourth Duma their
own representatives in as large numbers as possible despite the
obstacles put in their way both by the supporters of the old regime and by
the liberals. They must strive to consolidate the leadership of
working-class democrats and explain the great harm caused by the
vacillation of the peasant democrats toward the liberals.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See p. 372 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
See footnote to p. 88.—Ed.  

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 5, p. 468.—Ed.  
 

 
  

II. THE ROLE OF WORKER ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN

|

IV. CONCLUSIONS BASED ON THE EXPERIENCE OF THE ELECTIONS TO THE THIRD DUMA

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Experience of the Elections









Lenin: 1911/ce4thd: IV. CONCLUSIONS BASED ON THE EXPERIENCE OF THE ELECTIONS TO THE THIRD DUMA







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Campaign for the Elections to the Fourth Duma



    

IV. CONCLUSIONS BASED ON THE EXPERIENCE
OF THE ELECTIONS TO THE THIRD DUMA

For the purpose of providing a concrete definition of the
duties of working-class democrats in the election campaign, it would be
useful, we believe, to examine, in as great detail as possible, the data
relating to the elections to the Third Duma in a few individual
gubernias. In the first place, such an examination will help us to
understand more clearly and to become more thoroughly familiar with the
intricate and involved electoral system provided by the law of June 3,
1907; and, secondly, it will give all those active in the election campaign
a very real idea of their position as democrats, of the “circumstances”
under which they will have to carry on their work. If the democrats in the
various localities study the data relating to their respective gubernias,
that will add to our data, help to correct errors, and immediately arouse
the interest of everyone who is aware of his duty to participate in the
elections with a view to the political enlightenment of the wage-workers
and the organisation of the forces of democracy.  
 

Take, for example, Kazan Gubernia. It is represented in the Third Duma
by ten deputies, equally divided between the Rights and the
opposition—five Rights (four Octobrists and one Nationalist) and five
liberals (one Progressist, two Cadets, and two Moslems). There are neither
Trudoviks nor Social-Democrats.  

And yet, judging by the data on Kazan Gubernia, it must be admitted
that the democrats had a fairly good chance there. Of the Rights, one
(Sazonov) was elected by the assembly of landowners, three Octobrists were
elected by the first and second assemblies of urban voters (including
Mr. Kapustin, an inveterate counter-revolutionary, who was elected at the
second assembly of urban voters), and one Octobrist at the general
assembly of electors. Of the liberals, one was elected by the assembly of
landowners, one from the peasants (the Cadet Lunin) and three at
the general assembly of electors.  

Since the general assembly of electors elected three liberals and one
Right, it is obvious that the liberals had a majority in the gubernia
electoral assembly, but it was a precarious majority, otherwise not a
single Right would have been elected by the general assembly. The
precariousness of the liberal majority is also evident from the fact that
the landowners elected one Progressist and one Right; had the liberals had
a stable majority they would have prevented the latter’s election.  

Altogether Kazan Gubernia is allowed 117 electors who are divided among
the several curias as follows: peasants 33, landowners 50, first urban
curia 18, second urban curia 14, and workers 2. Consequently, the
landowners together with the first urban curia represent the majority
(50+18==68 out of 117). As we know, the law of June 3, 1907, is so framed
as to guarantee in all gubernias such a majority or an even more
“reliable” one, i.e., a majority made up of landowners alone (the
landowner curia alone to have an absolute majority in the gubernia
electoral assembly).  

The liberals won half the seats in the Duma because they were
apparently well represented among the landowners. On the other hand, it
seems that the urban electors were practically all Rights. Unless we assume
this to have been the case, it is hard to explain how it happened that the

    

deputies elected from the two urban assemblies were Rights when the
liberals had a majority in the gubernia electoral assembly. The Cadets were
compelled to vote for Rights. Given the precarious majority of the liberals
among the electors, mentioned above, the working-class democrats would have
a convenient field for action; they could take advantage of the dissensions
among the landowners and capitalists to organise the forces of democracy as
a whole and to get Social-Democrats and, in particular, Trudoviks elected
to the Duma.  

If, for instance, there were 57 Rights and as many liberals among the
electors and only three democrats (two worker Social-Democrats, and one
peasant Trudovik), that alone would enable the three democrats to elect one
Social-Democrat to the Duma—not to mention the rewarding task of rallying
the democratic forces which these three could tackle, considering that
there would be 33 peasant electors. We have assumed that there might be
three democrats, be cause three is the minimum required by the law
(Article 125 of the Regulations governing the elections), to nominate
candidates by ballot—a candidate who fails to obtain three nomination
ballots, cannot stand for election. Obviously, the three required by the
law could be made up by two liberals joining a democrat, provided the
liberals do not “progress” (in the Vekhi direction) to the point
where even in the gubernia electoral assembly they prefer an Octobrist to a
Social-Democrat.  

In the case of a tie between the Rights and the liberals even one
democrat, by voting now with the flights against the liberals, snow with
the liberals against the Rights, could prevent the election of any
candidate to the Duma and thus (in accordance with Article t19 of the
Regulations governing the elections) bring about an adjournment the
duration of which, according to the same article, is set by the assembly
itself, but may not exceed twelve hours, and arrange for an understanding
between the liberals and the democrats on condition that the latter obtain
seats in the Duma.  

The example of Kazan may serve as an illustration of two possible lines
for the workers’ policy in the elections to the Fourth Duma (and,
consequently, lines for the workers’ policy in general, since the
policy pursued in the elections

    

is but the application of the general policy to a specific case). One line
is to vote; as a general rule, for the more progressive candidates, without
going into any further definitions. The other line is to take advantage of
the antagonism between the Rights and the liberals t6 organise the
democrats. The ideological implication of the first line is passive
subordination to the hegemony of the Cadets; the practical result of this
line in case of success would be an increase in the Octobrist-Cadet
majority in the Fourth Duma at the expense of the Right-Octobrist majority
(with a possible decrease in the democratic minority). The
ideological implication of the second line is the waging of a struggle
against the leadership of the Cadets over the peasants and over bourgeois
democracy in general; its practical result in case of success would be the
increase and consolidation, the strengthening of the group of democrats in
the Fourth Duma.  

In practice the first line would amount to a liberal labour policy. The
second line represents the Marxist working-class policy. As for a more
detailed explanation of the meaning of these two policies, we shall have
many occasions to revert to that in the future.  

 
Notes
 
 

 
  

III. THE PEASANTRY AND THE PEASANT ELECTORS IN THE ELECTION CAMPAIGN

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Old and New (December 10, 1911)









Lenin: Old and New (December 10, 1911)







V. I.  

      Lenin
Old and New (December 10, 1911)




Published:
Zvezda, No. 33, December10, 1911.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 388-392.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
 R. Cymbala 

      Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Nik. Nikolin’s article in Zvezda, No. 29,
characteristically entitled “The New in the Old”, raises a number of
extremely interesting and important questions. A discussion on these
questions is undoubtedly desirable in order to lay down an exact, clear,
and definite line of conduct for adherents to the Russian working-class
democratic movement.  

The chief shortcoming of Nik. Nikolin’s article is that many of his
propositions are extremely vague. The author says, without explaining why,
that “on many points” he would “perhaps disagree” with me. I, for my
part, must say that none of Nikolin’s propositions call for disagreement,
since he never makes outspoken statements.  

Thus, for instance, Nikolin comes out dead against people who believe
that “our present situation ... is approximately what it was at the
beginning of the twentieth century”. According to his interpretation,
people holding such an opinion deny that there is something new in
the old. Of course, they are wrong if they deny that. And, of course,
Nikolin is a thousand times right when he says that there is something new
in the old which it is necessary to take into consideration and make use
of. But Nikolin says no thing as to what the new consists of, as to how
exactly it is to be taken into consideration, etc. On the other hand, it is
not clear from the passages he quotes what exactly his opponents mean by
the word “approximately”. If the new in the old is to be taken into
consideration in the same way as the Russian Marxists did exactly three
years ago in their appraisal of the political situation created after the
three years of storm and stress (i.e., after 1905–07), then, in my
opinion, it would not be wrong to say: “our present situation is
approximately what it was at the beginning

    

of the twentieth century”. If, however, people put forward a proposition
of this kind without, at first, giving a precise, clear, and definite
appraisal of the situation and the problems involved, then, of course, it
is wrong.  

The old problems, the old methods of solving them, and new ways of
preparing for the solution—that, it seems to me, is how, approximately,
the answer given three years ago could be formulated. From the standpoint
of this answer, participation in the Third Duma, which Nik. Nikolin
advocates so warmly and so correctly, appears to be absolutely
indispensable. The “trend” which repudiates this participation or which
hesitates to come out, openly, clearly, and without beating about the bush,
in favour of participating in the Third Duma, is taking the name of
working-class democracy in vain. Actually this is a trend outside
working-class democracy, for it represents a “legitimate shade” of
anarchist ideas but by no means of Marxist ideas.  

Take the question of the “superstructure”. “Formerly,” writes
Nik. Nikolin, “it may have seemed that the bureaucracy was the sole and
chief enemy of ‘all Russia’; today nobody thinks so any longer.... We are
sufficiently well aware that the Markovs, Krestovnikovs, Volkonskys,
Purishkeviches, Guchkovs, Khomyakovs, Avdakovs, and their like, are all
representatives of that particular social milieu from which the bureaucracy
draws its strength and obtains the motives for its activity.”  

Nik. Nikolin’s emphasis on the connection of the “bureaucracy” with
the upper ranks of the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie is quite
correct and extremely valuable. Only people who have never given a thought
to the new brought by the first decade of the twentieth century, who
understand nothing about the interdependence between the economic and the
political relations in Russia and about the significance of the Third Duma
can deny that this connection exists, deny that the present agrarian policy
is bourgeois in character, deny in general that “a step” has been taken
“towards the transformation into a bourgeois monarchy”.  

But it is not enough to concede that the connection exists, it
is necessary to point out what exactly is the actual nature of
this connection. The step taken toward the transformation into something
new by no means eliminates the

    

old, say, “bureaucratic” regime with its vast self-sufficiency and
independence, with its “peculiar nature” which the methods of Tolmachov
and Reinbot (etc., et al.) lend it, and with its uncontrolled
finances. While “drawing strength” from the support of the upper ranks of
the bourgeoisie the bureaucracy is not recruited from the
bourgeoisie, but from the old, very old, not only pre-revolutionary (before
‘905), but even pre-Reform (before 1861), landed and office-holding
nobility. While it “obtains the motives for its activity” largely from
the upper ranks of the bourgeoisie the bureaucracy lends its bourgeois
activity a tendency and a form that is purely and solely
feudal. For, if there is a difference between the bourgeois character of
the Prussian Junker and the American farmer (although both of them are
unquestionably bourgeois), there is a no less evident and equally great
difference between the bourgeois character of the Prussian Junker and the
“bourgeois character” of Markov and Purishkevich. Compared with the
latter, the Prussian Junker is quite a “European”!  

The principal, cardinal, and fatal mistake which, for instance,
M. Alexandrov commits in his well-known pamphlet is that he forgets about
the vast self-sufficiency and independence of the “bureaucracy”; and
N. R-kov, in No. 9–10 of the liquidationist Nasha Zarya, indulges
in this mistake to a point where it is reduced to an absurdity. Only the
above-mentioned answer given three years ago contains an exact definition
of the extent to which the old persists in the so-called “bureaucratic”
regime, and of the changes, or, rather, modifications, that have been
introduced by the “new”.  

I am by no means opposed to the “exploration of other ways and
means”, and I attach vast importance to constant and repeated discussion
of the direct answers to the vexed questions, but I cannot refrain,
however, from voicing my protest against the contraband that the
liquidators, for example, are smuggling in under the flag of
“exploration”. It is obvious that the differences of opinion between the
“exploring” R-kov and the “exploring” Potresovs, Yezhovs, and Chatskys
concern only details of their liberal labour policy. The stand
taken by all these “explorers” is that of a liberal, not a Marxist,
labour policy! It is one thing to

    

“explore ways” and discuss them from a Marxist standpoint in books,
magazines, etc.; and it is a different thing to come out with definite
answers in publications giving practical guidance.  

Take the question of “romanticism”. Nik
Nikolin condemns romanticism as a hopelessly obsolete feature of the
“old” and cites the following example: “The liberal thought that he was
performing the part of champion of all the oppressed, while the socialist
believed that he was backed by all ‘thinking’ and ‘labouring’ Russia”. The
example refers to the failure to understand the class struggle, and Nikolin
would have been perfectly right, of course, had he said that such a
“socialist”—obviously a Narodnik—was really no socialist at all but a
democrat who cloaked his democracy with pseudo-socialist
phrases. But in speaking of romanticism, one must not overlook the
Vekhi, i.e., counter-revolutionary, interpretation of that term
which is current in the most widely circulated, namely, the liberal
press. We can not help protesting against such an interpretation. We can
not help noting the “new” feature, namely, that liberalism in Russia has
given rise to the liberal trend of the Vekhi type, the policy
which the Milyukovs actually pursue although in words they renounce it for
purely diplomatic reasons.  

Hence the following practical conclusion of major importance: on the
basis of the “new” experience of the first ten years of the twentieth
century, the line of demarcation between liberalism and democracy must be
drawn more sharply. It is, of course, absurd to “lump the liberal
opposition with reaction”, but this conclusion alone (which Nikolin
draws), without the one I have just indicated, is decidedly insufficient.


In general, it must be said that it is in his conclusion that
Nik. Nikolin commits his chief sin—that of being vague and leaving things
unsaid. Take the first part of his conclusion: “Both the unreasonable
infatuation with the old methods of action and the emphatically negative
attitude to those methods are equally harmful”. In my opinion this is not
a dialectical, but an eclectic, conclusion. The unreasonable is
unreasonable, and therefore it is always and absolutely harmful—that goes
without saying. In order to

    

lend this part of the conclusion a vital, dialectical significance, it
would have to be couched in approximately the fob lowing terms: an attempt
to justify the refusal to take part in the Third or in, the Fourth Duma by
references to the old methods of action would be an extremely grave
mistake, a hollow phrase, a meaningless cry, in spite of the fact,
or—more correctly—because of the fact, that we must have an
emphatically positive attitude to those methods.  

It is just in passing, since it is impossible for me to dwell on this
question in greater detail, that I have thus indicated how, in my opinion,
the second part of the quoted conclusion ought to be corrected.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Meeting of the Bolshevik Groups Abroad









Lenin: Meeting of the Bolshevik Groups Abroad







V. I.  

      Lenin
Meeting of the Bolshevik Groups Abroad[1]
December 14–17 (27–30), 1911




Written: See below. 

Published:

      See below.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 393-396.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

1
Draft Resolution on the Report
“State of Affairs in the Party”
Organisation of the Social-Democratic Party Forces
Abroad and the Tasks of the Bolsheviks

The present state of Social-Democratic organisations abroad
is abnormal in the extreme.  

From 1908 onwards, when Social-Democratic publishing had begun to shift
more and more abroad, and prior to the Plenary Meeting, there was a
complete organisational split in all important centres abroad, owing to the
complete secession of the Menshevik groups from the Party.  

The Plenary Meeting (January 1910) attempted to create unity on the
basis of its unanimous approval of an anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist
line, and made a particularly energetic call for the establishment of
complete unity abroad.  

After the Plenary Meeting, however, in view of the non-fulfilment of
its terms by the liquidators and otzovists, no unity of the groups abroad
was achieved. On the contrary, there was greater disintegration, as in fact
the Vperyod group broke away from the Bolsheviks, and Plekhanov’s
followers from the Mensheviks. The parallel—“first” and “second” or
Menshevik and Bolshevik—groups continued to exist traditionally, but
actually in no way united any sound elements capable of carrying out joint
Social-Democratic work.  

At the present moment Bolshevik, “conciliator”, Vperyod;
Golos, and Plekhanov’s groups exist abroad in factional isolation,
linked together purely formally, and often not at

    

all, completely independent of each other, following different ideological
lines and having their own individual ties with various Social-Democratic
elements in Russia.  

The formation of the Russian Organising Commission (R.O.C.) in Russia
by the forces of the Bolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks and the energetic
start made by this R.O.C. Collegium to call a general Party conference of
the R.S.D.L.P. make for a decisive turn in the history of the Party and
show the only possible way, demanded by reality, out of the condition of
disruption and collapse.  

Since the Plenary Meeting, real Social-Democratic work has been carried
out only by the Bolsheviks and the pro-Party Mensheviks; it was
particularly harmonious in 1910. The Golos group represents
nothing but a section abroad of the Russian liquidator group Dyelo
Zhizni and Nasha Zarya, which has placed itself outside the
Party; and the Vperyod group abroad, which continues to cover up
otzovism and through its leader Lunacharsky to carry out religious
propaganda, conducts work which is not Social-Democratic.  

At the present moment, the R.O.C., created by the Bolsheviks and the
pro-Party Mensheviks and supported by nearly all the local
Social-Democratic organisations in Russia, is, in fact, the only absolutely
competent centre of Social-Democratic Party work.  

Uniting the Bolsheviks in one Social-Democratic organisation abroad,
the Meeting places the responsibility for the continuing split abroad on
those groups who do not wish to support the Russian centre, the R.O.C., or
on those who, cut off from Russia, continue “to play at agreeing”, thus
supporting non-Social-Democratic groups that are isolated from Russian
work.  

The Bolshevik organisation abroad will, as hitherto, use all its
strength to attract, irrespective of trends, all Social-Democrats prepared
to support the R.O.C. and to carry out the Party line, that is, the
anti-liquidationist and anti-otzovist (and equally anti-god-seeker) line,
in order that they join forces and merge into one Party organisation.  

The practical task of the Party organisation abroad is to struggle
against the liquidationist and otzovist trends,

    

against the disintegration of the groups abroad having no ideological
basis, assisting the unification of all real Social-Democratic Party
members and pro-Party Mensheviks in particulars and assisting the R.O.C. We
consider that the organs which should be supported, by Party members are
the Central Organ and Rabochaya Gazeta, as the isolation of the
pro-Party Mensheviks (abroad) can in no manner be justified, and no change
of the line confirmed by Party decisions can be found in the
above-mentioned journals.  

Written early in December 1911
Published according to the manuscript
First published in 1933 in Lenin’s Miscellany XXV



    

2
RESOLUTION ON THE RUSSIAN ORGANISING COMMISSION FOR THE
CONVENING OF A
CONFERENCE[2]

This Meeting confirms that for a long time? for two years
at least, the Party has recognised the urgent need to call a Party
conference. At the present time, despite all obstacles a decisive step has
been taken to bring this about. An R.O.C. has been formed in Russia,
supported by all local organisations (Kiev, Baku, Tiflis, Ekaterinoslav,
Ekaterinburg, St. Petersburg, Moscow? Nikolayev, Saratov, Kazan, Wilno,
Dvinsk, Nizhni-Novgorod, Sormovo, Samara, Tyumen, Rostov, and others).


This Meeting welcomes the formation of the R.O.C., and declares it to
be the duty of every Party member to render it every support.  

Written early in December 1911

Published on January 12, 1912, in the Notification of the Committee of the Organisation Abroad

Published according to the text of the Notification



 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Meeting of the Bolshevik Groups Abroad took place in Paris
on December 14–17 (27–30), 1911. It was called on the initiative of the
Paris Group supporting the Bolshevik newspaper Rabochaya
Gazeta. The aim of the Meeting was to unify the Bolshevik
organisations abroad and support the convening of an all-Russia Party
conference. Eleven delegates with full voting rights participated from
Bolshevik groups in Paris, Nancy, Zurich, Davos, Geneva, Liége,
Berne, Bremen, and Berlin. Lenin reported on the state of affairs in the
Party, and the draft resolution on this question, drawn up by Lenin, served
as a basis for the general resolution, adopted by the Meeting. The
“Notification” and resolution of the Meeting were published by the
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. Organisation Abroad in a leaflet on January 12,
1912 (N.S.).  

The heading to tile document has been provided by the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.





[2]
The resolution was adopted on December 17 (30), 1911, at the last
session of the Meeting of the Bolshevik groups abroad. The resolution was
published in the “Notification” of the Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. Organisation Abroad, with the following explanation:

“A special resolution of the Meeting drew the attention of all Party
comrades to the need to give energetic support to the Russian Organising
Commission and the conference which it is convening”.  

The heading to the document has been provided by the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign









Lenin: Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign








V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign




Published:
Prosveshcheniye, Nos. 1 and 2, December 1911 and January 1912.

      Signed: K. Tulin.

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 397-423.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I
  397



II
  402



III
  405



IV
  407



V
  412



VI
  417



VII
  420

 
 
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## I









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: I







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    
 

I

The elections to the Fourth Duma are close at hand, and
naturally, the question of the election campaign is on the order of the
day. It is clear that any wavering as to the advisability, from the point
of view of Marxism, of our participation in the elections, is
impermissible. It is not within the bounds of Marxism and the working-class
party, but only outside them, that views, hostile or indefinite,
or even merely indifferent to our participation in the elections, can be
regarded as “legitimate” shades of opinion. It may even seem somewhat
embarrassing to repeat this elementary truth, proved and corroborated by
experience many years ago (beginning with the end of 1907), but we
nevertheless have to repeat it, for the worst evil we have to contend with
now, is confusion and disintegration. And it is not only those who give
vague or evasive answers to elementary questions that contribute to this
confusion and disintegration, but also those who, for reasons of diplomacy
or through lack of principles, etc., defend vagueness and evasion.  

The elections to the State Duma naturally impose upon all Marxists,
upon all members of the working-class movement, the duty to bend all their
efforts to develop the most energetic, persistent activity and initiative
in every field of that movement. The answers to the questions on the
principles and the programmatic, political and organisational content and
line of this activity which were elaborated during recent years, must now
be directly applied in practice to the special sphere of “election”
activity.  
 

We deliberately speak of answers already formulated. It would be
ridiculous indeed to suppose that now, several mouths, or, for that matter,
even a year before the elections, you could manage to “find” the answers,
if they had not yet been found, if they had not been thought out and tested
by the practical experience of several years. After all, it is a matter of
providing answers to all the “vexed questions” relating to our
world outlook in general, to our appraisal of the previous, extremely
eventful period of Russian his tory, to our estimate of the present period
(which, in its main features, became defined as far back as 1908), and to
the political and organisational problems which had to be solved, one way
or another, by everyone who took part in the working-class movement during
the last, say, four years. At present it can only be a matter of applying
formulated answers and methods of work to the present particular field of
activity, the elections to the Fourth Duma. To say that “in the course of
the election campaign”, i.e., of one branch of activity, we can work out
the answers to the questions relating to all branches of activity,
relating not only to 1912, but also to “the entire period beginning with
1908”, would mean comforting ourselves with illusions, or concealing,
justifying the reigning confusion and disintegration.  

We are concerned, in the first place, with answers to programme
questions. What have developments in the past four years in Russia given us
in this respect? It must be admitted by each and all that during these four
years no attempts have been made to revise, or amend, or further elaborate
the old programme of the Marxists as far as its principles are
concerned. Characteristic of the “current period”, or more correctly in
many respects it could be called the “stagnation” or “rotten” period,
is the scornful attitude to the programme, and the desire to abridge and
reduce it without the least attempt at definite and down right
revision. In our epoch “revisionism”, in its specific role of bourgeois
emasculation of Marxist truths, is not of the militant variety which raises
“the banner of revolt” (as, for instance, Bernstein’s in Germany some ten
years ago, Struve’s in Russia some fifteen years ago, or Prokopovich’s
somewhat later); it is merely a cowardly and furtive renunciation, often
defended on the ground of “practical”,

    

mainly only allegedly practical, considerations. The successors and
continuers of the “cause” of Struve and Prokopovich—people like
Potresov, Maslov, Levitsky and Co.—“took part” in the reigning disorder
and contributed to it (as also did Yushkevich, Bogdanov, Lunacharsky,
etc.), mostly by means of timid and unsystematic attempts to throw the
“old” Marxism overboard and to replace it by a “new”, bourgeois
doctrine. It was no mere chance, nor was it due to the caprice of
“groups”, that questions of theory have attracted so much attention
during the past four years. Such questions have been treated as
“trivialities”, even if only in part, by those who timidly renounce the
old Marxism, and by them alone. If we speak today of the defence of the
Marxist programme and the Marxist world outlook in connection with and in
the course of the election campaign—if we speak of them not merely as an
official duty or with the intention of saying nothing, we must take into
account the experience of the past foul years and not mere words,
promises, or assurances. These four years have actually brought to light
quite a number of “unreliable fellow-travellers” of Marxism among our
intellectuals (who often desire to be Marxists), they have taught us to
distrust such fellow-travellers, they have served to enhance in
the minds of thinking workers the importance of Marxist theory and of the
Marxist programme in its uncurtailed form.  

There is a range of questions in which the programme comes close to or
actually merges with tactics. Naturally, these problems assume a
considerably greater immediate and practical significance during the
election campaign. It is in respect of these problems that the spirit of
renunciation and confusion has expressed itself in by far the sharpest
form. Some said that the old tasks were no longer valid, because the system
of government in Russia had, in essence, already become bourgeois. Others
maintained that from now on Russia’s development could proceed, like that
of Germany or Austria after 1848, without any “leaps”. Others again
insisted that the idea of the hegemony of the working class had outlived
its day, and that Marxists must aspire “not to hegemony, but to a
class party”, etc.  

It goes without saying that, literally, not a single problem

    

of tactics can be solved or explained to any extent completely, fully, and
coherently, without an analysis of these ideas, justly described as
“liquidationist”, and which form an inseparable part of the broad stream
of bourgeois public opinion which is turning back and away from
democracy. Anyone who has kept his eyes open to what is going on in
practical life knows that confusion in these problems is a hundred times
more pronounced than might be judged from what has been written, on this
subject. Nor, of course, could it be otherwise in the years following the
events at the end of 1905 and of 1906–07. But the more “natural” this
disintegration (in a bourgeois environment), the more urgent and vital is
the Marxists’ task of waging a comprehensive and unremitting fight against
it.  

Periods of renunciation and, disintegration similar to those of the
past four years in Russia have been known to all countries. There were
cases when not even groups remained, but only isolated individuals who in
similar circumstances managed for ten or more years to “keep the banner
flying”, to keep the ideas of continuity alive, and subsequently to apply
these ideas in a materially changed social and political situation. In
Russia matters are not so bad as that; for our “heritage” includes both a
programme which has remained intact, and formulated answers to the
fundamental tactical and organisational problems of the “moment”. The
liquidationist trend, which has renounced this answer, can not replace it
by anything resembling an explicit and clear answer of its own.  

An election campaign implies the application of a definite solution of
political problems to complicated propaganda, agitational, organisational,
etc., activity. You cannot em bark upon such a campaign without a definite
answer to the problems. And the answer which the Marxists formulated in
1908 has been fully corroborated by the experience of the past four
years. The new, bourgeois content of the, government’s agrarian policy; the
organisation of the landowners and the bourgeoisie in the Third Duma; the
behaviour of even the most “Left” bourgeois party, the Cadets, so vividly
illustrated by the trip to London, and not only by that trip; The
ideological currents of the Vekhi type, which enjoyed such immense
success among “educated” society—all these

    

facts clearly indicate that the old problems have not been solved but have
to be tackled now under new conditions, in a more bourgeois atmosphere,
when the bourgeoisie is systematically turning away from democracy
and assuming the role of a responsible, party, “loyal”, etc.,
“opposition”. A new situation and new methods of preparing for the old
solution of the old problems, a more evident split between democracy and
the anti-democratic liberal bourgeoisie, such are the main features of the
answer formulated by the Marxists to the fundamental political questions of
the present period.  

The answer to the problems of organisation is inseparably connected
with the entire world outlook of the Marxists, with their estimate of the
political meaning and significance of the June Third period. In the main
the old methods are to be preserved and adapted to the new circumstances
with their so-called “opportunities” of all sorts, such as open
associations, unions, etc. Nuclei, and a network of organisations around
them, connected with them, and directed by them, are to be formed. The
“nuclei” are to show greater flexibility, using more adaptable methods of
work which do not in every particular resemble the old forms. It is also
obligatory to take advantage, not only of the platform provided by the
Duma, but of all sorts of similar “opportunities”. It is an answer that
does not in the least tie our hands by any uniform standards or obligatory
forms of work; it leaves vast scope for working out the most suitable ways
and means of combining various forms of activity. But it is a “firm”
answer, based on unshakable principles, and as such it counters the
prevailing disorder, spirit of renunciation, and confusion, not only by a
verbal proclamation of loyalty to the old, but also by setting up a
fundamental organisational principle, which enables us to secure
ideological stability in real life. Those who have “accumulated a
reserve”, even if they are few in number, are uniting and systematically
upholding the “hierarchy”—its spirit, its teachings, its principles and
traditions, but not, of course, its forms.  

The liquidationist trend, on the other hand, succumbs to the
prevailing amorphousness (prevailing not only among us, by no
means only in the working class, but to an even

    

greater extent among other classes and parties); it abandons the work for
the old, and uses the quest for “something new” as an excuse for
justifying confusion. The liquidationist trend among the Marxists is but
one rivulet joining the broad ideological stream of bourgeois society, the
stream directed against democracy in general, against the mass movement in
particular, and especially against the recent forms of the organisation and
leadership of the movement.  

Such are the general propositions of Marxism, its attitude to the tasks
and problems of the present period, an attitude, we repeat, of long
standing, which ought now to be translated into an “election campaign”
with an integral ideological, programmatic, tactical, and organisational
content.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  


|

II

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## II









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: II







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    

II

Let us now examine the stand taken on the question of the
election campaign by Nasha Zarya, leading organ of the
liquidationist trend.  

There is nothing more repugnant to the spirit of Marxism than
phrase-mongering. And the most unpleasant feature that strikes one in
Nos. 6 and 7–8 of Nasha Zarya is the in credible orgy of
phrase-mongering that might truly be that of a Tartarin. The Tartarins of
our liquidationist trend have converted an election campaign, something
customary for Marxists in all lands, and which even in Russia has already
been conducted twice on a large scale, into something wrapped up
in so many pompous words, words and words, that it is simply unendurable.


Mr. Yuri Chatsky, in his article “Time to Begin”, begins an
exposition of the views of the liquidators, and, to all intents and
purposes, finishes the exposition of these views and does so as
the mastermind, leaving it to L. Martov to provide the trimmings, the
gloss, the literary ornamentation.  

Here is a sample of the writings of Yuri-Tartarin: 


   “It is hardly possible to expect with any certainty
   that the election campaign will b e conducted, organisationally, in an
   absolutely centralised manner, although we must strive for this by all
   those ways we have spoken of ... by organisationally consolidating the

    

   results of the political amalgamation of the worker Social-Democrats in
   the course of the political campaign 


For mercy’s sake, dear man—why compete with Trotsky? Why try to stun
the readers in general, and the workers in particular, with all that
verbiage about the results of political amalgamation in the course of the
political campaign? Or about consolidating those results? After all, it is
nothing but words, merely giving yourself airs by the ponderous repetition
of a simple idea. Organisational “consolidation” is always essential,
before, as well as after, elections. You call the elections a political
campaign, then—“to add weight”—you speak of a “series [!] of
all-Russian [!]  political campaigns”, and by all this din and clatter of
words you obscure the really urgent, vital, and practical
question: how to organise. Do we need “nuclei” and a network of
more or less open, if unstable, unions around them? Yes or no? If we do
need them, we need them both before and after the elections—since the
elections are but one of our jobs, one of many. If no systematic work has
been carried on for a long time, you will not succeed in
“consolidating” anything in the course of the election
campaign. Any practical worker will tell you it is nonsense. High-sounding
phrases are used only to cover up the absence of an explicit answer to the
fundamental question, viz., how to organise for every form of
activity, and not just for the election campaign.  

To speak, apropos of the elections, about “the fighting
mobilisation of the proletariat” (sic! see p. 49), or about
a “broad and open mobilisation of the worker masses” (p. 54), and so on
and so forth, means not only to lack any sense of proportion, but plainly
to harm the modest, necessarily modest, work by fostering phrase-mongering
of exactly the same quality as that of the “otzovists”,
“ultimatumists”, etc. According to the latter, a boycott is needed as a
means of especially stressing that the “spirit” is not dead (but the
“spirit” of the work must permeate all spheres of activity, including the
elections); the barkers of liquidationism, on the other hand, maintain that
the elections will solve everything—“the fighting mobilisation” (one
merely wonders how this Russian quasi-“Marxist” can unblushingly put down
such things on paper!)  and “organisational consolidation

    

of the results of the political amalgamation in the course of a political
campaign”! We all know perfectly well that the elections of 1912 (unless
conditions arise which will radically change the situation that existed in
1908 and exists in 1911) will not, and cannot, bring about either
a “broad” or an “open” “mobilisation of the masses”. All
they will give is a modest opportunity for activity that is not very broad
and not very open, and this opportunity should be made use of.  But there
is no point in imitating Trotsky’s inflated phrases.  

The cry about “open” organisations in connection with the elections
is just a bit of plain stupidity. What we say is: better let us do the work
not quite so openly, fellow-workers, that will be safer, more
proper, saner, and more useful as a means of influencing wider
sections of the population than the twaddle about existing
“openly”. In times such as ours, only utterly stupid or utterly frivolous
people can shout and brag: “We can do everything openly”.  

“A party (a class party) will appear only as a product of the
organised creative efforts of the independently active vanguard of the
workers” (p. 41).  

Phew! Have mercy on us! Don’t you know that in all countries it took
the advanced workers and real Marxist “intellectuals”, who
whole-heartedly threw in their lot with the workers, decades to form and
train their parties? Nor can it be different in our country, and
there is no point in this attempt to scare away the Russian working-class
reader by that pompous bunk about “creative efforts” (when it is a
question of teaching the ABC and of carrying small ordinary stones to lay
the foundation), about the “independently active” vanguard, etc. Under
the spell of Chatsky-Tartarin, Mr. Martov also lets his tongue run away
with him, and he speaks of “independently conscious elements of the
working class” (No. 7–8, p. 42), who are coming forward to replace the
old personnel now going through a process of 

They are laying it on thick: “independently active”, “independently
conscious”, “creative”, “fighting mobilisation”, “the broadest”,
“most open”.... One wonders how it is these gentlemen are not nauseated
by all this “verbal incontinence”, to use Shchedrin’s expression.  
 

The whole point is that they have to resort to florid,
laboured phrases which are meant to stun and stupefy the workers (and still
more so the intellectual, because workers laugh at a style like Yuri
Chatsky’s, and it is mostly high-school boys who “tall” for it),
because they have no plain, direct, and clear answer to the plain, clear,
and immediate questions. The question of the election platform enables us
to give a particularly vivid illustration of the truth regarding the
conversion of vague thoughts into vague, bombastic, and pompous
phrases.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

I

|

III

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## III









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: III







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    

III

In referring to the importance of an election platform,
Mr. Yuri Chatsky again speaks with great eloquence. The question of a
platform is “one of the most cardinal questions”. Splendid! “To the
worker Social-Democrats it [the platform] must be a product of feeling [!],
of deep thought; they must consider it their own.” (Yuri
Chatsky’s italics.)  

It is true that the workers ought to give deep thought to the
platform. Nor would it be at all amiss for intellectuals writing in
near-Marxist magazines to give the platform some thought. But the statement
that the platform must be “a product of feeling” is more than we can
understand. Perhaps Nevedomsky and Lunacharsky will treat us in the next
issue of Nasha Zarya to “feeling” articles on how the in
dependently active vanguard of the independently conscious masses that are
being mobilised is to “feel” an election platform.  

And here, if you please, is a gem from an article by Mr.  F. Dan:
“... the sense and the political content of election tactics change
completely depending on who creates and applies these tactics: a
self-governing collective of the Social-Democratic working-class vanguard,
with all its proletarian and intellectual forces, or various petty groups
of intellectuals, be they even ‘Social-Democrats’, but not backed up by
such a collective, not acting under its control and pressure...”. Who,
indeed, can doubt that Potresov and Dan are by no means a “petty group of
intellectuals”, but men “backed up by the self-governing
collective of the vanguard”

    

and “acting under its control”! 0, these Tartarins of the liquidationist
trend!  

Have Yuri Chatsky, L. Martov, and F. Dan given any thought to the
platform?  “It’s a shame to admit and a sin to conceal,” writes Yuri
Chatsky, “but it has also happened that for some of us the platform was
one thing, and other things were said in election speeches and articles,
everyone pulling his own way.  

The truth cannot be denied. “For some of us” such things have indeed
often happened.  

For instance, Yuri Chatsky, after indulging in words full of feeling
about a platform which is a product of feeling, begins to talk at extremely
great length, and in words no less full of feeling, about the importance
and the indispensability of a single platform. The words full of
feeling are deliberately used to obscure the simple question as to whether
there can be a single platform where there is no unity of
political opinion. If there is among us unity of opinion, why waste words
and go to the trouble of breaking down an open door when a platform
represents an exposition of opinion!  

Yuri Chatsky, however, after a lot of beating about the bush apropos of
a “single” platform, very clumsily gives away his own “secret”. “We
attach the greatest importance,” he writes, “to the sanction [of the
platform] by the Social-Democratic group in the Duma; but at the same time
we absolutely insist on the condition that the latter does not follow the
line of least resistance by sanctioning a platform imposed upon it by
circles abroad.” (P. 50.)  

This is described thus: Der König absolut, wenn er unseren
Willen tut—the king is absolute ruler so long as he does
our bidding. It is desirable to have a single platform—provided
it is not a platform “imposed by circles abroad”. Surely this means that
actually there are two platforms? One is the platform which you
are abusing as being “imposed from abroad” (truly a language worthy of
Purishkevich. Just think of it: Yuri Chatsky, working hand in glove with
Martov and Dan, writes in Potresov’s magazine about something being imposed
from abroad! How low one must have fallen to resort to such methods of
inciting ignorant people against “abroad”!). The other platform,
apparently,

    

does not come from abroad, but from the self-governing collective of the
broad and open organisations of the mobilised masses. In plainer words and
without any flourishes:

“the other element of possible centralisation is the group of
Social-Democratic [?] functionaries who are closely connect ed with the
open workers’ movement and are acquiring ever greater stability and
prestige in the process of conducting political campaigns. We refer
particularly to St. Petersburg and its leading role in the political
campaigns of the past year”. That is what Yuri Chatsky writes.  

It is all quite simple: the “group” of St. Petersburg liquidators,
well known for their work in Mr. Potresov’s magazine—that is the
“element of centralisation”. Clear, very clear, indeed, friend Yuri
Chatsky!  

There must be a single platform, but ... it must not be one
“imposed by circles abroad”, and it must satisfy the “group” of
St. Petersburg liquidators.... What an ardent advocate of “unity” he
is—this Yuri Chatsky!  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

II

|

IV

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## IV









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: IV







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    

IV

Let us now take a look at L. Martov’s “fundamental
platform propositions”.... As the basis of the platform he takes the
programme—and that is as it should be, of course. Martov gives a
paraphrase of sections of the programme. Only it is not clear whether
Martov is advocating that programme which he outlined in No. 7–8 of
Nasha Zarya. That particle of the old programme is
acceptable even to Larin and Levitsky, and, probably, to Prokopovich. Or,
does Martov subscribe to the whole of the old programme?


In fairness it must be noted that there is one passage in Martov’s
article which indicates the latter to be the case. It is the passage on
p. 48 in which he states that sometimes they are compelled to “refrain
from speaking out in clear terms” (that is true), but, they must not
renounce. Nobody can make them reduce the content of
their demands, he says. These are very fine words. Unfortunately, the
deeds do not correspond to these words, for we know perfectly
well, for instance, that Larin, whom Martov does “not suspect of
reformism”, does reduce and renounce. We shall very soon
have

    

occasion to see that Martov, too, in that very same article, while
promising not to “reduce”, and not to “renounce”, actually does both.


Consequently, the actual situation is that, on the question of using
the programme as a component part and basis of a platform, we have not one
but two platforms: without reduction and renunciation, and
with reduction and renunciation, the purport of which is clearly
indicated by the nature of the sermons preached by Larin, Levitsky, and
Potresov.  

Then comes the question of tactics. We must assess the historical
meaning of the June Third period, and this assessment ought to serve as the
basis of all the definitions of our tasks, of all the
opinions we “express” on any general and particular problems of
current politics. Martov himself is obliged to admit—despite the
liquidators’ characteristic habit of sneering at “assessments of current
events”—that this is a cardinal question. And so, this is what Martov
declares with regard to the “old”, formulated answer to that question:



   “Attempts were made to define the historical meaning of
   the ‘June Third’ period by an inept formula, inept because it is liable to
   lead to misconceptions, which referred to ‘a step toward the transformation
   [“in the transformation” would be the exact quotation] into a bourgeois
   monarchy’.”...  


An “inept” formula.... How mild that sounds! Yet it is only recently
that Martov’s colleagues saw in this formula a complete negation in
principle of the viewpoint which seems to them to be the only salvation. It
is only recently that F. Dan spoke of those who “want to shove in where
they have once been defeated”. Why, then, this change of tone? Is there a
fundamental divergence on the question of the historical meaning of the
June Third period, or not?  

Listen further: 


   “This formula fails to account for the actual step
   back toward division of power between the
   protagonists of absolutism and the landed nobility. It follows from the
   above that after the events of 1905 the forms in which alone it was
   possible for this division to be effected, created favourable conditions
   for the mobilisation and organisation of the social forces whose historical
   mission it is to work for the creation of a ‘bourgeois monarchy’.”...
   

 

According to Martov, these social forces are represented by the
bourgeoisie that was “given the right to act as a legal or tolerated
opposition” by the June Third period.  

Now, examine Martov’s reasoning. On the face of it, he
reproaches the “inept formula” only of overlooking the step back taken by
the government. But, in the first place, this is factually
incorrect. Martov has amazingly bad luck with the “formula” of 1908:
whenever he sets out to speak of it he immediately reveals a strange
inability (or reluctance?) to give an exact reproduction of the “formula”
which is so well known to him. The “formula” speaks plainly and
explicitly about the preservation of the “power and revenue” of the
feudal landowners (and not of bourgeois landowners, as Larin would
have us say)! Consequently, if this sort of division of power is to be
regarded as a “step back”, then this step back, far from being overlooked
in our formula, is referred to in the most explicit terms. And, secondly,
and this is the main point, while speaking of the step, back taken
by the government, Martov obscures, glosses over, the step back
taken by the liberal bourgeoisie. There’s the rub! That is the
essence of the arguments, which Martov obscures.  

The step back taken by the liberal bourgeoisie consists in the
Vekhi sentiments of this bourgeoisie, its renunciation of
democracy, its drawing closer to the “parties of law and order”,
its support (direct and indirect, ideological and political) for the
attempts of the old regime to maintain itself at the cost of minimum
“steps in the transformation into a bourgeois monarchy”. Without the
counter-revolutionary (Vekhi type) liberal bourgeoisie, it is not
only impossible for the bourgeois monarchy to take shape, it cannot even
begin to take shape. Martov “forgets” this primarily and mainly for the
simple reason that he himself is a Vekhi man among Marxists.  

In evaluating the June Third period, the liberal is entirely concerned
with the fact that the government took a “step back” towards the
Purishkeviches. Had the same government, with the same fundamental features
of the regime (and of its policy of suppression with regard to
democracy) left intact, taken a “step” towards him, towards the
liberal, that would have been all he required. What the liberal says, in
effect, is the following: I have proved by Vekhi and its

    

policy (Milyukov’s “London”) that I, the liberal, am a sincere, serious,
implacable enemy of democracy—of the democracy that is “anti-state”,
apostate, infantile, criminal, “thievish”, immoral, godless, and what
not, as stated in Vekhi. Yet, notwithstanding all this, power is
shared not with me but with Purishkevich!  That is the meaning of
the policy of the liberals after June 3, 1907, that is the meaning of the
“Stolypin liberalism” of Struve, Milyukov, and their like. I offer you my
very soul, says the liberal lifting up his eyes to the government, yet you
prefer Purishkevich!  

On the other hand, the standpoint of proletarian democracy in regard to
the June Third period, is fundamentally and radically different. The
government took its “step back” to the Purishkeviches at a different,
considerably higher, stage of development than before. A “step back” to
the nobility was taken in the eighties too. But that was a step back taken
in post-Reform Russia, in a Russia a long way advanced beyond the era of
Nicholas I, when the noble landowner had ruled in the absence of a
“plutocracy”, in the absence of railways, and in the absence of a growing
third element. And so today, the “step back” to the Purishkeviches is
combined with a bourgeois agrarian policy and with the bourgeoisie
organised and firmly entrenched in the representative institutions. It is
Purishkevich’s hegemony in the common (both Purishkevich’s and Milyukov’s)
turn against democracy, against the movement of the masses,
against so-called “excesses”, against the so-called “high-brow
[Vekhi] revolution”, etc.  

The liberal’s job is to “threaten” Purishkevich so as to get him to
“move over” a bit, to make more room for the liberals, but making sure at
the same time that this does not obliterate from the face of the earth all
the economic and political foundations of Purishkevichism. The task of a
democrat in general, and of a Marxist, a representative of proletarian
democracy, in particular, is to take advantage of any sharp conflict to
bring the masses into the arena for the very purpose of effecting this
obliteration. From the point of view of the task of the general
transformation of Russia, the historical meaning of the June Third period,
is precisely that the new step in the transformation into a

    

bourgeois monarchy is a step towards a greater separation of the classes in
every respect and, especially, towards a greater separation of the liberals
(the “responsible” opposition to the Purishkeviches) from the democrats
(working for the elimination of all the foundations of Purishkevichism).


Hence it is obvious that Martov, while apparently criticising only the
“inept formula”, actually puts forward the platform of a
liberal labour policy. He sees the “step back” taken by the old
regime towards the Purishkeviches, but he refuses to see the step back
taken by the liberal bourgeoisie towards the old regime. He sees that the
events of 1905 created favourable conditions “for the mobilisation and
organisation” of the liberal bourgeoisie against the Purishkeviches and
alongside the Purishkeviches, but he re I uses to see
that those events created “favourable conditions” for the mobilisation
and organisation of the Vekhi type, counter-revolutionary liberal
bourgeoisie against democracy, against the movement of the masses. From the
passage quoted from Martov’s article it, therefore, follows inevitably that
the workers ought to “support” the liberals in the latter’s
struggle against the Purishkeviches, that they ought to leave the
hegemony to the liberals; but it does not by any means follow
that, in spite of the Vekhi sentiments of the liberals,
in spite of the aspirations of the Milyukovs to get a seat next to
the Purishkeviches, the workers ought to rouse the masses to the job of
doing away entirely with the deepest roots (and the loftiest pinnacles) of
Purishkevichism.  

Hence it is obvious, further, why Martov can and should agree with
Larin on the basic points, differing from him only in details, only in the
manner of formulating the tasks of a liberal labour policy. We already have
a bourgeois monarchy in Russia, says. Larin, our landowners are no longer
“feudal lords” but agrarians, i.e., bourgeois entrepreneurs in the
countryside. Therefore, we are not facing any historical “leaps”, and
what we need is “not hegemony, but a class party” (Levitsky),
our task is to sup port the liberal constitutionalists, while preserving
our own

    independence.[1]

So far we still have no bourgeois monarchy,

    

objects Martov, but it is “ample” for us to know that the combination of
absolutism and constitutionalism is contradictory, and therefore it is
necessary for us to strike at the old regime “through the Achilles heel of
its contradictions”. Neither of the two disputants sees the connection
between the bourgeois monarchy that has been born or is being born and the
counter-revolutionary nature of the liberal bourgeoisie; both of them fail
to take account of the activity of the “leader” in determining not only
the extent but also the type of bourgeois transformation in Russia;
according to both of them, whether they say so or not, the “arrangements
are made” for the working class in the new, bourgeois Russia, but the
workers do not do the arranging and secure for themselves a
democratic following capable of repudiating all the foundations of
Purishkevichism.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
As Larin wrote; “to stand up for itself ... during the coming
constitutional reform”.  —Lenin
 

 
  

III

|

V

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## V









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: V







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    

V

It is interesting to note that Martov’s further arguments
defeat him even more glaringly.  


   “Thus,” Martov continues, “the Bourbons who were
   restored to power in 1815 did not create a bourgeois monarchy, but were
   compelled to cloak their rule, and the rule of the nobility that backed
   them, in political forms which hastened the organisation of the bourgeoisie
   and enabled it to grow into the force that was capable of creating the
   bourgeois monarchy of 1830.”  


Splendid. Prior to the Bourbons of 1815 and prior to 1789,
France had a feudal, patriarchal monarchy. After 1830 France had a
bourgeois monarchy. But what kind of monarchy did Martov set out to discuss
(to his own discomfiture), i.e., the monarchy of 1815–30? It is obvious
that it was “a step toward the transformation into a bourgeois
monarchy”. The example cited by Martov is a splendid refutation of his
arguments! Further, the French liberal bourgeoisie already began to reveal
its hostility to consistent democracy during the movement of 1789–93. As
Martov knows perfectly well, democracy did not by any means set itself the
task of creating a bourgeois monarchy. In the face of the
vacillations, betrayals, and counter revolutionary sentiments of the
liberal bourgeoisie, France’s

    

democrats, with the working class at their head, created, after a long
series of trying “campaigns”, the political system which became
consolidated after 1871. At the beginning of the era of bourgeois
revolutions, the French liberal bourgeoisie was monarchist in outlook; at
the end of a long period of bourgeois revolutions, and to the extent to
which the actions of the proletariat and of the bourgeois-democratic
elements (the “Left bloc” elements, in spite of all that L. Martov may
say to the contrary!) be came increasingly determined and independent, the
French bourgeoisie in its entirety was recast into a republican
bourgeoisie, retrained, re-educated, reborn. In Prussia, and in Germany in
general, the landowner never relinquished his hegemony during the whole
period of bourgeois revolutions and he “educated” the bourgeoisie in his
own image, after his own likeness. In France, during all the eighty years
of bourgeois revolutions, the proletariat, in various combinations with the
“Left bloc” elements of the petty bourgeoisie, won for itself hegemony at
least four times, and as a result the bourgeoisie had to create a political
system more acceptable to its opposite.  

Bourgeoisies differ. Bourgeois revolutions provide a vast variety of
combinations of different groups, sections, and elements both of the
bourgeoisie itself and of the working class. To “deduce” an answer to the
concrete problems of the Russian bourgeois revolution of the first decade
of the twentieth century from “the general concept” of bourgeois
revolution in the narrowest sense of the term is to debase Marxism to
liberalism.  


   “Thus,” Martov continues, “after it suppressed the
   Revolution of 1848, the Prussian government found itself compelled to
   introduce a constitution and a legislative representative body, organised
   in the interests of the landowners; these paltry rudiments of a
   constitutional-parliamentary system served as the basis for the political
   organisation of the bourgeoisie, which, however, to this day has not
   succeeded in transforming the state into a ‘bourgeois monarchy’.  

   “Hence the above-mentioned formulation errs in making no mention of
   the decisive collision between the classes, without which the objective
   tendency revealed in acts of the June Third type cannot be translated into
   reality!”  


That is truly magnificent, isn’t it? Martov is positively a virtuoso
when it comes to disguising reformist arguments,

    

theories, and platforms with catchwords which create the impression of
being Marxist and revolutionary! Apropos of the same “formula” which
Martov is criticising, F. Dan poured scorn on people who want “to shove in
where they have once been defeated”. Y. Larin wrote that the working class
must organise, not “in expectation of a revolution”, but simply for the
purpose of “firmly and systematically defending its special
interests”. Now Martov makes the discovery that the formula errs because
it makes no mention of the decisive collision between the
classes. Simply charming!  

But Martov’s phrase is not merely comical, it has another feature to
it. Martov expressed himself with consummate evasiveness. He did not say to
which classes he was referring. In the preceding sentences he
spoke of the landowners and the bourgeoisie. It might be conjectured that
Martov here refers to a decisive collision only between the
landowners and the bourgeoisie. Only on this assumption may
Martov’s words be “taken seriously”. But if this assumption is
correct, then that shows him up with particular clarity as an advocate or
defender of a liberal labour policy.  

Our formula “makes no mention of the decisive collision” between the
classes of the landowners and the bourgeoisie! But, hold! Our formula
speaks plainly, definitely and explicitly of “petty dissensions”
between these classes. From our viewpoint the dissensions between these
classes are petty. Great importance attaches to the collision,
not between these classes, but between other classes, of which the
“formula” speaks further on in just as plain and unmistakable terms.


Consequently the question is as follows. No one who shares the Marxist
viewpoint can expect Russia’s salvation from the “June Third period” to
come from anything other than a “decisive collision between the
classes”. We must be clear on the historical meaning of the “June Third
period” if we want to know which classes in contemporary Russia
can and must (in the sense of objective necessity, not of a subjective
“must”) come into decisive collision. Martov, apparently, thinks, as do
all the liquidators, that in Russia a decisive collision is bound to take
place between the landed nobility and the liberal bourgeoisie. (Be it noted
in parenthesis that the liquidators will render the working-class

    

movement a real service if they openly set forth this view in the
draft platform of Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni, because
they will thereby explain the matter to the workers; if, however, the
platform of these publications does not openly express this view,
it will be shown that the purpose of their platform is to conceal their
real views, that the platform is at variance with the real ideological
content of the propaganda carried on by these two magazines.)  

We think, and this is plainly stated in our “formula”, that
no decisive collision is to be expected between the old type of
landed nobility and the liberal bourgeoisie in Russia. Clashes between
these two classes are inevitable, but they will be mere “petty
dissensions” which will “not decide” anything in Russia’s
destiny and cannot bring about any decisive, real change for the

       better.[1]


A really decisive collision is still to come between other
classes—a collision on the basis and within the framework of bourgeois
society, i.e., of commodity production and capitalism.  

What ground is there for this opinion? It is justified both by
theoretical considerations and by the experience of 1905–07. In these
three years Russia experienced a sharp collision of classes that ranks as
one of the greatest class collisions in world history. Nevertheless, even
in those three years, in a bourgeois society which lacked even the most

    

elementary conditions and guarantees of bourgeois liberty, the collision
between the landed nobility and the liberal bourgeoisie, between the latter
and the old regime, was neither sharp nor decisive. On the other hand, the
sharp and decisive collisions, collisions that could in any way be
described as sharp and decisive, were those between the peasants and the
landowners, between the workers and the capitalists.  

How is this phenomenon to be explained? In the first place, by the fact
that the liberal bourgeoisie is so closely linked with the landed nobility
economically, their mutual interests are so closely intertwined, that from
the standpoint of the former the safest and most desirable course is to re
form the latter, but by no means to abolish it. The slowest, even
imperceptibly slow, reform is better than abolition, that is how the
overwhelming majority of the liberal bourgeois reason, and with Russia’s
economic and political situation as it is at present this class
cannot reason otherwise.  

Further, if we take for instance the strike movement, we find that in
Russia, during the three years referred to, it developed to a point never
achieved in any of the most advanced and most developed capitalist
countries in the world. That is why it was inevitable for the
liberal bourgeoisie to reason that the slowest, the most imperceptibly
slow, reform of the antiquated conditions of labour was better than a
resolute breach with the old, that it was better to preserve the old than
to make a decisive break with it. On the other hand, the economic condition
of the workers and peasants made it impossible for them to reason
along those lines; here the economic conditions gave rise to really sharp
and really decisive collisions. It Is wrong to think, as the Narodniks
think with regard to the peasantry, and Trotsky with regard to the workers,
that those collisions went beyond the limits of bourgeois society. But
there can be no shadow of doubt that it is by such, and only
by such, collisions (provided they lead to a definite outcome) that
all the old, the threadbare, the pre-bourgeois can be fully
eradicated, can be abolished without leaving a trace.  

The Russian landlords, from Purishkevich to Dolgorukov, have trained
our liberal bourgeoisie in a spirit of servility, inertia, and fear of
change unparalleled in history.

    

The Russian peasants, under the economic and political conditions at
present obtaining in Russia, represent that bourgeois stratum
of the population out of which the era of “collisions”, the era of
bourgeois revolutions (in the historico-methodological meaning of the
term), with the workers taking a leading part, is educating a
bourgeoisie that is free of the above-mentioned pleasant qualities. But
will it complete this education? This question can only be answered when
the era of bourgeois revolutions in Russia is at an end. Until that time
all the progressive trends of political thought in Russia will inevitably
be divided into two main types, depending on whether they are gravitating
to the hegemony of the liberals who are striving to remake and renovate
Russia in a manner that will not be injurious to the Purishkeviches, or to
the hegemony of the working class with the best elements of the peasantry
as its following.  

I said “are gravitating”, because we cannot expect all the
progressive trends to be conscious of, i.e., to under stand, the class
roots of the various policies. But Marxists would not be worthy of the name
if they failed to delve down to those roots, and if they failed to
understand that both the defence of the special interests of the working
class and the training of the working class for its future role in
bourgeois Russia will inevitably, owing to the objective interrelation of
the social forces, follow the same two main channels:

it will either trail along behind the liberals (who are marching
behind the Purishkeviches or alongside of them), or lead the democratic
elements forward in spite of the vacillations, desertions, and
Vekhi sentiments of the liberals.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Naturally, it does not follow from this that the liberal bourgeoisie,
together with the landed nobility, represents “one reactionary mass”,
that the conflicts between these two are of no political significance, that
they cannot give rise to a democratic movement, or that it is permissible
to ignore these conflicts. To draw such conclusions would be tantamount to
reducing a correct proposition to an absurdity, it would betray a lack of
understanding of the limits within which this proposition is correct. For
it is a well-known fact that “the greatest justice”, if reduced to an
absurdity because of a failure to understand the limits and conditions of
the just and unjust, becomes “the greatest injustice”: summum
jus—summa infuria. We should remember the following fact in the
history of Russian Marxism. The appraisal of the liberal-bourgeois parties
in Russia (with the Cadet Party at their head) given at the well-known
London Congress was exactly the same as that outlined in the present
article; but that did not prevent the Congress from recognising the
necessity “to make use of the activity of these parties to further the
political education of the people”.  —Lenin
 

 
  

IV

|

VI

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VI









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: VI







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    

VI

We have now come face to face with the question of the
celebrated “Left bloc” policy. Yuri Chatsky and F. Dan, it may be said
without exaggeration, rave and fulminate against a Left bloc. This is all
the more natural to the second of these two politicians since he must
somehow cover up his betrayal of the workers’ cause and his part in the
split of the St. Petersburg workers’ organisation, for the sake of a bloc
with the Cadets, in the spring of 1907! But the question of a Left bloc is
an interesting and important question of principle, not only, and even not
so much, from the

    

standpoint of election agreements (under the existing electoral law the
“Left bloc” has seldom been realised in practice), but from the point of
view of the general character and content of election propaganda and
agitation. To “compel” the most numerous democratic masses in the country
(the peasants and sections of the non-agricultural petty bourgeoisie akin
to them) “to choose between the Cadets and the Marxists”, and to pursue a
line of “joint action” of the workers and the peasant democrats both
against the old regime and against the vacillating counter-revolutionary
liberal bourgeoisie, is the basis and substance of the tactics of a “Left
bloc”. These tactics were sanctioned by the course of events in 1905 (the
working-class and peasant movement), by the votes of the “Trudovik” and
workers’ groups in the First and the Second Dumas, by the attitude of the
press of the different parties to the cardinal questions of democracy, and
even by the stand on the agrarian question taken by the “peasant group”
in the Third Duma (considering that there are many Right elements
in that group!). It is a well-known fact that the agrarian bill introduced
by forty-three peasant members of the Third

Duma[1] is far more democratic than the liberal bill of the Cadets, a
fact the Cadets themselves admit!  

There is no doubt that it is precisely in this sense, on general
principles, that the liquidators repudiate the “Left bloc” policy. And
there is just as little doubt that their repudiation of the Left bloc
policy constitutes treason to the cause of democracy. Not a single
bourgeois-liberation movement the world over has ever failed to provide
examples and instances of “Left bloc” tactics, and wherever these
movements triumphed, in all such cases, it was always as
a result of these tactics, a result of the struggle being directed along
these lines in spite of the vacillations and treachery of the liberals. It
was the “Left bloc” tactics—the alliance between the urban “plebs”
(==the modern proletariat) and the democratic peasantry that lent sweep and
force to the English revolution in the seventeenth century and the French
revolution iii the eighteenth century. Marx and Engels drew attention to
this fact on many occasions, not only in 1848, but much later as well. In
order to avoid quoting frequently quoted passages, we shall merely mention

    

the correspondence between Marx and Lassalle in 1859. Apropos of Lassalle’s
tragedy Franz von Sickingen, Marx wrote that the intended
collision in the drama was “not simply tragic, but really the tragic
collision that spelled the dooms and properly so, of the revolutionary
party of 1848–49”. And Marx, indicating in general terms the
entire line of the future differences between the Lassalleans and
the

Eisenachers,[2] reproached Lassalle for making the mistake of “placing
the Lutheran-knightly opposition above the
plebeian-Muncerian

opposition”.[3] 

We are not here concerned with the question whether Marx was right or
wrong in making that reproach; we think he was right even though Lassalle
defended himself vigorously against this reproach. The important point is
that Marx and Engels considered it an obvious mistake to place the
“Lutheran-knightly” opposition (the opposition of the liberals and
landowners in Russia at the beginning of the twentieth century)
above the “plebeian-Muncerian” opposition (proletarian and
peasant, in that same Russia); that both of them considered this absolutely
impermissible for a Social-Democrat!  

In heaping abuse upon Left bloc tactics, the liquidators try by their
words to drown the inescapable fundamental issue of the principle that a
“Left bloc” policy is obligatory for every workers’ party in every
bourgeois-democratic movement. Since they are unable to deal with the
question in terms of principle they get into curious contradictions and
defeat their own case. Here is an instance. The very same Martov, who
dreads a “Left bloc” like the plague, writes in formulating the agrarian
programme in his “Fundamental Theses of a Platform” that “as before, the
surest, most painless and most advantageous path of cultural development is
... to take the landed estates from their present owners and transfer them
to the people”. Involuntarily he thus went so far as to advocate, oh
horror!  nationalisation! That in the first place. Secondly, in expressing
this correct idea, Martov (despite his colleague Cherevanin—see the
latter’s Vekhi-type book on The Present Situation in
1908) expressed a Left bloc idea; his agrarian programme is a
programme of Left bloc action both against the old regime and
against the liberal parties of the Cadet type!

    

“Drive Nature out of the door, and she will fly in through the window”!


The agrarian programme formulated by L. Martov is one on which the
workers and the peasant Trudoviks together with their ideological leaders,
the Narodniks, are making common cause (actually making common cause, i.e.,
working together regardless of any “agreements”). On the other
hand, this programme separates both the workers and the peasant
Trudoviks, taken together, from the Cadets (and from the bourgeois
liberals in general). If in addition to this absolutely indisputable
political conclusion, you will bear in mind that the agrarian question (the
question of democratic agrarian change) is a key question of our liberation
movement, then it is obvious that Martov was compelled to
formulate “Left bloc” tactics in regard to the central issue of
our epoch!  

How and why did this misfortune befall our opponent of the “Left
bloc” policy? Very simply. It was necessary for him either to
break with the old programme openly and unequivocally, which he
could not make up his mind to do; he had not yet “caught up” with the
courageous (in their renegacy) Cherevanin and Larin. Or else it was
necessary to reproduce, at least more or less correctly, the old
programme—from which the “Left bloc” policy follows as an inescapable
conclusion. Such is the bitter lot of our liquidators.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the agrarian bill of the independent and Right peasant
deputies, introduced into the Third Duma on May 10 (23), 1908. The bill
envisaged the compulsory alienation with compensation at average market
prices of the landed estates not being exploited by their owners. It was
proposed to implement the land reform through local land committees elected
by a general vote. For Lenin’s appraisal of this bill see his articles
“The New Agrarian Policy” and “The Agrarian Debates in the Third Duma”





[2]
Eisenachers—members of the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party
of Germany founded in 1869 at the Eisenach Congress. The leaders of the
Eisenachers were August Bebel and Wilhelm Liebknecht, who were under the
ideological influence of Marx and Engels. The Eisenach programme stated
that the Social-Democratic Workers’ Party of Germany considered itself “a
section of the International Working Men’s Association and shared its
aspirations”. Thanks to the regular advice and criticism, of Marx and
Engels, the Eisenachers pursued a more consistent revolutionary policy than
did Lassalle’s General Association of German Workers; in particular, on the
question of German unification, they followed “the democratic and
proletarian path and struggled against any concessions to Prussianism,
Bismarckism or nationalism”





[3]
Lenin is quoting from a letter written by Marx to Lassalle on April 19,
1859. When Lenin wrote this article, Marx’s letter had not yet been
published, and he availed himself of extracts from it which Lassalle had
quoted in his reply to Marx and Engels dated May 27, 1859 (see Marx and
Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, pp. 138–40).



 
  

V

|

VII

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VII









Lenin: 1911/fuprelca: VII







V. I.  

      Lenin
Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign



    

VII

It remains for us to point out two more important pas sages
in Martov’s article. “In each case,” he writes, “of such a conflict
arising within the June Third system [he is speaking of conflicts and
friction which disintegrate and sap this system] the workers’ party should
strive to prevail upon the propertied classes to take one step or another
toward the democratisation of legislation and an extension of
constitutional guarantees, and, what is of the greatest independent value
to us, toward an extension of the sphere of the unrestricted organisation
of the popular forces” (Nasha Zarya, No. 7–8, p. 50).  

Martov’s formulation is very apt, only it is a formulation of the tasks
and the line of a liberal labour policy.

    

“To prevail upon the propertied classes to take a step”, to “extend the
sphere of the unrestricted organisation of labour”—these phrases of
Martov’s are exactly those repeated throughout the world by all
more or less educated liberal bourgeois, all liberal bourgeois imbued to
any extent with the “European” spirit. The distinction between a liberal
labour policy and a Marxist labour policy begins only when and
where it is explained to the workers that the above-quoted liberal
formulation is inadequate, unsatisfactory, and a deception. To prevail upon
the non-propertied classes to take a step toward changing the very
“sphere” which the liberals are promising to “extend”, and to
substitute for it a fundamentally different “sphere”—that
(approximately) is how the tasks and aspirations of the workers’ party
should be defined, if there is no desire to build up a liberal labour
party.  

It should be remarked,, as a curiosity, that in a note to the quoted
passage L. Martov makes the following observation: “As a matter of course,
this formulation is sure to give rise to charges of opportunism and
‘legalism at all costs’”. And how do you think he refutes these
charges? By referring to an article by N. Rozhkov printed in the
Obskaya

Zhizn,[2] No. 171. From that article Martov quotes five lines of
extremely inept and unintelligible statements about “open political
associations”. We have not read that article. But, assuming that Rozhkov
advocates an “open party”, what is this supposed to prove when we are
dealing with Martov’s formulation of a liberal labour
policy? Since when has it become customary for anyone to justify
one mistake of his own by pointing to another mistake
committed by another writer?  

But the entire spirit of Martov’s article is best and most
vividly conveyed by the following tirade in the concluding section of the
last paragraph: 


   “We must conduct the entire election campaign under the
   banner of the struggle of the proletariat for the freedom of its political
   self-determination, of the struggle for its right to have a class party of
   its own and to develop its activities freely, for the right to take part in
   political life as an independent organised force. This principle [mark
   this!] must govern both the content and tactics of the election campaign
   and the methods to be used for organisational work.”  

 

Those are words that correctly express the “principle” which
determines the “content” of the entire election agitation (and of the
entire policy) of the liquidators! As for the fine words about “reducing
nothing and renouncing nothing”, with which Martov tried to console the
Marxist readers, they are nothing but words, hollow words, so long as
this is how the “principle” is formulated. For the crux of the
matter is that the principle itself turns out to be that of a liberal
labour policy.  

The liberal bourgeois tells the workers: you are justified in fighting,
indeed, you must fight, for the freedom of your own political
self-determination, for the right to have a class party of your
own, for the right freely to develop your activities, for the
right to take part in political life as an independent organised
force. It is these principles of the liberal, educated, radical, to use the
English or French term, bourgeoisie that Martov is offering the workers in
the guise of Marxism.  

The Marxist tells the workers: in order really and success fully to
fight for the freedom of your “own” political self-determination, you
must fight for the free political self-determination of the entire people,
you must show the people what the successive democratic forms of its
political existence should be, and win the masses and the undeveloped
sections of the working people away from the influence of the liberals. If
your party is really to attain a full understanding of the tasks of the
class, and if its activity is actually to be of a class nature and not of a
guild nature, it is necessary for it not only to take part in political
life, but, in spite of all the vacillations of the liberals, to direct the
political life and initiative of the broad strata on to a greater arena
than that indicated by the liberals, toward more substantial and more
radical aims. He who confines the class to an “independent” corner of
“activity” in an arena, the bounds, form, and shape of which are
determined or permitted by the liberals, does not understand the tasks of
the class. Only he understands the tasks of the class who directs its
attention (and consciousness, and practical activity, etc.) to the need for
so reconstructing this very arena, its entire form, its entire shape, as to
extend it beyond the limits allowed by the liberals.  
 

Wherein lies the difference between the two formulations? In the very
fact, among other things, that the first excludes the
idea of the “hegemony” of the working class, whereas the second
deliberately defines this very idea; the first is the modern, latest
variation of old Economism (“the workers should confine themselves to the
economic struggle, leaving the political struggle to the liberals”),
whereas the second strives to leave no room in the minds of the workers
either for the old Economism or for its new variety.  

Now it remains but to answer the concluding question:

In what way does Levitsky differ from Martov? The former is one of the
younger liquidators, one of the new generation, unaffected by the
traditions and memories of the past. He does not beat about the bush, but
says plainly, with the eagerness and straightforwardness of youth:
“not hegemony, but a class party”! Martov, however, is “a man of
the world”, he once belonged to the old Iskra group, he
represents a mixture of the old traditions, which have not yet completely

      vanished,[1]

and of the new liquidationism which has not yet mustered a sufficient
amount of courage. That is why he first swears and vows to—“reduce
nothing, renounce nothing”—and then, after long and devious
circumlocutions, blurts out that the “principle” of the entire election
campaign must be a liquidationist one.  

But, then, it is precisely the “principle” of the election campaign
that constitutes the whole crux of the matter.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
It would be more correct to say: The substance of these traditions,
their ideological core, has completely vanished as far as Martov is
concerned, but the words have remained, the habit of carrying the
“decent label” of an “unswerving internationalist” still makes itself
felt.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Obskaya Zhizn (Ob Life)—daily newspaper of a
liberal-bourgeois trend, published in Novonikolayevsk (Novosibirsk) from
1909 to 1912.



 
  

VI

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## First Exposure of Cadet Negotiations with the Cabinet









Lenin: First Exposure of Cadet Negotiations with the Cabinet







V. I.  

      Lenin
First Exposure of Cadet Negotiations with the Cabinet




Published:
Prosveshcheniye, No. 1, December 1911.

      Signed: P..

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 424-432.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Those who, six or five and a half years ago, sounded the
alarm about the negotiations which the Constitutional-Democrats were, in
general, conducting with Cabinet ministers, especially on the subject of
ministerial portfolios, cannot help entertaining a feeling of profound
satisfaction today. Historical truth is bound to out—it is sometimes
divulged in quarters from which truth is least expected. The first
revelations have now been made, and, despite all the efforts of
“interested” persons (and parties) to hush them up, they will not end
here. It may be said with absolute certainty that these exposures will
fully corroborate the accusations we levelled against the Cadets at that
time.  

Witte started them in his controversy with Guchkov. Witte’s object and
the nature of his revelations are of the basest; it is an intrigue of the
worst kind, a desire to trip somebody up, a bid for a portfolio. But it is
a well-known fact that when two thieves fall out honest men always come
into their own; and when three thieves have fallen out, the gain is likely
to be the greater.  

What matters most in Witte’s letter is that willy-nilly he had to
establish certain facts—thus providing an opportunity (and
making it indispensable) to verify these facts by questioning all those
involved in the affair. The basic facts to be gleaned from Witte’s letter
are the following: 

(1) The conference called by Witte was attended by Shipov, Guchkov,
Urusov, Y. Trubetskoi, and M. Stakhovich, that is to say, leading figures
of the Cadet, Peaceful Renovation, and Octobrist parties.  
 

(2) “At the first session of the conference between Count Witte [we
are quoting his letter I and the above-mentioned prominent persons,
agreement in principle was reached on all the main questions, except the
question of the appointment of the Minister of the Interior.”  

(3) “Count Witte insisted on Durnovo’s appointment, while the
prominent persons, with the exception of Prince Urusov, were opposed to
it. As for Prince Urusov, he tried to persuade his colleagues at the
conference to agree to Durnovo’s appointment in view of the gravity of the
situation and the impossibility of delaying the matter, and, for his own
part, he declared that, in order to set an example, he was prepared to
accept the post of Vice-Minister under Durnovo.... At the next session
Shipov, Guchkov, and Prince Trubetskoi declared that they could not join a
Cabinet that would include Durnovo....”  

(4) Stolypin’s candidature was mentioned, but it failed to receive
unanimous approval. Some were in favour, others were opposed to it.  

What amendments has Guchkov introduced to this statement of the facts?
He has confirmed that “Durnovo’s candidature had the warm Support of
Prince Urusov, subsequently a member of the First Duma.” Witte, according
to Guchkov, hesitated, and there was a moment when he was prepared to give
up Durnovo because it was known that the press was about to come out with
revelations and bitter articles against him. “The whole incident,” adds
Guchkov, “took place immediately after the Manifesto of October 17, when
there reigned the fullest, the most unbridled, I should say, freedom of the
press.”  

The negotiations were prolonged. Guchkov writes of “wearisome days of
protracted negotiations”. In respect of Stolypin, he says that “nobody
expressed the unfavourable opinion mentioned by Cound Witte. In describing the general situation
obtaining at that time, Guchkov says: “Many ‘saviours’ of the country have
now appeared on the scene.... But where were they in those days? ... At
that time many of them had not yet made up their minds on which side of the
barricades they were going to stand”.  

Those are the essential points in Witte’s and Guchkov’s
revelations. The minor details we naturally leave out of

    

consideration. The historical truth is now quite definitely established:

(1) At that extremely grave moment in the history of Russia there were
no serious differences of opinion between the Cadets and the
Octobrists;

(2) “At that time many [of the bourgeois leaders and, as Guchkov
“subtly” hints, perhaps even of the ministers] had not yet made up their
minds on which side of the barricades they were going to stand”. But the
fact is that those who attended the conference, and did so more than once,
were men who all stood on one definite “side of the
barricades”. During those conferences the ministers, and the
Octobrists, and the Cadets all stood on the same side of the
barricade. Historical truth permits of no doubt or misinterpretation: these
were conferences at which the government conducted negotiations with the
counter-revolutionary, liberal bourgeoisie.  

Now look at the behaviour of the Cadets. Ever since the publication of
Witte’s and Guchkov’s revelations (their letters were printed in
St. Petersburg on September 26, and in Moscow on September 27, Old Style),
the Cadets have been maintaining complete silence about their part
in the affair, confining themselves to attempts to “twit” Guchkov. That
is exactly what Rech did in its issue of September 28, and
Russkiye Vedomosti in its issue of the same date, where they
“twitted” Guchkov with having subsequently joined Durnovo’s colleagues,
but they have never printed any corrections or denials that affect the
historical facts. The third thief hopes that, thanks to the
controversy between Witte and Guchkov, he will go unnoticed!  

Then the Octobrists begin to “revenge” themselves on both Witte and
the Cadets. On October 14 (after two weeks of reconnoitring by the
Octobrists and of cowardly and mean silence on the part of the Cadets)
Golos Moskvy carried a “statement of facts” headed “Count Witte
and P. N. Durnovo in Alliance with the Cadets”. The new revelations bring
out the following points:

(1) Prince Trubetskoi was a member of the Constitutional-Democratic Party
at the time.

(2) “Since he did not want to create any misconceptions in Count Witte’s
mind, Prince Trubetskoi considered it his duty to warn him that he, Prince
Trubetskoi, would inform the bureau of his party, which met every day in
Professor Petrazhitsky’s apartment to discuss current affairs,

    

about all of Witte’s negotiations with men prominent in public life” (it
is obvious that neither the Octobrists nor the Cadets regard the worker and
peasant democrats as “prominent in public life”; apparently, in
October 1905 the workers and peasants were outside “public
life”!).

(3) Mr. Petrunkevich was particularly vehement in his objections to
Stolypin’s candidature. He said that, “if the worst came to the worst
[sic!], it was necessary to advise Count Witte to appoint Durnovo,
rather than Stolypin, to the post of Minister of the Interior. The other
leaders of the Constitutional-Democratic Party fully shared Petrunkevich’s
opinion, and Prince Trubetskoi was instructed to convey to Count Witte the
opinion of the prominent public men who met in Petrazhitsky’s
apartment”. The next morning Trubetskoi visited Count Witte and conveyed
to him the exact opinion of the bureau of the Constitutional-Democratic
Party about both candidates.  

Has Trubetskoi corroborated the reference to his part in the affair? He
fully corroborated it when he told both the correspondent of Novoye
Vremya (see issue of October 15) and the correspondent of
Rech (see issue of October 19) that the information printed in
Golos Moskvy was “quite exact”. “The word ‘bureau’,”
said Trubetskoi, “is perhaps out of place, it would have been
more correct to say ‘leaders of the Party’” (meaning the
Cadets). Trubetskoi made another, just as immaterial, “correction”,
stating that he had visit ed Witte “not the next morning, perhaps, but two
or three days later”. Finally, in the interview he gave to the
Rech correspondent, Trubetskoi said: 

“Exception must be taken to one statement made by Guchkov. He says
that the prominent people refused to join the Cabinet only because of
Durnovo. That is not quite so [not quite so! I as far as I am concerned
and, if I am not mistaken, the same applies to Shipov and I expressed our
willingness to join the Cabinet, but on condition that its programme was
drafted beforehand. Witte, however, tried to persuade us to join the
Cabinet without insisting on that condition. That was the difference
between us and Guchkov, who, as far as I can remember, stipulated no such
condition.” Trubetskoi is very cautious in his choice of expressions on
this point: “not quite so”, “as far as I can remember”!  
 

Mr. Petrunkevich deals with the subject in Rech of October
19—three weeks after the first revelations were published! Now,
see how he does it.  

He begins with a long-winded argument (27 lines) about the
inadvisability of relying on people’s memories, and points out that Shipov
was the only one who kept a diary.  

What is the purport of this argument? Do you want to have the truth
published, at once and in full? Then nothing could be easier than to
name all those who took part in the conferences and to question
them about it. If, however, you do not want to have the truth about
your own party published, then do not play at hide-and-seek and do
not refer to Shipov.  

Then follow 27 lines of argument about the propensity of the
Octobrists for “canards”. But what is the point of this argument, once
Golos Moskvy mentioned the person who corroborated its
information? Mr. Petrunkevich is obviously at pains to obscure a plain and
clear question by heaping up literary and diplomatic rubbish around
it. That is a dishonest method.  

Further follow 20 lines of jibes at Trubetskoi: that he
indulges in “personal reminiscences”—as though reminiscences could be
anything but personal!—and that the Prince “never mentioned the
matter to anyone”—the emphasis being Petrunkevich’s, who obviously
intends this as a rebuke for Trubetskoi’s indiscretion. Instead of giving a
plain answer to the question, the Cadets have begun to rebuke one another
for being indiscreet. What can this kind of method mean, except
that the Cadets are chagrined by the revelations? It betrays their
efforts to husk up the matter (what they say, in effect, is: don’t
be indiscreet in the future, Prince).  

The 74 lines of introduction are followed, at last, by the denial
proper on the following points:

(1) The bureau of the Constitutional-Democratic Party was in Moscow and,
therefore, could not meet in Petrazhitsky’s apartment.

(2) “At that time” Petrazhitsky “was not one of the group of persons who
directed the affairs of the Party”.

(3) “The few members I of the bureau of the Constitutional-Democratic
Party I who were living in St. Petersburg were not authorised to enter into
any negotiations, and still less alliances, with Count Witte, Mr. Durnovo,
or any other persons.”

    

(4) “Personally, I [Petrunkevich] visited Petrazhitsky once
[Mr. Petrunkevich’s emphasis], and it is true that on that one occasion
there was some talk about the possibility of Prince Trubetskoi being
offered the post of Minister of Education, and all those present expressed
their conviction that the Prince could accept the offer only on condition
that the entire Cabinet adopted a clear and definite programme fully
conforming to the conditions of the political situation. Moreover, the
Cabinet was to be one that could command the confidence of ‘society’ [bear
in mind what all the disputants mean by the word “society”: the
workers and peasants are not “society”]. It is quite possible
that at the same time the personal and political qualities of the various
candidates, among them Durnovo and Stolypin, were discussed. But neither my
memory, nor the memory of others whom I consulted on the subject, has
retained any recollection of a warm speech which, presumably, convinced all
those present.”  

That is all there is to the relevant part of Mr. Petrunkevich’s
“denial”, to which he adds a further 48 lines of jibes at Trubetskoi, to
the effect that the latter’s memory has failed him, that the
Constitutional-Democratic Party concluded no alliance with Durnovo and that
it “prevented one of its members, Prince Trubetskoi, from joining a
Cabinet Which the Party could not support”.  

Trubetskoi’s and Petrunkevich’s letters in the Rech of October
27 add nothing new. The former insists that it was no other than
Petrunkevich who “advised that Durnovo be preferred to
Stolypin”. Petrunkevich denies this.  

Now, what does this all boil down to?  

Mr. Petrunkevich declares that the few members of the bureau who were
living in St. Petersburg were not authorised to enter into any
negotiations, but he cannot help confirming the fact that
negotiations were conducted! He himself states (Rech, October 27):
“At the conference in Petrazhitsky’s apartment we discussed Prince
Trubetskoi’s candidature”.  

This then means that negotiations were conducted. If, as
Mr. Petrunkevich says, the Party “prevented” Prince Trubetskoi, this
means that the negotiations were conducted on behalf of the
Party!  

Mr. Petrunkevich has an amazing knack of contradicting himself. There
were no negotiations, but ... but there was

    

“a conference on the candidature”. The bureau of the Party held no
meetings, but ... but the Party took a decision. Such pitiful evasions are
characteristic of people who are trying in vain to conceal
something. What, indeed, could be simpler than to name all those
who took part in the conference, or to cite the exact decision of the
“bureau”, or of the Party, or of the leaders, or to set forth the
allegedly clear and allegedly definite programme which (allegedly) the
Cadets demanded of Witte’s Cabinet? But the trouble with our liberals is
that they cannot afford to tell the truth, they are
afraid of it, the truth is their ruin.  

And so they resort to petty and shabby subterfuges, equivocations and
evasions, the purpose of which is to prevent the reader (at least the
inattentive one) from getting a clear idea of a historical question of
great importance, namely, the question of the attitude of the liberals to
the government in October 1905.  

Why is the truth the ruin of the Cadets? Because the fact that
negotiations were conducted, and the circumstances and conditions under
which they were conducted, explode the fable that the Cadets are democrats
and prove the counter-revolutionary nature of their liberalism.  

Could a really democratic party even think of entering into
negotiations with a man like Witte at a time like October 1905? Certainly
not; for such negotiations necessarily implied that both parties stood, to
a certain extent, on common ground, namely the common ground of
counter-revolutionary aspirations, sentiments, and

    proclivities.[1]

There was nothing to negotiate with Witte, except ways and means of putting
an end to the democratic mass movement.  

Further, assuming for a moment that the Cadets, in entering into
negotiations, did have some democratic purposes in

    

mind, could a democratic party have failed to inform the people of those
negotiations when they were broken off? It could not. This is exactly where
we see the difference between counter-revolutionary liberalism and
democracy, undeserving of the epithet counter-revolutionary. The liberal
desires an extension of liberty, but in such a way as not
to lend strength to democracy; he wants the negotiations and the
rapprochement with the old government to continue, to gain in force, to be
put on a firm basis. That is why the liberal could not afford to
inform the public of the negotiations after they had been broken off, for
that would have made it difficult to resume the negotiations, he would
there by “have shown his hand” to democracy and broken with the
authorities—but that is precisely something a liberal cannot bring
himself to do. A democrat, on the other hand, who happened to be in the
position of someone conducting negotiations with Witte and who saw the
hopelessness of the negotiations, would immediately make them public, and
thereby put the Wittes to shame, expose their game, and bring about a
further advance of the democratic movement.  

Consider also the question of the programme of the Cabinet and of its
composition. All those involved in the affair speak of the latter and say
quite clearly and explicitly, such and such portfolios were offered to such
and such individuals. But not a single clear and explicit word is
said about the former, i.e., about the programme! Both Trubetskoi
and Petrunkevich remember the candidates for portfolios perfectly well, and
name them. But none of them says anything about what the
“programme” was! Is it just an accident? Of course not. It results from
(and is also positive proof of) the “programmes” having been the last
thing the liberal gentlemen thought of, simply meaningless window-dressing,
hollow “literature”—actually, Witte could have had no other programme
than that of strengthening the government and weakening the democratic
movement, and no matter what assurances he gave, and what promises and
statements he made, that would be the only policy he would have
pursued. The “vital” business that they were primarily concerned
with was that of the distribution of portfolios. For this reason only,
Witte, for instance, could forget all about the programme
(according to Witte,

    

there was even complete agreement on principles!), but the controversy over the
question as to who was better (or worse?), Durnovo or Stolypin, that is
something they all re member, of which they all talk, and in connection with
which they all refer to the speeches and arguments made by one person or
another.


Murder will out. Even in the deliberately touched up stories of three or four
persons the historical truth stands out in fairly bold relief.


Immediately after October 17, the entire liberal bourgeoisie of
Russia—from Guchkov to Milyukov, who is undoubtedly politically
responsible for Trubetskoi—turned away from democracy and drew
closer to Witte. Nor was this an accident or the treachery of
individuals—it was the class that went over to the
counter-revolutionary position that corresponds to its economic interests. Only
when they had assumed that position could the Cadets conduct negotiations with
Witte through Trubetskoi in 1905, with Trepov through Muromtsev in 1906,
etc. Unless we understand the distinction between counter-revolutionary
liberalism and democracy, we cannot understand anything either about the history
of the latter or about its tasks.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See the excellent explanation of this common ground, on the
basis of articles written by Mr. Milyukov himself (A Year of
Struggle), in Y. K.’s article, “From the History of Russian
Liberalism”, in the almanac Summer Lightnings, St. Petersburg,
1907. “Count Witte’s resignation means the loss of the last opportunity to
come to terms,” wrote Mr. Milyukov on April 18, 1906, thus admitting quite
clearly and definitely that there had been negotiations for
deals and that there had been opportunities, that there
was some sense in repeating the attempts to negotiate a deal.
—Lenin
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Three Questions









Lenin: Three Questions







V. I.  

      Lenin
Three Questions




Published:
Prosveshcheniye, No. 1, December 1911.

      Signed: Peterburzhets.

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 433-445.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The verbatim reports of the State Duma, even of the Third Duma, represent
extremely interesting and instructive political material. It will not be an
exaggeration to say that the supplement to the rag called Rossiya is
worth more than all the liberal newspapers. For the liberal newspapers make it
their business to whitewash the liberals, and to gloss over the presentation of
essential problems, by the Rights on the one hand, and by the representatives
of the real masses of the population on the other; they invariably introduce an
element of falsehood into the appraisal of the real nature of our
“home policy”. Yet it is precisely the way in which the
various questions are presented, and the appraisal of the real
nature of the issues involved, that is of prime importance in dealing with
all the socio-economic and political problems of the present period.


We shall try to illustrate the above, as far as possible, by the debate in
connection with three questions: on the secret political police, the famine, and
the “temporary” Regulations of

1881.[2]


The first meeting of the current session of the Duma opened with a
speech dedicated to Stolypin by the Chair man, an Octobrist. An interesting
feature of the speech was the statement made by the leader of the Octobrists
that “his [Stolypin’s] constant concern was to ensure steady, even
if cautious and circumspect, progress along the path of political and social
development in Russia”. Well put isn’t it? Stolypin in the capacity
of a “progressist”! Many a democrat who read Rodzyanko’s speech must have
paused to ask why, under the present system of government, under the present
political regime, and as long as there exists the class whose policy Stolypin
put into effect, there can be no other kind of “progress”
except the kind that we are witnessing

    

at present, a kind of “progress” which fails to satisfy even the
Octobrists. What a pity that none of the members of the Duma who were
present during that

speech[1]

—those

of them who pose as representatives of democracy—displayed any desire to
dwell on the class roots of the Stolypin brand of “progress”.


Yet the debate on the secret political police was a suit able occasion
for going into that matter.  

Stolypin “trusted the honourable A. I. Guchkov”, thundered Markov the
Second, “and his no less honourable friends in the Duma Centre. And he
paid with his life for his trustfulness. The tranquillity which we
experienced is the tranquillity of the grave. There is no other
tranquillity. (Voices from the benches on the left: Hear, hear!) There is a
revival of revolution.... There is no tranquillity, revolution is
imminent. Revolution must be fought, we must fight it tooth and nail, we
must give no quarter (laughter on the Left), we must hang all those
rascals, fanatics, and scoundrels. That is all I have to say in opposition
to the motion that this question be recognised as

urgent[3]”.  

That was how the representative of the landowners presented the
question.  

Markov the Second was followed by Rodichev, who spoke on the real
substance of the question. As usual, he spoke eloquently. But this eloquent
liberal presented the question in an incredibly crude way. Liberal words
and words—nothing more. “When their [the Octobrists’] Central
Committee,” exclaimed Mr. Rodichev, “declares with reference to the
opposition that it is bent on assassinating its political antagonists, that
is a shameful lie. But I am ready to forgive

    

you this lie if you vow to put an end to the serpent that has acquired
power over the Russian government, to put an end to the spyocracy.” (See
page 23 of the Verbatim Report in Rossiya, and also page 24, again
with a “vow”.)  

Impressive language—terribly impressive! Rodichev is prepared to
forgive the Octobrists if they “vow” to put an end! But isn’t it all
bluff, Mr. Windbag? Not only the Octobrists, but you, Cadets, as
well—no matter how much you “vow”—cannot put an end to any
serious evil. Your talk about “vows” in connection with so grave a
question only serves to obscure the political consciousness of the
masses instead of enlightening them; you muddle peoples’ minds by
the din of words, instead of calmly, plainly and clearly explaining
why the “serpent” has acquired power in the present instance,
why it was able to and had to acquire power.  

Since Mr. Rodichev does not explain this, since he is afraid of looking
simply and directly at the root and the essence of the question, the thing
that distinguishes him from the Octobrists is not the way he presents the
question, nor his principles, but only the sweep of his eloquence. We need
but pay just a little attention to his speech, we need only to ponder over
it a little to see that, in substance, Mr. Rodichev shares the standpoint
of the Octobrists; it is only for this reason that he can promise
them “forgiveness” if they “vow”. All these offers of forgiveness and
all these vows are nothing but a farce played by liberals afraid of more or
less consistent democracy. Hence the approach to the question which we see
in Rodichev’s words about “proportion”, in his defence of Lopukhin,
etc. At bottom there is no distinction between the stand taken by the
Octobrists and that taken by the liberals.  

On the other hand, consider the speech of Pokrovsky the Second. He
began by pointing out that the question put by him and his colleagues “is
entirely different in substance” from that put by the Octobrists. And,
notwithstanding the fact that there were a few somewhat inept passages in
the question put by Pokrovsky the Second and his colleagues, this
distinction in substance was correctly noted. “We are not
worried,” said Pokrovsky the Second, “by what seems to worry you—that
the political police may spell ruin for the government; what worries us is
that the political police,

    

which the government is cultivating with your assistance, spells ruin for
the country.”...  

And Pokrovsky the Second tried to explain—not declaim but
explain—why the government needs the political police, and what are the
class roots of that institution (class roots are not affected by “vows”
and offers of “forgiveness”). “The government,” said Pokrovsky the
Second, “had become completely alien to society, it had no support
whatever in society, because it was the enemy of democracy and in itself
consisted only of the paltry remnants of the extinct class of the nobility;
therefore it was obliged [our emphasis] to entrench itself, to
separate and isolate itself from society—and so it created the political
police.... Thus we see that as the broad social movement grows and ever
larger sections of democracy are swept into this movement, the significance
and the influence of the political police also grows.”  

Pokrovsky the Second apparently felt that the word “society” used
here was not explicit in that context, and so he began to use the
correct word “democracy” instead. At any rate he tried—and
that was the great service he rendered—to explain the essence of
the political police, to throw light on its class roots, and on its
connection with the entire system of government.  

Even if we overlook Mr. Rodichev’s unrestrained and vulgar
phrase-mongering, is it not obvious that the presentation of the question
by Pokrovsky the Second and Gegechkori was as different as earth and sky
from the presentation of the question by the Rodichevs? Yet the essential
feature distinguishing the presentation of the question by the workers’
deputies was their consistent application of democratic principles, only of
democratic principles. It is one of our most important tasks in the Third
Duma in general, after the period 1906–11 in particular, and especially on
the eve of the elections to the Fourth Duma, to explain the pro found
difference between genuine democracy and the liberalism of the Cadets (the
liberalism of “society”) who take the name of democracy in vain.  


Let us now turn to the second question, that of the
famine. The first to speak was Mr. Dzyubinsky, and he spoke very badly. Not
that there was anything wrong with his facts,

    

he had certainly marshalled the proper facts and presented them simply,
clearly, and truthfully. He showed no lack of sympathy for the
famine-stricken people, he certainly sympathised with the sufferers and was
not remiss in his criticism of the government—he criticised it all the
time. But his speech was not that of a democrat but of a liberal official;
this was its principal defect, and this is also the principal defect of the
entire attitude of the “intellectual” members of the Trudovik group, a
defect which is even more clearly shown in the verbatim reports of the
proceedings in the First and Second Dumas. The only distinction between
Dzyubinsky and the Cadets was that the former’s speech was free of the
counter-revolutionary notes which no attentive person could fail to
distinguish in all the speeches of the Cadets. Judging by the presentation
of the question, however, Dzyubinsky did not go far beyond the liberal
official’s point of view. That is why his speech was so infinitely weak, so
murderously tedious, so wishy-washy, particularly as compared with the
speech made by his colleague, another member of his party, the peasant
Petrov the Third, in whom, as in almost all the peasant members of
the Trudovik group in the First and Second Dumas, one feels a genuine
democrat to the marrow of his bones, a democrat “rooted in the soil”.


Observe how Mr. Dzyubinsky starts his speech. In speaking of the famine
he lays the main stress, of all things, on the relief clauses of the Relief
Regulations of June 12, 1900! You feel at once that this man, this
political leader, received his most vivid impressions of the famine, not
from personal experience, not from his own observations of the life of the
masses, not from any clear ideas of that life, but from a textbook on
police law. To be sure, he used the most up-to-date and best textbook
written by a most liberal professor, one who is as liberal as they make
them.  

Mr. Dzyubinsky criticised the Regulations of June 12, 1900. Now see
how he criticises: “Practically from the very moment the
Regulations of June 12, 1900, were issued, both the government itself and
society recognised that they were unsatisfactory”.... The government
itself has recognised that they are unsatisfactory, hence, the task of the
democrats is to amend the Regulations of June 12,

    

1900, so that the government itself may consider them “satisfactory”! You
can plainly visualise the atmosphere of a Russian provincial government
institution. The air is stale, it reeks of a government office. The company
is made up of the governor, the prosecutor, the colonel of the gendarmerie,
the permanent member and two liberal members of the Zemstvo. One of the
liberal members argues that it is necessary to present a petition for
amendments to the Regulations of June 12, 1900, since “the government
itself has recognised that they are unsatisfactory”.... Have a heart,
Mr. Dzyubinsky! Why, indeed, do we democrats need the Duma, if we are going
to carry into it too the language and manners, the way of
“political” thinking and the presentation of questions which were
pardonable (if they were pardonable) thirty years ago in a provincial
government office, or in a snug philistine “nest”—the private office of
a liberal engineer, lawyer, professor, or Zemstvo member? A Duma is not
needed for that!  

There is a proverb: “You can tell a man by the company he
keeps”. When you read the Duma verbatim reports you feel like paraphrasing
that proverb in regard to some of the deputies as follows: “Show me
whom you are addressing when speaking from the rostrum of the
State Duma, and I’ll tell you who you are”.  

Mr. Rodichev, for instance, like all the Cadets, always addresses his
words to the government and the Octobrists. Mr. Rodichev, like all the
Cadets, calls upon them to take a vow” and, on that condition, is willing
to “forgive” them. In substance, this brilliant phrase uttered by
Rodichev (who involuntarily let his eloquence betray him into telling the
truth) perfectly expresses the entire spirit of the political stand
generally taken by the Cadets in all the Dumas, in all the
important pronouncements of the Constitutional-Democratic Party in
parliament, in the press, and in the ante-rooms of ministers. “I am ready
to forgive you this lie if you vow to put an end to the serpent that has
acquired power over the Russian government”—these words should be
chiselled on the monument which it is high time to erect to Mr. Rodichev.


But Mr. Dzyubinsky is not a Cadet, nor is he one of those political
illiterates who regard the Cadets as a democratic

    

party. He calls himself a Trudovik, a Narodnik. But he lacks democratic
sense to such an extent that when he rises to speak from the rostrum of the
State Duma he continues to address officials. He lacks the proper
democratic sense to such an extent that he does not address his words to
the mil lions of famine-stricken peasants—and in Russia it is possible to
address them from the rostrum of the Duma, and so far, in fact, only from
the rostrum of the Duma—but to the few hundred officials who know about
the Regulations of June 12, 1900.  


   “The Regulations of June 12,” said Mr. Dzyubinsky, “were intended
   to serve a purely political purpose; their purpose was to eliminate the
   Zemstvo-run public organisations and concentrate the relief work among
   the population entirely in the hands of the government.”  


“The Regulations of June 12 were intended to serve a purely political
purpose.” What sort of language is this? How it reeks of hoary antiquity!
Twenty-five or thirty years ago, in the cursed eighties of the past
century, that was precisely the language Russkiye Vedomosti used
in criticising the government from the Zemstvo point of view. Wake up,
Mr. Dzyubinsky! You have slept all through the first decade of the
twentieth century. While you were asleep old Russia died and a new Russia
came into being. In this new Russia you cannot use the language
you do—reproaching the government for intending its regulations to serve
a “purely political” purpose. With all the good intentions, manners, and
benevolence of your language it is more reactionary than that of the
reactionaries in the Third Duma. It is the language of people—or of
provincial officials who fight shy of all politics—who regard
“politics” as something in the nature of sorcery, and dream of a relief
campaign “without politics”. The only way to speak to the Russia of today
is to appeal for a change from one kind of politics to another, from the
politics of one class to the politics of another class or other classes,
from one political system to another. This is the ABC not only of
democracy, but even of the most narrow liberalism—if we take the meaning
of these political terms seriously.  

The whole of Dzyubinsky’s speech was pervaded with the same spirit. He
spoke of the circular instructions

    

regarding the collection of taxes, of the tax spiral, of reduced railway
fares for harvestmen and peasant delegates, he spoke about seed being
received too late for the sowing, of cows demanded as security for credits
advanced—because the government is more interested in feeding cattle than
in feeding people—and about the fact that peasants would rather borrow
75,000 rubles at 12 per cent interest from a private bank than go through
the red tape of borrowing 70,000 rubles interest free from the
treasury. He wound up by citing informative letters from the localities
that describe appalling distress. But in the whole of this very
well-intentioned speech there was not a spark of democratic feeling, not a
trace of appreciation of the tasks of democratic
“politics”. What undoubtedly does follow from his speech—and
this was what the well-intentioned Mr. Dzyubinsky wanted to prove—is that
our regime is rotten; but the trouble is that the speaker did not even
notice that at the same time there “followed” from his speech the rotten
morals of a rotten liberal official.  

The next speaker but one after Dzyubinsky was Count Tolstoi, deputy
from Ufa Gubernia. He is very far removed from Trudovik views, but he spoke
exactly like Dzyubinsky:

“Guided by some sort of political considerations, the government is
systematically preventing the Zemstvos from taking part in relief work,
with the result that a vast section of the common people are
suffering”.... Dzyubinsky’s and Count Tolstoi’s speeches could have been
made twenty and fifty years ago. In these speeches there still lingers the
spirit of the old, now fortunately dead, Russia, in which there were no
classes that were aware, or beginning to be aware, of the difference
between the “politics” of the various sections of the population, and
that had learned, or had begun to learn, to fight openly and directly for
their conflicting interests—the Russia of “common people” at the bottom
and liberal Zemstvos and for the most part non-liberal officials on the
top. At that time both “the common people” and the liberal Zemstvos were
most of all afraid of “some sort of political considerations”.  

Turn over a few more pages of the Verbatim Report. There you come
across speeches which, on the whole, could not have been made in Russia
either fifty or twenty years

    

ago, nor for that matter, seven years ago. There is an altercation between
Markov the Second and Petrov the Third—men with numbers to their

names,[4] as if deliberately to show that we have before us typical
representatives of the various classes, that there are many like
them. Markov the Second is attacking in the old way; Petrov the Third, on
the other hand, is defending himself and is passing from defence to attack
not in the old way.  

Markov the Second: “The wordy and completely irrelevant attacks are to
be explained, of course ... by the fact that, no matter what the Russian
Government does, there will always be those who raise the people to
revolt...”. “In the Western gubernias ... people are toiling on the land
and doing things which your people on the Volga refuse to do

[it is not quite clear whom the speaker means by the words “your people on
the Volga” for the only speaker who preceded him was the Trudovik Kropotov
from Vyatka Gubernia; apparently, “your people on the Volga” did
not refer to any member of the Duma, nor to anything that
was or might have been said in the Duma, but to something else], for there
are too many loafers on the Volga, and this must be borne in mind.... We
know that there are many among your famine-stricken people who actually
ought to be made to starve, so as to compel them to work instead of
loafing.”  

Petrov the Third, although he is not from the Volga but from Perm
Gubernia, replies: “Let me remind you again, gentlemen, that if Markov the
Second is not a loafer he ought to recall the years 1905 and 1906 after
which the landed gentry received millions in subsidies from the state
treasury. What does that mean? This is what you should have remembered
first; you had no right to cast a slur on the peasants.”  

Markov the Second (from his seat): “Easier there, you!” These
“Seconds” and “Thirds” behave very rudely, don’t they?  

What lack of restraint compared with the well-mannered, respectable,
official language which the Dzyubinskys used to prove to the Marshals of
the Nobility that the relief regulations of 1850 ... of 1900 I mean ... are
not perfect! It is as if we had just emerged from the respectable private
office of a respectable “public figure” into the crush and

    

jam of some city square or busy street. What lack of decorum, what
disorder!  But we shall see later how “order” was introduced—not by the
Chairman, as you might think, oh no!—but introduced by a respectable
public figure, Mr. Shingaryov, member of the Constitutional-Democratic
Party. However, let us finish with this picture of contemporary manners.


Petrov the Third: “It is said that if funds are allocated for relief,
the people will spend the money on drink. That is not true,
gentlemen. Whose duty is it to prevent this? The fact is that in many
gubernias the people have requested that the taverns be closed down, but
nothing is being done about it. It is possible, yes, that the population
spends part of the money on liquor; but how about yourselves, Markov the
Second and you other gentlemen, how much do you spend on liquor? Perhaps,
if we divide the total per head, it will turn out that you spend much more
on drink than the peasants do.... As long as the land, which ought to
belong to the peasants, is in the hands of such Markovs, Purishkeviches,
and their fraternity, famines will most certainly keep recurring. But these
gentlemen will say that the peasants are to blame for the famine because
they are loafers.”  

Markov the Second (from his seat): “Our peasants are not starving”.


Petrov the Third: “I think, gentlemen, that the cardinal point of the
question of how to put an end to all starvation is that the land must be
taken from those who do not cultivate it, from the ‘non-loafing’ gentlemen,
and transferred to those who do. So long as you do not transfer the land,
and I know for certain that you will not, the peasant population will
starve. It is thus obvious that strife similar to that which took place in
1905 is again inevitable, and you yourselves are inviting that strife, for
a hungry man is like a beast and you, therefore, are provoking the
population to make a revolution and to wrest by force what belongs to it by
right.”  

If Muromtsev had been Chairman of the Third Duma he would have surely
stopped the speaker—in the First Duma he always stopped speakers for such
inappropriate statements. In Muromtsev’s absence, Shingaryov, who spoke
next, took it upon himself to restore “order”. He immediately

    

took Markov the Second to task for “speaking in a tone worthy of a cheap
show”, and then he went on to lecture Petrov the Third on how to
argue with the Markovs. Markov’s party colleague Vishnevsky, said
Mr. Shingaryov, “spoke sincerely” and came out in favour of supporting
the question. He, Shingaryov, expressed the “hope that the government will
show more wisdom than Deputy Markov had shown in his speech.... It is the
duty of a representative of the Russian people to say to gentlemen: Shame
on you”.  

Rodichev and Shingaryov thus put Markov utterly to shame and, on top of
that, Shingaryov, by the model manner in which he polemised with Markov,
utterly confounded “the Third”.  


The last of the questions which form the subject of these notes
concerned the “temporary” Regulations of August 14, 1881, i.e., the
notorious Regulations for the protection of the state, which have been
systematically reaffirmed in the course of thirty years and which represent
the actual constitution of Russia. The main speakers on this question were
Teslenko and Milyukov, and the episode that provided the finishing touch
was the “expulsion of Jellinek”, i.e., the expulsion of Teslenko for
fifteen sittings for quoting a pas sage from

Jellinek,[5] despite Teslenko’s statement that his words had
“nothing in common with the construction which is now, apparently, being
put on them by those who want to vote” in favour of expulsion.  

Without going into greater detail in respect of this interesting
episode, we shall merely note that even in the presentation of this,
politically so plain and clear, question of the Regulations of August 14,
1881, Mr. Milyukov, the leader of the Constitutional-Democratic Party,
managed to provide a “brilliant” illustration of specific Cadet
narrow-mindedness and hypocrisy. “Gentlemen,” exclaimed Milyukov, “there
is no question more urgent than the one we have raised, for it represents
the principal and fundamental contradiction of Russian life [can the
contradiction between a scrap of paper and Russian life be called the
contradiction of Russian life?]; it is the contradiction between the
existing system of government and the methods of administration.”  
 

That is not true, Mr. Milyukov. The very Regulations of August 14,
1881, their thirtieth anniversary, and their “peculiar” “juridical
nature” prove that there is perfect harmony between the
“existing system of government” and the methods of administration, that
there is no “contradiction” at all. Considering, as he does, that there
is a contradiction between the two, and trying, as he does, to make it
appear that a gulf lies between the “system of government” and the
“methods of administration”, Mr. Milyukov thereby descends in
his criticism of the evil from the plane of the democratic struggle to that
of liberal good wishes. By the very fact that he is creating the fiction of
a gulf between things that are indissolubly connected in real
life, Milyukov is lending support to juridical and state-law fictions that
are intended to facilitate the justification of the evil, to
obscure its real roots. Milyukov thereby takes an Octobrist stand;
for the Octobrists, too, do not deny the existence of the evil, but try to
remove the formal contradictions while leaving intact the
real omnipotence of the bureaucracy from top to bottom and from
bottom to top.  

Like the genuine Cadet that he is, Milyukov—far from even noticing
that, for a “democrat”, he has hopelessly muddled things, and that he is
arguing like an Octobrist—is even proud of his “statesmanlike”
presentation of the question. Immediately after the words quoted above we
read: 

“This contradiction, gentlemen, is so obvious that even in your midst
[Mr. Milyukov is, of course, addressing the “leading party of the Third
Duma”—the Octobrists] it has been pointed out quite frequently; but very
seldom did you reach the substance, the root, the primary cause, which we
are discussing today. As a rule, what did you make of this problem of the
contradiction between the system and the methods of government? You pleaded
that the customs of administration cannot be rooted out at one stroke ...

[the reference is correct so long ... so long as the entire
“administration” is not removed, and this is something the Cadets
themselves do not countenance] ... you referred to the local administrative
bodies not obeying central instructions, instructions issued by the central
authorities; the most that you dared, was to accuse the central authorities

    

of not giving proper instructions. To you this has always been a question
of facts, to us it is a question of right.”  

You refute yourself splendidly, Mr. Milyukov! The Octobrists are
right, a hundred per cent right, when they refer to the close and
indissoluble connection, to the closest and most indissoluble connection,
between the central and local authorities. From this fact a democratic
conclusion must be drawn, for it would be ridiculous to deny this
connection after all that Russia knows about Tolmachov, Dumbadze, Reinbot,
Illiodor, the murderers of Herzenstein, etc. You, however, are drawing the
conclusion, naïve in its half-heartedness, that it is a “question of
right”. But who is going to determine the extent of this right? How will
you reach an “agreement” on this point? What is political right, if not
the formulation, the registration, of the relationships of might? You have
copied your definitions of right from West-European textbooks which
record what has come into being as a result of a long period of
battles in the West, as a result of the established (until disestablished
by fundamentally different movements of the working class) balance of
forces among the various elements of the West-European bourgeoisie, the
West-European peasants, the West-European feudal landowners, government
authorities, etc. In Russia this period has just begun, here the question
is presented—such is the current historical
situation—precisely as a question of “facts”; you, however, shrink back
from this plain and clear presentation of the question, hiding your head,
covering it with a magic cap of invisibility woven from the fictions of
“right”. Yours is the standpoint of a liberal official, not of a
democrat.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
We learn from the speech of Markov the Second that the workers’
deputies were not in the hall at the time. “You,” said Markov the Second,
addressing the workers’ deputies, “... frankly expressed your attitude
... when your benches were vacated a little while ago.... You
withdrew.... Even if I don’t respect you for that, I can under stand you.”
Markov the Second very often behaves in the Duma like a common rowdy. But
the words quoted above, as well as very many statements of his colleagues,
show clearly that the question is present ed from the standpoint of a
definite class. This outspokenness is, as a rule, a hundred times more
useful for the development of the political consciousness of the masses
than the hackneyed phrases of the liberals who claim to be “above
classes”.  —Lenin
 



[2]
The questions were discussed at the sessions of the Third Duma held on
October 15 and 17 (28 and 30), 1911.





[3]
Urgent question. In Russia’s Duma procedure questions were not
usually put directly to a minister or submitted for debate without having
first been examined by a commission. The Duma itself, however, could decide
that a question was “urgent” and should be the subject of an immediate
debate. As the reader can see from this article, the debate on whether a
question was sufficiently urgent for a debate could obstruct any real
discussion of it and ensure its relegation to a commission. From this it
follows that no question raised by a small minority in the Duma could ever
be voted “urgent” and discussion on it permitted.





[4]
Men with numbers to their names—ordinal numbers were added
when several members of the Duma had the same name (e.g., Markov the First,
Markov the Second).





[5]
Jellinek, Georg—a German bourgeois lawyer.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Famine and the Reactionary Duma









Lenin: The Famine and the Reactionary Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Famine and the Reactionary Duma




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 7, December 22, 1911 (January 4, 1912).

      Published according to the Rabochaya Gazeta text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 446-450.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Not so long ago, under the influence of last year’s
harvest, the hack journalists confidently held forth on the beneficial
results of “the new agrarian policy”, and, taking their cue from them,
some naïve persons proclaimed that there had been a turn in our
agriculture and that it was on the upgrade throughout Russia.  

Now, as if timed to coincide with the fifth anniversary of the decree
of November 9, 1906, the famine and crop failure which have gripped nearly
half of Russia have shown most graphically and incontrovertibly how much
wanton lying or childish simplicity there was behind the hopes placed in
Stolypin’s agrarian policy.  

Even according to government calculations, the authenticity and
“modesty” of which were demonstrated during preceding spells of famine,
the crop failure has affected twenty gubernias; twenty million people “are
entitled to receive relief”, in other words, they are bloated from hunger
and their farms are being ruined.  

Kokovtsov would not be Minister of Finance and the head of the
counter-revolutionary government if he did not make “encouraging”
statements—there is really no crop failure, you see, but merely “a poor
harvest”; hunger “does not cause disease”, but, on the contrary,
“sometimes cures” diseases; the stories about the sufferings of the
famine-stricken are all newspaper inventions—as is eloquently testified
to by the governors; on the contrary, “the economic conditions of the
localities affected by the poor harvest are not so bad at all”; “the idea
of giving free food to the population is pernicious”, and, finally, the
measures taken by the government are “sufficient and timely”.  

The head of the constitutional government forgot to mention his
brilliant invention designed to combat the famine,

    

namely, that police agents should be given authority to organise “famine
relief”.  

“Public aid” even from legal liberal societies has now been abolished
and a Saratov police agent, as the only champion of the starving, has been
able to spend freely in taverns the funds entrusted to him to aid the
famine-stricken.  

Naturally, the feudal landowners on the Right were enthusiastic about
“the detailed and, so to speak, all-embracing speech of the Chairman of
the Council of Ministers” (Deputy Vishnevsky on November 9); naturally,
the grovelling Octobrists promptly stated in their motion to pass to next
business that “the government has taken timely measures to combat the
effects of the crop failure”; and one of their leaders (by no means an
ordinary mortal!) indulged in a profound discourse on “unrestricted
circulation of canned fish as a means of providing the population with
desirable food”.  

Hunger-typhus, scurvy, people eating carrion for which they fight dogs,
or bread mixed with ashes and manure such as was demonstrated in the State
Duma—all these things do not exist as far as the Octobrists are
concerned. To them the word of the Minister is law.  

And the Cadets? Even on this issue they refrained from voicing a
straightforward opinion on the infamous behaviour of the government and
found nothing better than, through the medium of Kutler, one of their
speakers, to “draw reassuring conclusions from the comprehensive speech of
the Chairman of the Council of Ministers” (sitting of November 9); and in
formulating their motion to pass to next business, they gently described
the activity of the government as being merely “insufficiently [!]
systematic, inadequate, and not always [!] timely”.  

The question of relief and of its organisation is but one aspect of the
matter, as the Social-Democrat deputy, Comrade Belousov, correctly pointed
out in his speech. No less important is the fundamental question which
arises each time the discussion turns on the famine—the question of the
causes of famine and of the measures to combat crop failures.


The feudal landowners on the Right have a “very simple” solution: the
“loafing” muzhik must be made to work still harder and then “he’ll
deliver the goods”. Markov the

    

Second, the diehard from Kursk, thinks that it is “horrible” that “out
of 365 days in the year the muzhik works only 55–70 days, doing nothing
for three hundred days”, merely warming his back on the stove and
“demanding a ration from the government”.  

The semi-feudal landowners among the Nationalists and Octobrists take a
“deeper” view of the matter. In line with their duty to sing the praises
of the authorities, they are still trying to persuade people that “the
question of famine will be radically solved when the land passes from the
hands of the feeble and the drunkards into the hands of the strong and the
sober”, “when the reform inaugurated by the late P. A. Stolypin is fully
implemented, when the stake on the strong is won”. (Kelepovsky’s speech at
the sitting of the Duma on November 9.)  

However, the more far-sighted among the recent defenders of the decree
of November 9 are already beginning to sense that the breath of death is
hovering over this “great reform”. N. Lvov, a deputy from Saratov, who
was and, as he declared, still is “in favour of the law of November 9”,
shared with the Duma the following impressions he had gained “from contact
with reality”: “All those things you are saying here in the State Duma
somehow seem terribly removed from the actual suffering which one sees with
one’s own eyes”. “It is necessary to exercise great caution, and it is
necessary to spare that section of the population whom some people are
inclined to ignore. As a result of the law of November 9, many newcomers
have appeared in some gubernias, including Saratov, land prices have risen
and the condition of the poor population has become extremely
difficult.... Terrible hatred and condemnation are welling up among the
peasant poor—and some measures ought to be taken against this state of
affairs.... For relying on the strong by no means implies that the poorer
peasants ought to be hastened to their doom and left to perish in
poverty”, and so on and so forth.  

In brief, the impressions “gained from contact with reality” are
beginning to open the eyes of this landowner who was “in favour of the law
of November 9”.  

The seeds of immeasurably more profound doubt as to the salutary effect
of Stolypin’s “agrarian reform” have been

    

planted by this year’s famine in the minds of the Right-wing peasants. The
motion put forward by Andreichuk, a Right-wing peasant, “that the
government shall, at an early date, introduce into the State Duma a bill to
limit the amount of land in the hands of big landowners”—a motion
supported by all the Right-wing peasants and even by rural priests—shows
more than anything else along what lines the peasants, even the Rights
among them, think the “struggle against the famine” should be conducted.


The demand voiced by Andreichuk, the demand that comes direct from the
peasant world, provides additional proof (recall the statement of the
Right- and Left-wing peas ant deputies suggesting the compulsory alienation
of land ed estates in order to provide allotments for those who possess
little land, recall the speeches of the peasant deputies in the debate on
the decree of November 9, etc.), showing how deeply the need for an
agrarian revolution is penetrating into the minds even of the Right-wing
peasants, to what great extent even they regard the struggle against famine
as inseparable from the struggle “for land”.  

A real struggle against famine is inconceivable without the appeasement
of the peasants’ land hunger, without the relief from the crushing pressure
of taxes, without an improvement in their cultural standard, without a
decisive change in their legal status, without the confiscation of the
landed estates—without a revolution.  

In this sense this year’s crop failure is a new reminder of the doom
that awaits the entire existing political system, the June Third monarchy.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912




Published:
Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 451-486.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents




1.


Draft Resolution on the Constitution of the Conference
  453

2.


Draft Resolution on the Tasks of the Party in the Present Situation
  455

3.


Draft Resolution on the Tasks of Social-Democrats in the Struggle Against the Famine
  458

4.


Draft Resolution on Liquidationism and the Group of Liquidators

5.


Resolutions of the Conference




5.

 
THE RUSSIAN ORGANISING COMMISSION FOR CONVENING THE CONFERENCE
  462



THE CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFERENCE
  462



THE ABSENCE OF DELEGATES  THE NON-RUSSIAN NATIONAL CENTRES  THE GENERAL PARTY CONFERENCE
  464



ON THE REPORTS OF THE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS
  465



THE TASKS OF THE PARTY IN THE PRESENT SITUATION
  466



ELECTIONS TO THE FOURTH DUMA
  468



THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA
  471



THE CHARACTER AND ORGANISATIONAL FORMS OF PARTY WORK
  472



THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE FAMINE
  474



THE PARTY’S ATTITUDE TO THE WORKERS’ STATE INSURANCE DUMA BILL
  475



THE “PETITION CAMPAIGN”
  479



LIQUIDATIONISM AND THE GROUP OF LIQUIDATORS
  480



THE CENTRAL ORGAN
  482



RABOCHAYA GAZETA
  482



NEWSPAPER PRAVDA
  482



CHANGES IN THE ORGANISATIONAL RULES OF THE PARTY
  482



PROPERTY IN THE HANDS OF THE FORMER TRUSTEE, AND FINANCIAL REPORTS
  483



THE RED CROSS
  483



THE PARTY ORGANISATION ABROAD
  484



THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENTS ATTACK ON PERSIA
  484



THE CHINESE REVOLUTION
  485



THE POLICY OF THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT IN FINLAND
  485



GREETINGS TO THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY
  486

 

  462

  460

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. worked from January 5 to January 17 (18–30), 1912 in
Prague, and actually assumed the character of a Party congress. More than
20 Party organisations were represented at the Conference as well as
representatives of the editorial boards of the Central Organ
Sotsial-Demokrat and of Rabochaya Gazeta, of the
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. Organisation Abroad, and the group of the
C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. arranging underground transport and travel
facilities and known as “the transport group”. Apart from two pro-Party
Mensheviks, the delegates were all Bolsheviks. Among the delegates were
G. K. Orjonikidze, representing the Tiflis organisation, S. S. Spandaryan
from Baku, Y. P. Onufriyev from St. Petersburg, F. I. Goloshchokin from
Moscow. The Committee of the Organisation Abroad was represented by
N. A. Semashko, and the transport group of the C.C. by I. A. Pyatnitsky.


V. I. Lenin represented the Editorial Board of the Central Organ.


Lenin was the leading figure at the Conference. Opening the Conference,
he defined the terms of reference, spoke on the current situation and the
tasks of the Party, the work of the International Socialist Bureau, made,
some informative reports and took part in the discussions on the work of
the Central Organ, on the tasks of Social-Democracy in the struggle against
the famine, on the organisational question, on the work of the Party
Organisation Abroad, and on a number of other questions. It was Lenin who
drafted the resolutions on the major questions on the conference agenda.


Lenin’s speech and the conference resolution on “The Tasks of the
Party in the Present Situation” contained a profound analysis of the
political situation within the country, reflected the growing revolutionary
mood of the people. The Conference emphasised that, as before, the conquest
of power by the proletariat, acting as the leader of the peasantry, still
remained the chief task of the democratic revolution in Russia. 


One of the cardinal problems confronting the Conference was that of
ridding the Party of the opportunists. The resolutions adopt ed on
“Liquidationism and the Group of Liquidators”, on “The Party
Organisation Abroad” were of tremendous theoretical and practical
significance. The liquidators were grouped around two legal magazines,
Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni. The Conference declared
“that by its conduct the Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni
group had definitely placed itself outside the Party”. The liquidators
were expelled from the R.S.D.L.P. The Conference condemned the activities
of the anti-Party groups abroad—the Menshevik Golos group, the
Vperyod and Trotsky groups, and recognised the absolute necessity
for a single Party organisation abroad, conducting its work under the
supervision and guidance of the C.C., and pointed out that Party groups
abroad “which refuse to submit to the Russian centre of Social-Democratic
activity, i.e., to the Central Committee, and which cause disorganisation
by communicating with Russia independently and ignoring the Central
Committee, have no right to use the name of the R.S.D.L.P.” These
resolutions considerably strengthened the unity of the Marxist party in
Russia.  

A major part of the Conference deliberations was taken up with the
question of participation in the election campaign to the Fourth Duma. The
Conference stressed that the main Party task in the elections, and of the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma itself, was socialist class propaganda
and the organisation of the working class. The main election slogans put
forward by the Conference were the basic demands of the Party’s minimum
programme: a democratic republic, the eight-hour day, confiscation of all
landed estates.  

The Conference adopted a resolution on “The Character and
Organisational Forms of Party Work”, adopted Lenin’s draft on changes in
the organisational Rules of the Party, approved the newspaper
Sotsial-Demokrat as the Party Central Organ, elected a Party
Central Committee and set up the Bureau of the C.C. in Russia.  

The Prague Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. played an outstanding role in
building the Bolshevik Party, a party of a new type. It summed up a whole
historical period of struggle by the Bolsheviks against the Mensheviks, and
consolidated the victory of the Bolsheviks. The Menshevik-liquidators were
driven out of the Party. Local Party organisations rallied still closer
round the Party on the basis of conference decisions. The Conference
strengthened the Party as an all-Russia organisation and defined its
political line and tactics in the conditions of a new revolutionary
upsurge. Free of opportunists, the Bolshevik Party led the new powerful
upsurge of the revolutionary struggle of the masses. The Prague Conference
was of great international significance. It showed the revolutionary
elements of the parties of the Second International how to conduct a
decisive struggle against opportunism by carrying the struggle to a
complete organisational break with the opportunists.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Constitution









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: Draft Resolution on the Constitution of the Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

     

1
Draft Resolution on the Constitution of the
Conference[1]
RESOLUTION ON THE CONSTITUTION

Whereas: 

1. The disintegration and collapse of most Party organisations caused
by the broad stream of counter-revolutionary feeling and ferocious
persecution on the part of tsarism, as well as the prolonged absence of a
practical Party centre, a Central Committee, have all been factors
responsible for the extremely serious position of the Russian S.D.L. Party;


2. At the present moment, due to the revival of the working-class
movement, progressive workers everywhere show an intense desire to
re-establish the illegal organisations of the Party, and in this connection
most local organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. have displayed tremendous and
successful initiative in re-establishing the Party and convening a general
Party conference; 

3. The extremely urgent practical tasks of the working-class movement
and of the revolutionary struggle against tsarism (leadership in the
economic struggle, political agitation, and proletarian meetings; elections
to the Fourth Duma, etc.) make it imperative that prompt and most energetic
measures be taken to re-establish a competent practical Party centre,
closely linked with the local organisations; 

4. After an interval of more than three years since the last conference
of the R.S.D.L.P., and after many attempts during more than two years to
convene a meeting of representatives of all Party organisations, we have
now succeeded in uniting twenty organisations in Russia around the Russian
Organising Commission which called the present Conference and which several
months ago notified all Social-Democrats

    

of its convocation and invited to the Conference all, without a single
exception, organisations of our Party; furthermore, all organisations were
given an opportunity to take part in our Conference;


5. Despite the delay and a number of arrests all the Party organisations
functioning in Russia, with very few exceptions, are represented at the
present Conference;


It is therefore resolved:


The Conference constitutes itself the general Party Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. which is the supreme Party authority and is pledged to
establish competent central bodies.


Written not later than January 5 (18), 1912

First published on January 18, 1937, in Pravda, No. 18

Published according to the manuscript



    

     
Notes
 
 



[1]
The heading to the document, has been provided by the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.



 
  


|

Draft Resolution on the Tasks of the Party in the Present Situation

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Tasks of the Party









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: Draft Resolution on the Tasks of the Party in the Present Situation







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

2
Draft Resolution on the Tasks of the Party in the
Present Situation

This Conference endorses, first and foremost, the resolution adopted at the
Party Conference in December 1908 on “The Tasks of the Party in the
Present Situation”. This Conference points to the extreme importance of
that resolution, whose provisions relating to the historical meaning and class
essence of the entire June Third regime on the one hand, and the growing
revolutionary crisis on the other, have been fully confirmed by the events of
the past three years.


Of these events the Conference particularly notes the following:


(a) The agrarian policy of tsarism, with which both the government parties of
the landowners and big bourgeoisie and the counter-revolutionary liberals have
bound up their counter-revolutionary interests, has not led to the creation of
anything like stable bourgeois relations in the village, nor has it relieved the
peasantry of mass hunger, which reflects the extreme worsening of the condition
of the population and an enormous loss of productive forces.


(b) In view of its impotence in the face of the world competition of the modern
capitalist states and being pushed more and more into the background in Europe,
the tsarist autocracy in alliance with the reactionary nobility and the growing
industrial bourgeoisie, is now endeavouring to satisfy its predatory interests
by means of crude “nationalist” politics, directed against the more
cultured regions (Finland, Poland, North-Western Area), and, through colonial
conquest, against the peoples of Asia (Persia and Mongolia)

    

who are waging a revolutionary struggle for freedom.  

(c) The developing economic advance is largely offset by the complete
disruption of peasant economy, by the rapacious budgetary policy of the
autocracy and the absolute corruption in the bureaucratic apparatus; on the
other hand, the increasing cost of living intensifies the poverty of the
working class and the broad masses of the population.  

(d) In view of this the broad masses of the population have become
convinced, during the five-year existence of the Third Duma, that it is
unwilling, unable, and powerless to do anything to improve their
conditions, and that the parties predominating in the Duma are anti-popular
in character.  

(e) The onset of a political revival is to be noted among broad
democratic circles, chiefly among the proletariat. The workers’ strikes of
1910–11, the beginning of demonstrations and proletarian meetings, the
start of a movement among urban bourgeois democrats (the student strikes),
etc., all these are signs of the growing revolutionary feelings of the
masses against the June, Third regime.  

This Conference, proceeding from all these facts, confirms the tasks
confronting the Party as outlined in detail in the resolution of the
December 1908 Conference, and draws the particular attention of comrades
to: 

(1) The fact that, as heretofore, the first task on the order of the
day is the continued work of the socialist education, organisation, and
unification of the politically-conscious masses of the proletariat; 

(2) The necessity for intensive work to re-establish the illegal
organisation of the R.S.D.L.P., which more than ever before takes advantage
of all and every legal possibility, which is capable of leading the
economic struggles of the proletariat, and which is the only party able to
take the lead in political actions by the proletariat that are growing more
frequent; 

(3) The necessity to organise and extend systematic political agitation
and to give wholehearted support to the incipient mass movement and secure
its development under the banner of full implementation of the Party
slogans.  
 

Propaganda for a republic, and against the policy of the tsarist
monarchy, must be given special prominence to counteract, among other
things, the widespread propaganda in favour of curtailed slogans and
adaptation to existing “legality”.  

Written early in January 1912

First published in 1941 in Proletarskaya Revolutsia, No. 1

Published according to the manuscript



    

     
Notes
 
 

 
  

Draft Resolution on the Constitution of the Conference

|

Draft Resolution on the Tasks of Social-Democrats in the Struggle Against the Famine

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Struggle Against the
    Famine









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: Draft Resolution on the Tasks of Social-Democrats in the Struggle Against the Famine







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

3
Draft Resolution on the Tasks of Social-Democrats in
the Struggle Against the
Famine[1]

Whereas: 

(1) The famine affecting 20 million peasants in Russia once again shows
the absolutely unbearable conditions of the peasant masses, crushed and
oppressed by tsarism and the class of feudal landowners, conditions
unimaginable in any civilised country of the world; 

(2) The present famine once again confirms the failure of the
government’s agrarian policy and the impossibility of ensuring anything
like normal bourgeois development in Russia so long as its policy in
general, and its agrarian policy in particular, are directed by the class
of feudal landowners who, through the parties of the Right, dominate the
Third Duma, the Council of State, and circles at the Court of Nicholas II;


(3) The Black-Hundred parties (with the Markovs and similar people at
the head), by their statements in the Duma and their attempts to lay the
blame on the “loafing peasants” have so flaunted the shamelessness of the
tsarist-landowner gang that is plundering Russia that the eyes of even the
most ignorant are being opened, and indignation of even the most
indifferent is being aroused; 

(4) The actions of the government in hindering relief for the
famine-stricken, the police interference with the Zemstvos, with the
collectors of funds and the organisers of kitchen committees, etc., give
rise to widespread dissatisfaction even among the bourgeoisie, and voices
of protest are raised even among such backward and counter-revolutionary
bourgeoisie as the Octobrists; 

(5) The liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, while helping in its press to
inform the public of the famine and of the

    

behaviour of the government, nevertheless, in the person of the
Constitutional-Democrat Kutler in the Third Duma, adopted such a
moderate-oppositional position that can, under no circumstances, satisfy
democrats, any more than it is possible to accept the presentation of the
question of relief for the famine-stricken as philanthropy, which is the
way the majority of the liberals present it; 

(6) Among the working class, despite the worsening of its economic
position arising from the increasing numbers of starving and unemployed, a
spontaneous desire is to be observed to collect funds to aid the starving
and to help them in other ways. This desire natural to every democrat, to
say nothing of a socialist, must be supported and furthered by all
Social-Democrats in the spirit of class struggle; 

The Conference resolves that it is essential: 

(a) To bend all efforts to extending propaganda and agitation among the
broad masses of the population, and in particular among the peasantry,
explaining the connection between the famine and tsarism and its entire
policy; to distribute in the villages for agitational purposes the Duma
speeches, not only of the Social-Democrats and Trudoviks, but even of such
friends of the tsar as Markov the Second, and to popularise the political
demands of Social-Democracy—in the first instance the overthrow of
tsarist monarchy and the establishment of a democratic republic, followed
by the confiscation of landed estates; 

(b) To support the desire of the workers to aid the famine—stricken
as far as possible, advising them to send their donations only to the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma, to the workers’ press, or to workers’
cultural-educational and other associations, etc., and forming special
nuclei of Social-Democrats and democrats upon their joining groups,
committees or commissions for aid to the famine-stricken; 

(c) To endeavour to give expression to the anger of the democratic
masses aroused by the famine in demonstrations, mass meetings, and other
forms that constitute the beginning of a revolutionary mass struggle
against tsarism.  

Written early in January 1912

First published on January 18, 1937, in Pravda, No. 18

Published according to the manuscript



    

     

Notes
 
 



[1]
The heading to the document has been provided by the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism of the Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.



 
  

Draft Resolution on the Tasks of the Party in the Present Situation

|

Draft Resolution on Liquidationism and the Group of Liquidators

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liquidationism









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: Draft Resolution on Liquidationism and the Group of Liquidators







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

4
Draft Resolution on Liquidationism
and the Group of Liquidators
LIQUIDATIONISM AND THE GROUP OF LIQUIDATORS

Whereas: 

(1) The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party for nearly four years
has been waging a determined fight against the liquidationist trend, which
was characterised at the conference of the Party in December 1908 as 


   “an attempt on the part of a group of Party intellectuals to liquidate
   the existing organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. and to replace it at all costs,
   even at the price of downright renunciation of the programme, tactics, and
   traditions of the Party, by a loose association functioning legally”; 


(2) The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee held in January 1910,
continuing the fight against this trend, unanimously declared it to be “a
manifestation of bourgeois influence upon the proletariat” and demanded,
as a condition for real Party unity and for the fusion of the former
Bolshevik and Menshevik groups, a complete rupture with liquidationism and
the utter rout of this bourgeois deviation from socialism; 

(3) In spite of all Party decisions, and in spite of the obligation
assumed by the representatives of Menshevism at the Plenary Meeting held in
January 1910, a section of the Mensheviks, grouped around the magazines
Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni, refused to help restore the
Central Committee (the refusal of Mikhail, Yuri, and Roman, in the spring
of 1910, not only to join the Central Committee but even to attend a single
meeting to co-opt new members); 
 

(4) It was precisely after the Plenary Meeting of, 1910 that the
above-mentioned publications definitely turned to liquidationism all along
the line, not only “belittling [contrary to the decision of the Plenary
Meeting] the importance of the illegal Party”, but openly renouncing it,
declaring that the Party was already liquidated, that the idea of reviving
the illegal Party was “a reactionary utopia”, using the columns of
censored magazines to heap ridicule and abuse on it, calling upon the
workers to regard the nuclei of the Party and its hierarchy as “dead”,
etc.; 

(5) The few local groups of liquidators, consisting mainly of
representatives of the intelligentsia, continuing their work of destroying
the Party, not only refused to listen to the call, repeated in 1911, to
help revive the illegal Party and convene a Party conference, but, banded
together in entirely independent small groups, they openly began to agitate
among the workers against the illegal Party and launched an open fight
against reviving it—even in those places where the pro-Party Mensheviks
predominated (for example, in Ekaterinoslav, Baku, Kiev, etc.); 

The Conference declares that by its conduct the above-mentioned group
has definitely placed itself outside the Party.  

The Conference calls upon all Party members, irrespective of tendencies
and shades of opinion, to combat liquidationism, explain its great
harmfulness to the cause of the emancipation of the working class, and bend
all their efforts to revive and strengthen the illegal Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party.  

Written early in January 1912

First published in 1929–30, in 2nd and 3rd editions of Collected Works of V. I. Lenin, Vol. XV

Published according to the manuscript



    

     
Notes
 
 

 
  

Draft Resolution on the Tasks of Social-Democrats in the Struggle Against the Famine

|

THE RUSSIAN ORGANISING COMMISSION FOR CONVENING THE CONFERENCE

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Russian
  Organising Commission









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE RUSSIAN ORGANISING COMMISSION FOR CONVENING THE CONFERENCE







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

5
Resolutions of the Conference
THE RUSSIAN ORGANISING COMMISSION
FOR CONVENING THE CONFERENCE

Having heard and discussed the report of the representative of the
Russian Organising Commission on its activity in connection with the
convening of a general Party conference: 

The Conference deems it its duty to stress the enormous importance of
the work accomplished by the Russian Organising Commission in rallying all
the Party organisations in Russia irrespective of factional affiliation,
and in re-establishing our Party as an all-Russian organisation.  

The activity of the Russian Organising Commission, in which Bolsheviks
and pro-Party Mensheviks in Russia worked in harmony, is to be all the more
commended since it was carried out under incredibly trying conditions due
to police persecution and in face of numerous obstacles and difficulties
arising out of the situation within the Party.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

Draft Resolution on Liquidationism and the Group of Liquidators

|

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFERENCE

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Constitution









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFERENCE







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFERENCE

Whereas: 

(1) The disintegration and collapse of most Party organisations, caused
by the broad stream of counter-revolutionary feelings and ferocious
persecution on the part of tsarism, as well as the prolonged absence of a
practical Party centre, a Central Committee, have all been factors
responsible for the extremely serious position in which the
R.S.D.L.P. found itself in the period 1908–11; 

(2) At the present moment, due to the revival of the working-class
movement, progressive workers everywhere

    

show an intense desire to re-establish the illegal organisations of the
Party and inaugurate systematic legal and illegal Social-Democratic
activity, and in this connection most local organisation of the
R.S.D.L.P. have displayed tremendous and vigorous initiative in
re-establishing the Party and convening a general Party conference; 

(3) The extremely urgent practical tasks of the working-class movement
and of the revolutionary struggle against tsarism (leadership in the
economic struggle, general political agitation, proletarian meetings, the
campaign in connection with the elections to the Fourth Duma, etc.) make it
imperative that prompt and most energetic measures be taken to re-establish
a competent practical Party centre, closely linked with the local
organisations; 

(4) After an interval of more than three years since the last
conference of the R.S.D.L.P., and after many attempts during more than two
years to convene a meeting of representatives of all Party organisations,
we have now succeeded in uniting more than twenty organisations in Russia
(St. Petersburg, Moscow, Saratov, Kazan, Samara, Nizhni-Novgorod, Sormovo,
Rostov, Ekaterinoslav, Kiev, Nikolayev, Lugansk, Baku, the Tiflis group,
the Wilno group, the Dvinsk group, Ekaterinburg, Ufa, Tyumen, a number of
places in the Central Region, and others) around the Russian Organising
Commission which called the present Conference, and which several months
ago notified all Social-Democrats of its convocation and invited to the
Conference all, without a single exception, organisations of our Party;
furthermore, all organisations were given an opportunity to take part in
the Conference; 

(5) Despite a number of arrests made by the police, all the Party
organisations functioning in Russia, with very few exceptions, are
represented at the present Conference; 

(6) Groups of Social-Democrats active in the legal working-class,
movement in some of the big centres of Russia (St. Petersburg, Moscow, the
Caucasus) were invited to attend the Conference and have given it their
endorsement; 

It is therefore resolved: 

The Conference constitutes itself the general Party Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P., which is the supreme Party authority.  
    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE RUSSIAN ORGANISING COMMISSION FOR CONVENING THE CONFERENCE

|

THE ABSENCE OF DELEGATES  THE NON-RUSSIAN NATIONAL CENTRES  THE GENERAL PARTY CONFERENCE

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Absence of
Delegates









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE ABSENCE OF DELEGATES  THE NON-RUSSIAN NATIONAL CENTRES  THE GENERAL PARTY CONFERENCE







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE ABSENCE OF DELEGATES  THE NON-RUSSIAN NATIONAL
CENTRES  THE GENERAL PARTY CONFERENCE

Recognising that it is extremely important to strengthen the unity of
the Social-Democratic workers of all the nationalities of Russia, and
considering it absolutely imperative to establish unity with the
non-Russians in the localities and to strengthen the ties between the
national organisations and the all-Russia centre, the Conference at the
same time is compelled to place on record that: 

(1) Experience has conclusively proved that in the Party we cannot
tolerate a situation where non-Russians working in total isolation from
Russian organisations have chosen to set up a federation of the worst type
and—frequently regardless of whether they wanted to or not—placed key
Russian organisations in such a position that without non-Russian national
centres, which for all practical purposes do not concern themselves with
Russian affairs, the R.S.D.L.P. was unable to effect very essential and
important Party work.  

(2) During the past year one of the non-Russian national centres (that
of the Bund) openly co-operated with the liquidators and tried to bring
about a split in the R.S.D.L.P.; others (the central bodies of the Latvians
and the Polish S.D.) at the decisive moment kept aloof from the fight
against the liquidators who are trying to destroy the Party.  

(3) The pro-Party elements in the non-Russian organisations, in the
first place all the worker members of the Party, knowing what is going on
in the Russian organisations, are coming out resolutely in
favour of unity with the Russian illegal Social-Democratic
organisations, in favour of sup porting the Russian Organising
Commission, and in favour of fighting the liquidationist trend.


(4) The Central Committees of the three national organisations were
invited three times (by the Organising Commission Abroad, the Russian
Organising Commission, and the delegates to the Conference) to attend the
Party Conference, and every facility has been provided for them to send
their delegates.  

In view of all this, and considering it inexpedient to suspend the
activity of the R.S.D.L.P. because of the reluctance of the non-Russian
national centres to send delegates to the general Party Conference, the
Conference places the

    

entire responsibility for the failure of the non-Russians to attend on
their central bodies. At the same time the Conference instructs the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to work unremittingly for unity and the
establishment of normal relations with the non-Russian national
organisations affiliated to the R.S.D.L.P.  

The Conference is confident that, in spite of all obstacles, worker
Social-Democrats of all the nationalities of Russia will work in harmony
and fight shoulder to shoulder for the cause of the proletariat and against
all the enemies of the working class.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE CONSTITUTION OF THE CONFERENCE

|

ON THE REPORTS OF THE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Local
      Organisations









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: ON THE REPORTS OF THE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

ON THE REPORTS OF THE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS

Having heard the reports of the local organisations the Conference
places on record that: 

(4) Energetic work is being conducted everywhere among worker
Social-Democrats with the object of strengthening the local illegal
Social-Democratic organisations and groups; 

(2) It has been recognised everywhere that it is necessary to combine
illegal with legal Social-Democratic work; it has been recognised
everywhere by Social-Democrats that our illegal Party organisations should
use the legally existing working-class associations of every kind as bases
for carrying on work among the masses. Nevertheless, not enough has so far
been done to promote practical Social-Democratic work in trade unions,
co-operative societies, clubs, etc.; not enough has so far been done to
disseminate Marxist literature, to make use of the speeches of
Social-Democrat deputies in the Duma, etc. In this field it is absolutely
imperative for the illegal Social-Democratic groups to show greater energy;


(3) Everywhere in the localities, without a single exception, Party
work is being conducted jointly and harmoniously mainly by the Bolsheviks
and the pro-Party Mensheviks, as well as by Vperyod supporters in
Russia wherever there are any, and by all other Social-Democrats who
recognise the need for an illegal R.S.D.L.P. The entire work is,
furthermore, conducted in the spirit of the defence of Party principles and
the struggle against liquidationism.  
 

The Conference is confident that, in connection with the revival of the
working-class movement, energetic efforts will be continued to strengthen
the old and create new, sufficiently flexible, organisational forms which
will help the Social-Democratic Party to carry on its struggle for the
old revolutionary aims and revolutionary methods of achieving them
in new circumstances.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE ABSENCE OF DELEGATES  THE NON-RUSSIAN NATIONAL CENTRES  THE GENERAL PARTY CONFERENCE

|

THE TASKS OF THE PARTY IN THE PRESENT SITUATION

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Tasks of the
      Party









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE TASKS OF THE PARTY IN THE PRESENT SITUATION







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE TASKS OF THE PARTY IN THE PRESENT SITUATION

This Conference endorses, first and foremost, the resolution on the
June Third regime and tile tasks of the Party, adopt ed at the Party
Conference in December 1908. This Conference points to the extreme
importance of that resolution, whose provisions relating to the historical
meaning and class essence of the entire June Third regime on the one hand,
and the growing revolutionary crisis on the other, have been fully borne
out by the events of the past three years.  

Of these events the Conference particularly notes the following: 

(a) Tile agrarian policy of tsarism, with which both the government
parties of the landowners and big bourgeoisie and, actually, the
counter-revolutionary liberals have bound up their counter-revolutionary
interests, has not led to the creation of anything like stable bourgeois
relations in the village, nor has it relieved the peasantry of mass hunger,
which reflects the extreme worsening of the condition of the population and
an enormous loss of the productive forces of the country.  

(b) In view of its impotence in the face of the world competition of
the modern capitalist states and being pushed more and more into the
background in Europe, tsarism in alliance with the reactionary nobility and
the growing industrial bourgeoisie, is now endeavouring to satisfy its
predatory interests by means of crude “nationalist” politics, directed
against the inhabitants of the border regions, against all oppressed
nationalities, against the more cultured regions in particular (Finland,
Poland, North-Western Area) and, through colonial conquest, against the
peoples of Asia (Persia and China) who are waging a revolutionary struggle
for freedom.  
 

(c) The developing economic advance is largely offset by the complete
disruption of peasant economy, by the rapacious budgetary policy of the
autocracy and corruption in the bureaucratic apparatus; on the other hand,
the increasing cost of living intensifies the poverty of the working class
and the broad masses of the population.  

(d) In view of this the broad masses of the population have become
convinced, during the five-year existence of the Third Duma, that it is
unwilling, unable, and powerless to do anything to improve their
conditions, and that the parties predominating in the Duma are anti-popular
in character.  

(e) The onset of a political revival is to be noted among broad
democratic circles, chiefly among the proletariat. The workers’ strikes of
1910–11, the beginning of demonstrations and proletarian meetings, the
start of a movement among urban bourgeois democrats (the student strikes),
etc., all these are signs of the growing revolutionary feelings of the
masses against the June Third regime.  

This Conference, proceeding from all these facts, con firms the tasks
confronting the Party, as outlined in detail in the resolution of the
December 1908 Conference, particularly pointing out that the task of
winning power by the proletariat, carrying with it the peasantry, remains
as before, the task of the democratic revolution in Russia. This Conference
draws the particular attention of comrades to: 

(1) The fact that, as heretofore, the first task on the order of the
day is the continued work of the socialist education, organisation, and
unification of the politically-conscious masses of the proletariat; 

(2) The necessity for intensive work to re-establish the illegal
organisation of the R.S.D.L.P., which more than ever before takes advantage
of every legal possibility, which is capable of leading the economic
struggles of the proletariat, and which is the only party able to take the
lead in political actions by the proletariat that are growing more
frequent; 

(3) The necessity to organise and extend systematic political agitation
and to give wholehearted support to the incipient mass movement and secure
its development

    

under the banner of full implementation of the Party slogans.  

Propaganda for a republic, and against the policy of the tsarist
monarchy, must be given special prominence to counteract, among other
things, the widespread propaganda in favour of curtailed slogans and of
confining activity to the existing “legality”.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

ON THE REPORTS OF THE LOCAL ORGANISATIONS

|

ELECTIONS TO THE FOURTH DUMA

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Elections to the
      Fourth Duma









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: ELECTIONS TO THE FOURTH DUMA







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

ELECTIONS TO THE FOURTH DUMA
I

This Conference recognises the undoubted necessity for participation by
the R.S.D.L. Party in the forthcoming election campaign to the Fourth State
Duma, the nomination of independent candidates of our Party and the
formation in the Fourth Duma of a Social-Democratic group, which as a
section of the Party is subordinated to the Party as a whole.  

The main tasks of our Party in the elections, and equally of the future
Social-Democratic group in the Duma itself—a task to which all else must
be subordinated—is socialist, class propaganda and the organisation of
the working class.  

The main election slogans of our Party in the forthcoming elections
must be: 

(1) A democratic republic.  

(2) The eight-hour working day.  

(3) Confiscation of all landed estates.  

In all our election agitation it is essential to give the clearest
possible explanation of these demands, based on the experience of the Third
Duma and all the activities of the government in the sphere of central as
well as local administration.  

All propaganda on the remaining demands of the Social-Democratic
minimum programme, namely: universal franchise, freedom of association,
election of judges and officials by the people, state insurance for
workers, replacement of the standing army by the arming of the people, and
so on, must be inseparably linked with the above-mentioned three demands.

    

II

The general tactical line of the R.S.D.L.P. in the elections should be
the following: the Party must conduct a merciless struggle against the
tsarist monarchy and the par ties of landowners and capitalists supporting
it, at the same time steadfastly exposing the counter-revolutionary views
of the bourgeois liberals (headed by the Cadet Party) and their sham
democracy.  

Particular attention in the election campaign must be paid to
dissociating the position of the proletarian party from that of
all non-proletarian parties and explaining the petty-bourgeois
essence of the sham socialism of the democratic (chiefly Trudovik, Narodnik
and Socialist-Revolutionary) groups, as well as the harm done to democracy
by their waverings on the question of consistent and mass revolutionary
struggle.  

As far as electoral agreements are concerned, the Party, adhering to
the decisions of the London Congress, must: 

(1) Put forward its candidates in all worker curias and forbid
any agreement whatsoever with other parties or groups
(liquidators); 

(2) In view of the great agitational significance of the mere fact of
nomination of independent Social-Democratic candidates, it is necessary to
ensure that in the second assemblies of urban voters, and as far as
possible in the peas ant curias, the Party puts forward its own candidates;


(3) In cases of a second ballot (Article 106 of the Election
Regulations) in the election of electors at the second assemblies of urban
voters it is permissible to conclude agreements with bourgeois democrats
against the liberals, and then with the liberals against all the government
parties. One form of agreement can be the compilation of a general list of
electors for one or several towns in proportion to the number of votes
registered at the first elections; 

(4) In those five cities (St. Petersburg, Moscow, Riga, Odessa, Kiev)
where there are direct elections with a second ballot, it is essential in
the first elections to put forward independent Social-Democratic candidates
for the second urban curia voters. In the event of a second ballot here,
and since there is obviously no danger from the Black

    

Hundreds, it is permissible to come to an agreement only with the
democratic groups against the liberals; 

(5) There can be no electoral agreements providing for a common
platform, and Social-Democratic candidates must not be bound by any kind of
political commitment, nor must Social-Democrats be prevented from
resolutely criticising the counter-revolutionary nature of the liberals and
the half-heartedness and inconsistency of the bourgeois democrats; 

(6) At the second stage of the elections (in the uyezd assemblies of
delegates, in the gubernia assemblies of voters, etc.), wherever it proves
essential to ensure the defeat of an Octobrist-Black Hundred or a
government list in general, an agreement must be concluded to share the
seats, primarily with bourgeois democrats (Trudoviks, Popular Socialists,
etc.), and then with the liberals (Cadets), independents, Progressists,
etc.  
III

All Social-Democrats must immediately commence preparation for
the election campaign, and should pay special attention to the following:


(1) It is urgently necessary everywhere to form illegal
Social-Democratic nuclei in order that they may without delay prepare for
the Social-Democratic election campaign; 

(2) To pay the necessary attention to the strengthening and broadening
of the legally existing workers’ press; 

(3) The entire election campaign must be carried out in close alliance
with workers’ trades unions and all other associations of workers, and the
form in which these societies participate must be chosen with due
consideration paid to their legal status; 

(4) Special attention must be paid to the organisational and agitation
preparation of the elections in the worker curias of those six gubernias in
which the election of deputies to the Duma from the worker curias is
guaranteed (St. Petersburg, Moscow, Vladimir, Kostroma, Kharkov and
Ekaterinoslav). Every single worker elector—here and in the other
gubernias—must be a Social-Democratic Party member; 
 

(5) Assemblies of workers’ delegates, guided by the decision of the
illegal Party organisations, must decide who precisely is to be
elected to the Duma from the workers, and bind all electors, under threat
of boycott and being branded as traitors, to withdraw their candidature in
favour of the Party candidate; 

(6) In view of persecution by the government, the arrest of
Social-Democrat candidates, etc., it is necessary to carry out particularly
restrained, systematic and careful work, using every means to react quickly
to all police tactics and nullify all the tricks and coercion of the
tsarist government, and to elect Social-Democrats to the Fourth State Duma,
and then in general to strengthen the group of democratic deputies in the
Duma; 

(7) The candidates of the Social-Democratic Party are endorsed, and
instructions concerning the elections are given by the local illegal
organisations and groups of the Party, under the general supervision and
guidance of the Central Committee of the Party; 

(8) If, despite all efforts, it proves impossible to convene a Party
congress or a new conference before the elections to the Fourth Duma, the
Conference empowers the Central Committee, or an institution appointed for
the purpose by the latter, to issue concrete instructions on questions
concerning the conduct of the election campaign in the various localities,
or to meet special circumstances arising, etc.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE TASKS OF THE PARTY IN THE PRESENT SITUATION

|

THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Social-Democratic Group









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA

This Conference recognises that the Social-Democratic group in the Duma
made use of the Duma platform in accordance with the line defined by the
December (1908) Party Conference, which must remain the guide for the
direction of Party work in the Duma.  

The Conference, in particular, regards as consistent with the tasks of
the proletariat that aspect of the group’s activities that it has
energetically defended the interests of the workers and all measures for
improving their lot (for in stance, the labour bills) and in so doing has
endeavoured to show all the partial tasks in their relation to the general
aims of the liberation movement led by the proletariat,

    

and points to the mass movement as the only way to rid Russia of the
sufferings and shame to which she has been brought by tsarism.  

The Conference welcomes the beginning of open actions by the workers in
connection with the praiseworthy behaviour of the Social-Democratic group
in the Duma, which in the reactionary Duma raised the banner of the
Social-Democratic deputies to the Second Duma and exposed to the workers of
the entire world all the provocative filth of the Black-Hundred tsarist
gang that organised the government coup d’état of 1907. The
Conference calls on all class-conscious workers in Russia to give
wholehearted support to the speeches of the Social-Democrats in the Third
Duma, and the campaign of proletarian meetings commenced by the
St. Petersburg workers.  

The Conference recognises that in view of the forthcoming election
campaign to the Fourth Duma, the Social-Democratic Duma group must devote
still more attention to explaining to the people the class essence of the
non-proletarian parties (and in particular to exposing the
counter-revolutionary and treacherous nature of the Cadet Party) being
guided by the resolution of the London (1907) Congress, which in all its
significant sections has been confirmed by the experience of the period of
counter-revolution. Further more, the central slogans, which must be common
to all statements made by members of the Social-Democratic group, must
determine the nature of its work and concentrate all its partial demands
and reforms on the main points, should be the following three slogans: (1)
a democratic republic, (2) the eight-hour day, (3) confiscation of all
landed estates and their transfer to the peasantry.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

ELECTIONS TO THE FOURTH DUMA

|

THE CHARACTER AND ORGANISATIONAL FORMS OF PARTY WORK

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Party
Work









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE CHARACTER AND ORGANISATIONAL FORMS OF PARTY WORK







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE CHARACTER AND ORGANISATIONAL FORMS
OF PARTY WORK

Recognising that the experience of the past three years has undoubtedly
confirmed the main provisions of the resolution on the problem of
organisation carried by the December (1908) Conference, and assuming that
the new upswing of the working-class movement makes possible the further
development of organisational forms of Party work along

    

the lines indicated therein, i.e., by the formation of illegal
Social-Democratic nuclei surrounded by as wide a network as possible of
every kind of legal workers’ associations, 

The Conference considers that: 

(1) It is essential for illegal Party organisations to participate
actively in the leadership of the economic struggle (strikes,
strike committees, etc.), and to ensure co-operation in this sphere between
the illegal Party nuclei and the trade unions, in particular with the
S.D. nuclei in the trade unions, and also with various leaders of the trade
union movement; 

(2) It is desirable that S.D. nuclei in unions organised on an
industrial basis should, whenever local conditions permit,
function in conjuction with Party branches
organised on a territorial basis; 

(3) It is essential for the maximum possible initiative to be shown in
the organisation of S.D. work in legally existing associations—unions,
reading rooms, libraries, various types of workers’ entertainment
societies, the circulation of the trade union journals and the guidance of
the trade union press in the spirit of Marxism; the use of the Duma
speeches of the S.D. members, the training of workers to become legal
lecturers, the creation (in connection with the elections to the Fourth
Duma) of workers’ and other voters’ committees for each district, each
street, etc., and the organisation of Social-Democratic campaigns ill
connection with the elections to municipal bodies, etc.; 

(4) It is essential to make special efforts to strengthen and increase
the number of illegal Party nuclei, and to seek for new organisational
forms for them of the greatest possible flexibility, to establish and
strengthen leading illegal Party organisations in every town and to
propagate such forms of mass illegal organisations as “exchanges”,
factory Party meetings, and so on; 

(5) It is desirable to draw the study circles into everyday
practical work—the distribution of illegal Social-Democratic and
legal Marxist literature, and so on; 

(6) It is essential to bear in mind that systematic agitation through
S.D. literature and particularly the regular distribution of the illegal
Party paper, issued frequently and regularly can have a tremendous
significance for the

    

establishment of organisational links, both between the illegal nuclei, and
between the S.D. nuclei in legally existing workers’ associations.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC GROUP IN THE DUMA

|

THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE FAMINE

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Struggle Against
the Famine









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE FAMINE







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY
IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE FAMINE

(1) The famine affecting 20 million peasants in Russia once again shows
the absolutely unbearable conditions of the impoverished peasant masses,
crushed and oppressed by tsarism and the class of feudal landowners,
conditions unimaginable in any civilised country of the world; 

(2) The present famine once again confirms the failure of the
government’s agrarian policy, and the impossibility of ensuring anything
like normal bourgeois development in Russia so long as its policy in
general, and its agrarian policy in particular, are directed by the class
of feudal landowners who, through the parties of the Right, dominate the
June Third Duma, the Council of State, and circles at the Court of
Nicholas II; 

(3) The Black-Hundred parties (with the Markovs and similar people at
the head), by their statements in the Duma and their attempts to lay the
blame on the “loafing peasants”, have so flaunted the shamelessness of
the tsarist landowner gang that is plundering Russia that the eyes of even
the most ignorant are being opened, and the indignation of even the most
indifferent is being aroused; 

(4) The actions of the government in hindering relief for the
famine-stricken, the police interference with the Zemstvos, with the
collectors of funds and the organisers of kitchen committees, etc., give
rise to widespread dissatisfaction even among the Zemstvos and the urban
bourgeoisie; 

(5) The liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, while helping in its press to
inform the public of the famine and of the behaviour of the government,
nevertheless, through the Constitutional-Democratic group in the Third Duma
acted as such a moderate opposition that under no circumstances can its
conduct satisfy democrats, any more than it is possible to accept the
presentation of the question of relief to the famine-stricken as
philanthropy, which is the way the majority of the liberals present it;

 

(6) Among the working class, despite the worsening of its economic
position arising from the increasing numbers of starving and unemployed, a
spontaneous desire is to be observed to collect funds to aid the starving
and to help them in other ways. This desire natural to every democrat, to
say nothing of a socialist, must be supported and furthered by all
Social-Democrats in the spirit of class struggle.  

Having considered all these points, The Conference resolves that it is
essential: 

(a) To enlist all Social-Democratic forces to extend propaganda and
agitation among the broad masses of the population, and in particular among
the peasantry, explaining the connection between the famine and tsarism and
its en tire policy; to distribute in the villages for agitational purposes
the Duma speeches, not only of the Social-Democrats and Trudoviks, but even
of such friends of the tsar as Markov the Second, and to popularise the
political demands of Social-Democracy—the overthrow of the tsarist
monarchy, the establishment of a democratic republic and the confiscation
of landed estates; 

(b) To support the desire of the workers to aid the famine-stricken as
far as possible, advising them to send their do nations only to the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma, to the workers’ press, or to workers’
cultural-educational and other associations, etc., and forming special
nuclei of Social-Democrats and democrats upon their joining groups,
committees or commissions for aid to the famine-stricken; 

(c) To endeavour to give expression to the anger of the democratic
masses aroused by the famine in demonstrations, mass meetings, and other
forms of mass struggle against tsarism.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE CHARACTER AND ORGANISATIONAL FORMS OF PARTY WORK

|

THE PARTY’S ATTITUDE TO THE WORKERS’ STATE INSURANCE DUMA BILL

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Workers' State
Insurance
Duma Bill









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE PARTY'S ATTITUDE TO THE WORKERS' STATE INSURANCE DUMA BILL







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE PARTY’S ATTITUDE TO THE WORKERS’
STATE INSURANCE DUMA BILL
I

1. The share of the wealth produced by the wage-worker which he
receives in the form of wages is so insignificant that it is scarcely
sufficient to provide for his most essential requirements; the proletarian
is therefore deprived of any

    

opportunity to lay aside any part of his earnings to provide for himself in
case of inability to work as a result of accident, illness, old age or
permanent disablement, as well as in case of unemployment which is
inseparably linked up with the capitalist mode of production. The insurance
of workers in all the aforementioned cases is therefore a reform
imperatively dictated by the entire course of capitalist development.  

2. The best form of workers’ insurance is state insurance
based on the following principles:

(a) it should provide for the workers in all cases of incapacity
(accidents, illness, old age, permanent disablement; extra provisions for
working women during pregnancy and childbirth; benefits for widows and
orphans upon the death of the bread-winner) or in case of loss of earnings
due to unemployment;

(b) insurance must include all wage-earners and their families;

(c) all insured persons should receive compensations equal to their
fall earnings, and all expenditures on insurance must be
borne by the employers and the state;

(d) all forms of insurance should be handled by uniform insurance
organisations of the territorial type and based on the principle
of jail management by the insured persons, themselves.  

3. The government Bill, passed by the State Duma, is in radical
contradiction to all these fundamental requirements of a rational insurance
scheme; for

(a) it provides for only two kinds of insurance, cases of accident
and cases of illness;

(b) it extends to only a small part (according to the most liberal
calculations, to one-sixth) of the Russian proletariat, since it excludes
from insurance whole regions (Siberia and, in the government’s version,
also the Caucasus) and whole categories of workers who particularly need
insurance (farm labourers, building workers, railway workers, post and
telegraph workers, shop assistants, etc.);

(c) it provides for beggarly rates of compensation (the maximum
compensation in case of total disablement resulting from accidents
is set at two-thirds of the earnings, the latter, moreover, calculated on
the basis of standards lower than the actual earnings) and at the same time
makes the workers pay the lion’s share of the expenditure on
insurance—for the plan is to make the workers cover the expenditures

    

not only on insurance against illness but also on insurance against
“minor” injuries, which in practice are the most numerous. This new
procedure is a change for the worse even compared with the present law,
according to which compensation for injuries is paid entirely by the
employers;

(d) it deprives the insurance bodies of every vestige of independence,
placing them under the combined surveillance of civil servants (from the
courts and the “Council for Insurance Affairs”), the gendarmerie, the
police (who, besides exercising general surveillance, are invested with the
right to direct the practical activities of the insurance bodies, influence
the selection of their personnel, etc.), and the employers (the accident
insurance societies under the exclusive control of employers; sick benefit
societies run by the factories; society rules guaranteeing the influence of
the employers, etc.).  

4. This law, which rides roughshod over the most vital interests of the
workers, is the only one possible in this present period of frenzied
reaction, this period of the domination of counter-revolution, and is the
result of many years of preliminary negotiations and agreement between the
government and the representatives of capital. An insurance reform really
corresponding to the interests of the workers can only be accomplished
after the final overthrow of tsarism and the achievement of conditions
indispensable for the free class struggle of the proletariat.  
II

In view of the aforementioned, the Conference resolves that: 

(1) It is the urgent task both of the illegal Party organisations and
of the comrades active in the legally existing organisations (trade unions,
clubs, co-operative societies, etc.) to develop the most extensive
agitation against the Duma Insurance Bill, which affects the interests of
the entire Russian proletariat as a class, since it grossly violates them.


(2) The Conference considers it necessary to emphasise that all
Social-Democratic agitation concerning the Insurance Bill should be
presented in relation to the class position

    

of the proletariat in modern capitalist society, and should criticise the
bourgeois illusions being spread by the social-reformists; this agitation
must, in general, be linked up with our fundamental socialist tasks; on the
other hand, it is necessary in this agitation to show the connection
between the character of the Duma “reform” and the current political
situation and, in general, its connection with our revolutionary-democratic
tasks and slogans.  

(3) Fully approving of the vote of the Social-Democratic group in the
Duma against the Bill, the Conference draws the attention of the comrades
to the extensive and valuable material clarifying the attitude of the
various classes to labour reforms furnished by the debate in the Duma on
this question; the Conference particularly stresses the fact that the
debate vividly brought out the aspirations of the Octobrist representatives
of backward capital openly hostile to the workers, as well as the attitude
of the Constitutional-Democratic Party masked, in the hypocritical speeches
of its representatives, by social-reformist phrases about “social peace”;
in point of fact, the Cadets came out in the Duma against the independent
activity of the working class and virulently contested the principal
amendments to the Bill proposed by the Social-Democratic group in the Duma.


(4) The Conference most earnestly warns the workers against all
attempts to curtail or completely distort Social-Democratic agitation by
confining it to what is legally permissible in the present period of the
domination of the counter-revolution; on the other hand, the Conference
emphasises that the main point of this agitation should be to explain to
the proletarian masses that no real improvement in the worker’s conditions
is possible unless there is a new revolutionary upsurge, that whoever
wishes to achieve a genuine labour reform must above all fight for a new,
victorious revolution.  

(5) Should the Duma Bill become law in spite of the pro test of the
class-conscious proletariat, the Conference summons the comrades to make
use of the new organisational forms which it provides (workers’ sick
benefit societies) to carry on energetic propaganda for Social-Democratic
ideas in these organisational units and thus turn the new law, devised as a
means of putting new chains and a new

    

yoke upon the proletariat, into a means of developing its
class-consciousness, strengthening its organisation and intensifying its
struggle for full political liberty and for socialism.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE TASKS OF SOCIAL-DEMOCRACY IN THE STRUGGLE AGAINST THE FAMINE

|

THE “PETITION CAMPAIGN”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Petition
      Campaign









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE 'PETITION CAMPAIGN'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE “PETITION CAMPAIGN”

1. The counter-revolution, as represented by the government and the
Third Duma, regards the working-class movement as its chief enemy and
persecutes it in all its forms, systematically infringing upon even those
“legal opportunities” remaining to the working class as a result of the
revolution.  

2. This regime constantly confronts the masses of workers with the fact
that they cannot achieve even their most elementary rights (above all, the
freedom of association) without the complete overthrow of the tsarist
monarchy.  

3. The petition circulated in the winter of 1910 by a group of
St. Petersburg liquidators, and the agitation which accompanied this
petition campaign, isolated the demand for freedom of association from the
sum total of all the revolutionary demands of the working class. Instead of
explaining to the workers that to win full freedom of association in Russia
it is indispensable for the masses to wage a revolutionary struggle for
fundamental democratic demands, the liquidators actually preached the
so-called “fight for right”, that is to say, a liberal fight for the
“renovation” of the June Third regime by partial improvements.  

4. In view of the specific conditions obtaining in Russian political
life and the condition of the masses of the workers, the above-mentioned
campaign has inevitably degenerated into the purely formal and meaningless
signing of papers and has met with no response and aroused no political
interest among the masses.  

5. The fate of this petition campaign clearly confirmed the
incorrectness of the entire undertaking and its isolation from the
working-class masses: altogether 1,300 signatures were collected, the
petition campaign having met with absolutely no response in any of the
Party organisations regardless of factions and trends; nor did our
Social-Democratic group in the Duma deem it possible to have anything to do
with it.  
 

6. The workers’ mass meetings in connection with the fate of the
deputies to the Second Duma and the workers’ demonstrations held in various
cities on January 9, 1912, show that the independent activity of the
workers by no means runs in such channels as a petition campaign, nor is it
conducted under the banner of “partial rights”.  

In view of the aforementioned, the Conference 

(1) calls upon all Social-Democrats to explain to the workers the
paramount importance to the proletariat of freedom of association; this
demand must always be closely linked up with our general political demands
and our revolutionary agitation among the masses; 

(2) while recognising that under certain conditions a mass petition of
workers could prove a very effective means of protest, is of the opinion
that in the present period in Russia a petition is one of the least
effective methods of Social-Democratic agitation.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE PARTY’S ATTITUDE TO THE WORKERS’ STATE INSURANCE DUMA BILL

|

LIQUIDATIONISM AND THE GROUP OF LIQUIDATORS

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liquidationism









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: LIQUIDATIONISM AND THE GROUP OF LIQUIDATORS







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

LIQUIDATIONISM AND THE GROUP OF LIQUIDATORS

Whereas: 

(1) The R.S.D.L.P. for nearly four years has been waging a determined
fight against the liquidationist trend, which was characterised at the
conference of the Party in December 1908 as 

“an attempt on the part of a group of Party intellectuals to liquidate
the existing organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. and to replace it at all costs,
even at the price of downright renunciation of the programme, tactics, and
traditions of the Party, by a loose association functioning legally”; 

(2) The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee held in January 1910,
continuing the fight against this trend, unanimously declared it to be a
manifestation of bourgeois influence upon the proletariat and demanded, as
a condition for real Party unity and for the fusion of the former Bolshevik
and Menshevik groups, a complete rupture with liquidationism and the utter
rout of this bourgeois deviation from socialism; 

(3) In spite of all Party decisions, and in spite of the obligation
assumed by the representatives of all the factions

    

at the Plenary Meeting held in January 1910, a section of Social-Democrats,
grouped around the magazines Nasha Zarya and Dyelo
Zhizni, began to defend openly the trend which the entire Party has
recognised as being the product of bourgeois influence on the proletariat;


(4) The former members of the Central Committee, Mikhail, Yuri, and
Roman, refused not only to join the Central Committee in the spring of
1910, but even to attend a single meeting to co-opt new members, and
bluntly declared that they considered the very existence of the Party
Central Committee to he “harmful”; 

(5) It was precisely after the Plenary Meeting of 1910 that the
above-mentioned chief publications of the liquidators, Nasha Zarya
and Dyelo Zhizni, definitely turned to liquidationism all along
the line, not only “belittling [contrary to the decisions of the Plenary
Meeting] the importance of the illegal Party”, but openly renouncing it,
declaring that the Party was “extinct”, that the Party was already
liquidated, that the idea of reviving the illegal Party was “a reactionary
utopia”, using the columns of legally published magazines to heap slander
and abuse on the illegal Party, calling upon the workers to regard the
nuclei of the Party and its hierarchy as “dead”, etc.; 

(6) At a time when throughout Russia the members of the Party,
irrespective of factions, united to promote the immediate task of convening
a Party conference, the liquidators, banded together in entirely
independent small groups, split away from the local organisations even
where the pro-Party Mensheviks predominated (Ekaterinoslav, Kiev) and
definitely refused to maintain any Party relations with the local
organisations of the R.S.D.L.P.; 

The Conference declares that by its conduct the Nasha Zarya
and Dyelo Zhizni group has definitely placed itself outside
the Party.  

The Conference calls upon all Party members, irrespective of tendencies
and shades of opinion, to combat liquidationism, explain its great
harmfulness to the cause of the emancipation of the working class, and bend
all their efforts to revive and strengthen the illegal R.S.D.L.P.  
    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE “PETITION CAMPAIGN”

|

THE CENTRAL ORGAN

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Central
      Organ









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE CENTRAL ORGAN







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE CENTRAL ORGAN

Having heard and discussed the report of the representative of the
Central Organ, the Conference approves of the Central Organ’s line in
principle and expresses the wish that more space be devoted to articles of
a propagandist nature, and that the articles be written in a more popular
style, so as to make them more, intelligible to the workers.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

LIQUIDATIONISM AND THE GROUP OF LIQUIDATORS

|

RABOCHAYA GAZETA

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Rabochaya
      Gazeta









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: RABOCHAYA GAZETA







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

RABOCHAYA GAZETA

Whereas: 

Rabochaya Gazeta has resolutely and consistently championed
the Party and its principles, and enjoys the full sympathy of Party
functionaries in local Party branches, irrespective of factional
affiliation, 

The Conference: 

(1) calls upon all comrades in the localities; to support Rabochaya
Gazeta in every way; 

(2) recognises Rabochaya Gazeta as an official organ of the
Central Committee of the Party.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE CENTRAL ORGAN

|

NEWSPAPER PRAVDA

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Pravda









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: NEWSPAPER PRAVDA







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

NEWSPAPER PRAVDA[1]

The Conference annuls the agreement with the editors of Pravda
concluded by the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee in January 1910.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the Vienna Pravda—Trotsky’s factional
Menshevik-liquidator paper.



 
  

RABOCHAYA GAZETA

|

CHANGES IN THE ORGANISATIONAL RULES OF THE PARTY

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Organisational Rules









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: CHANGES IN THE ORGANISATIONAL RULES OF THE PARTY







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

CHANGES IN THE ORGANISATIONAL RULES OF THE PARTY

The following is to be added to Clause 2: 

“Co-option is considered permissible—in accordance with the
decisions of the December (1908) Conference.”  

Clause 8 is to be deleted and replaced by the following: 

“The Central Committee shall convene conferences of representatives of
all the Party organisations as frequently as possible.”  

Clause 9, third paragraph, dealing with representation at congresses,
is amended to read: 

“The basis of representation at Party congresses shall be fixed by the
Central Committee after preliminary communication with local
organisations.”  
    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

NEWSPAPER PRAVDA

|

PROPERTY IN THE HANDS OF THE FORMER TRUSTEE, AND FINANCIAL REPORTS

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Property









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: PROPERTY IN THE HANDS OF THE FORMER TRUSTEE, AND FINANCIAL REPORTS







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

PROPERTY IN THE HANDS OF THE FORMER TRUSTEE, AND
FINANCIAL REPORTS

The Conference notes the statement of the authorised representatives of
the Bolsheviks, with whom the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee
concluded an agreement in January 1910, providing for the conditional
transfer by the Bolsheviks of the property of their group to the Central
Committee, and resolves that 

(1) in view of the fact that the liquidators violated the agreement,
and that the trustees have refused to act as arbitrators, the Bolshevik
representatives have every formal right to dispose both of the property in
their own hands and of the property now in the hands of Comrade Zetkin,
former trustee; 

(2) following the application made by the representatives of the
Bolsheviks, the Conference regards the funds now in Comrade Zetkin’s
keeping as unquestionably belonging to the Party through the Central
Committee elected by the Conference, and 

(3) instructs the Central Committee to take all measures immediately to
obtain the property of the Party from Comrade Zetkin.  
 *     *  * 

The Auditing Committee, having examined the financial reports and the
receipts submitted by Rabochaya Gazeta, now endorsed by the
Conference as an organ of the Central Committee, and also the receipts
presented by the group of Bolsheviks to whom funds were advanced by the
Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee for the purpose of publishing
Social-Democratic literature, has found the accounts to be in order and
moves that they be accepted by the Conference.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

CHANGES IN THE ORGANISATIONAL RULES OF THE PARTY

|

THE RED CROSS

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Red
      Cross









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE RED CROSS







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE RED CROSS

The Conference instructs all the comrades in the localities to make
every effort to revive the Red Cross organisation, which is so urgently
needed for aid to imprisoned and exiled comrades.  
    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

PROPERTY IN THE HANDS OF THE FORMER TRUSTEE, AND FINANCIAL REPORTS

|

THE PARTY ORGANISATION ABROAD

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Party
      Organisation Abroad









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE PARTY ORGANISATION ABROAD







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE PARTY ORGANISATION ABROAD

The Conference recognises the absolute necessity for a single Party
organisation abroad that carries on its work of assisting the Party under
the control and guidance of the Central Committee.  

The Conference approves the Committee of the Organisation

Abroad[1] as one of the Party organisations functioning abroad, and
summons all Party elements, irrespective of factions and trends, who
support the illegal Party and are waging an implacable fight against the
anti-Party trends (liquidationism), to rally around the Central Committee
in order to assist in the work of the Party in Russia and in creating a
single organisation abroad.  

All groups abroad, without any exception, may communicate with Russian
organisations only through the Central Committee.  

The Conference declares that the groups abroad which refuse to submit
to the Russian centre of Social-Democratic activity, i.e., to the Central
Committee, and which cause disorganisation by communicating with Russia
independently and ignoring the Central Committee, have no right to use the
name of the R.S.D.L.P 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Committee of the Organisation Abroad was set up in
December 1911 at a meeting of the Bolshevik groups abroad. The tasks of
this Committee were dealt with in the general resolution adopted by this
meeting.



 
  

THE RED CROSS

|

THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENTS ATTACK ON PERSIA

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Attack on Persia









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENTS ATTACK ON PERSIA







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENTS ATTACK ON PERSIA

The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party protests against the
rapacious policy of the tsarist gang which is bent on suppressing the
freedom of the Persian people and, in pursuing this policy, does not shrink
from carrying out the most barbarous and infamous acts.  

The Conference places on record that the alliance between the Russian
and British governments which the Russian liberals are widely advertising
and supporting in every way, is directed primarily against the
revolutionary movement of the democratic forces in Asia, and that, by
virtue of this alliance, the Liberal government of Britain is a party to
the bloody atrocities perpetrated by the tsarist government.  
 

The Conference expresses its unqualified sympathy for the struggle
waged by the Persian people and, particularly, by the Persian
Social-Democratic Party, which has lost so many of its members in the fight
against the tsarist butchers.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE PARTY ORGANISATION ABROAD

|

THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Chinese
      Revolution









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE CHINESE REVOLUTION







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

In view of the campaign of propaganda conducted by the government and
liberal newspapers (Rech) in favour of taking advantage of the
revolutionary movement in China in order to annex, in the interests of
Russian capitalists, the Chinese provinces bordering on Russia, the
Conference recognises the world-wide importance of the revolutionary
struggle of the Chinese people, which is bringing emancipation to Asia and
is undermining the rule of the European bourgeoisie. The Conference hails
the revolutionary republicans of China, testifies to the profound
enthusiasm and complete sympathy with which the proletariat of Russia is
following the successes of the revolutionary people of China, and condemns
the behaviour of the Russian liberals who are supporting tsarism’s policy
of conquest.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE RUSSIAN GOVERNMENTS ATTACK ON PERSIA

|

THE POLICY OF THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT IN FINLAND

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Tsarist Government in
      Finland









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: THE POLICY OF THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT IN FINLAND







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

THE POLICY OF THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT
IN FINLAND

The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., the first to be convened since
Russian tsarism and the counter-revolutionary Duma passed laws abolishing
the rights and liberties of the Finnish people, expresses its complete
solidarity with the fraternal Social-Democratic Party of Finland,
emphasises that the workers of Finland and Russia have a common task in the
struggle against the Russian counter-revolutionary government and
counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie who are trampling on the rights of the
people, and expresses its firm conviction that only as a result of the
joint efforts of the workers of Russia and of Finland will tsarism be
overthrown and the Russian and Finnish people attain freedom.  
    

     

Notes
 
 

 
  

THE CHINESE REVOLUTION

|

GREETINGS TO THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Greetings to the
      German Social-Democratic Party









Lenin: 1912/6thconf: GREETINGS TO THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.
JANUARY 5–17 (18–30), 1912



    

GREETINGS TO THE GERMAN SOCIAL-DEMOCRATIC PARTY

The following telegram was sent on behalf of the Conference to the
Central Organ of the German Social-Democratic Party: 

The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, as represented by the
Russian Organising Commission and the Central Organ of the Party, sends its
ardent greetings to the fraternal German Social-Democratic Party on the
occasion of the brilliant victory over all the forces of the bourgeois
world it won at the recent

elections.[1] 

Long live international Social-Democracy; long live the German
Social-Democratic Party!  

Written in January 1912

Published in February 1912 in a pamphlet All-Russian Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. Central Committee Publishing House, Paris

Published according to the pamphlet text



 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The January 1912 German elections to the Reichstag resulted in a great
victory for the Social-Democrats, 110 of their candidates being elected,
receiving a total of 4,500,000 votes.  

Vorwärts published the message of greetings sent by the
R.S.D.L.P. in its issue No. 22 of January 27, 1912.



 
  

THE POLICY OF THE TSARIST GOVERNMENT IN FINLAND

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Organ of a Liberal Labour Policy









Lenin: An Organ of a Liberal Labour Policy







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Organ of a Liberal Labour Policy




Published:
Zvezda, No. 11 (47), February 19, 1912.

      Signed: F. L-ko.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 487-490.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Before me lie three issues of the St. Petersburg weekly
newspaper Zhivoye

Dyelo[1] which began publication in January last.  

I invite readers to look closely at the sermons which it preaches.


The main political question of the day is the elections to the Fourth
Duma. Martov’s article in No. 2 is devoted to this subject. The slogan he
puts forward reads: “We must endeavour to dislodge reaction from its
positions in the Duma.” And in No. 3 Dan repeats this idea—“The best
way to weaken its pernicious influence [that of the Council of State] is to
wrest the Duma from the hands of the reactionaries.”  

The slogan is clear, and every class-conscious worker will have no
difficulty, of course, in seeing that it is not a Marxist, not a
proletarian, not even a democratic, but a liberal slogan. It is
the slogan of a liberal labour policy.  

Here is Martov’s defence of this slogan: “Is this task
feasible under the existing electoral law? Unquestionably, it
is. True, this electoral law guarantees beforehand a majority of electors
from the landowners and the first urban [capitalist] curia in a
considerable [?] number of gubernia assemblies.  

In his attempt to defend a bad cause Martov was at once forced to make
a flagrantly wrong assertion. The electors from the landowners plus the
first urban curia comprise an absolute majority, not “in a considerable
number” of gubernia assemblies, but positively in all of them (in
European Russia). And this is not all. In 28 out of 53 gubernias, the
electors sent by the landowners alone comprise an absolute
majority in the gubernia assemblies. And these 28 gubernias

    

send 255 deputies to the Duma—out of a total of 442, i.e., again an
absolute majority.  

In order to defend the liberal slogan about “dislodging reaction from
its positions in the Duma” Martov had to begin by whitewashing the Russian
landowners so as to make them look like liberals. Not a bad beginning!


“However,” Martov continues, “the last elections showed that among
the landowners and the big urban bourgeoisie too, there are elements
hostile to the Black-Hundred, nationalist and Octobrist reactionaries.”


True. Even some of the electors delegated by the landowners are members
of the opposition, Cadets. What conclusion is to be drawn from this? Only
that the Duma majority elected on the basis of the law of June 3, 1907,
cannot be shifted farther than a landowners’ “liberal”
opposition. The landowner has the last say. This fact remains true, and
Martov tries to evade it. Consequently, only if the landowner joins the
opposition can the “opposition” (of the landowners) gain the
upper hand. But that is precisely the crux of the whole question; can one
say, without turning into a liberal, that the (landowners’)
“liberal opposition will be capable of dislodging reaction from its
positions in the Duma”?  

In the first place, we must not gloss over the fact that our electoral
law favours the landowners. Secondly, we must not forget that the
landowners’ “opposition” has all the distinguishing features of so-called
“Left Octobrism” (with which the Cadets are permitted by their
last conference to form blocs!—something that it is no use Martov keeping
quiet about). Only comical liberal politicians can talk about a possible
victory of “Left Octobrists”, and of “wresting the Duma from the hands
of the reactionaries” or of “dislodging reaction from its positions in
the Duma”.  

The task of worker democrats is to take advantage of the
conflicts between the liberals and the present majority in the Duma for
the purpose of strengthening the democratic forces in the Duma, and by
no means to support liberal illusions about the possibility of “wresting
the Duma from the hands of the reactionaries”.  

Our author lands into an even worse mess when he turns to a question of
principle, to the question as to what significance should
be attached to the eventuality of “the entire
    

opposition breaking down the Black-Hundred Octobrist majority in the
Duma”.  

“It is to the interest of the workers,” argues Martov, “that power
in a class state should be transferred from the hands of the savage
landowner into the hands of the more civilised bourgeoisie.”  

A wonderful argument. Only a minor detail has been for gotten—a mere
trifle—that “it is to the interest” of the Russian “more
civilised bourgeoisie”, the liberals, the Cadets, not to
undermine the power of the savage landowner. “It is to the interest”
of the liberals to share power with him, taking care not to undermine this
power and not to place a single weapon in the hands of democracy.  

That is the crux of the matter! And it is to no purpose that you try to
evade a serious question and, with an air of importance, chew the cud of
trivial commonplaces.  

“By strengthening their representation in the Duma,” says Martov,
“the Cadets and the Progressists will still not be able to assume power,
but it will facilitate their advance towards power.” Well, well. If that
is the case, why is it that, since 1848, the German Cadets and Progressists
have “strengthened their representation” in Parliament time and again,
but, for all that, they have so far “not come to power”? Why is it that
during sixty-four years, and to this very day, they have
left power in the hands of the Junkers? Why is it that the Russian
Cadets, although they “increased their representation” in the First and
Second Dumas, did not “facilitate their advance towards power”?  

Martov accepts Marxism only insofar as it is acceptable to
any educated liberal. It is to the interest of the workers that
power should be transferred from the hands of the landowner into the hands
of the more civilised bourgeois—every liberal in the world will subscribe
to this “conception” of the “interest of the workers”. But
that is still not Marxism. Marxism goes further and says:

(1) it is to the interest of the liberals not to undermine the power of the
landowner, but to take a place next to him;

(2) it is to the interest of the liberals to share power with the
landowners in such a way as to leave absolutely nothing to the worker or to
democracy;

(3) power actually does “fall out” of the

    

hands of the landowners and “passes into the hands” of the liberals
only when democracy triumphs in spite of the
liberals. You want Proof? Take the entire history of France and the latest
events in China. In the latter country the liberal Yuan Shih-kai would
never have come to power even provisionally, even conditionally, if Chinese
democracy had not scored a victory in spite of Yuan Shih-kai.


If the commonplace maxim that a liberal is better than a member of the
Black Hundreds is all that Struve, Izgoyev and Co. accept in the
way of Marxism, the dialectics of the class struggle is a sealed book both
to the liberal as well as to Martov.  

To sum up: precisely in order that power in Russia may actually
“pass” from the hands of the landowners into the hands of the
bourgeoisie, democracy in general, and the workers in particular, must not
be deceived and enfeebled by the false slogan of “wresting the
Duma from the hands of the reactionaries”. The practical task that faces
us at the elections is by no means to “dislodge reaction from its
positions in the Duma”, but to strengthen the forces of democracy in
general and of working-class democracy in particular. This task may
sometimes clash with the “task” of increasing the number of liberals, but
five additional democrats are more important to us, and more useful to the
proletariat, than fifty additional liberals.  

Hence the following conclusion which Martov refuses to draw, even
though he does pretend to agree that the Cadets are not democrats,
but liberals:

(1) in the five big

cities,[2] in the event of a second ballot, agreements are permissible
only with the democrats against the liberals;

(2) at all the ballots and in all the agreements at the
second stage, precedence should be given to agreements with the
democrats against the liberals, and only subsequently may agreements be
concluded with the liberals against the Rights.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Zhivoye Dyelo (Vital Cause)—the weekly legal
newspaper of the Menshevik-liquidators, published in St. Petersburg from
January 20 (February 2) to April 28 (May 11), 1912. Sixteen issues
appeared.





[2]
The five big cities where, according to the electoral law, there were
direct elections with second ballots were St. Petersburg, Moscow, Riga,
Kiev and Odessa.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Against Unity—With the Liquidators









Lenin: Against Unity—With the Liquidators







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Unity—With the Liquidators




Published:
Prosveshcheniye, No. 3–4, February-March 1912.

      Signed: M. B..

      Published according to the Prosveshcheniye text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 491-496.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

No. 7 of the liquidationist newspaper Zhivoye
Dyelo carries an editorial entitled “For Unity—Against a
Split”. The article deals with a question that is undoubtedly extremely
interesting and important and is exercising the mind of every thinking
worker. We consider it our duty to express our opinion—even if in part
and in brief, on the obviously and definitely incorrect information offered
readers by Zhivoye Dyelo.  

On the basis of reports in the newspapers Golos Zemli,
Russkoye Slovo and Kievskaya

Mysl[1] which “agree with the information received by Zhivoye
Dyelo”, the latter establishes the fact that a general Party
conference was held abroad, and that this conference has “imposed upon all
Marxists in Russia definite tactics to be pursued in the election
campaign”, and, among other things, placed the Nasha Zarya and
Dyelo Zhizni group outside the Party (italics of the
Zhivoye Dyelo). In this connection, Zhivoye Dyelo (which
intersperses its article with the usual slander and insinuations against
the, anti-liquidators) is, first, trying its utmost to discredit the
conference, and, second, takes Nasha Zarya and Co. under its wing,
declaring that they cannot be placed “outside”, that the “writers” of
that trend “contemptuously shrug their shoulders at this resolution”,
etc.  

We note, to begin with, that the entire content of the article in
Zhivoye Dyelo, its hysterical tone and its vociferous shouting
“for unity” clearly testify to the fact that the liquidators have been
touched to the quick and are trying, unsuccessfully, to obscure the
substance of the matter. It is with this substance that we
shall now deal.  
 

Naturally, we can neither defend the conference nor supplement or
correct the information printed in the above-mentioned newspapers (to which
Golos Moskvy should now be added). For that matter this is not
what we have set out to do. And, for that matter, too, it is sufficient to
reproduce word for word just one sentence from the article in
Zhivoye Dyelo: “We ask,” the liquidators exclaim, “who elected
them [the delegates to the conference], who authorised them to speak and
decide on behalf of the Moscow, St. Petersburg, etc., Marxists?” It would
be quite natural for Mr. Purishkevich or Mr. Zamyslovsky, for example,
openly to “ask” such a question. But it is the liquidators who
ask this question of the public in the columns of Zhivoye
Dyelo and this question in itself so splendidly reveals their
liquidationist nature, so magnificently exposes them, that it only remains
for us to point to these methods of the liquidators and to leave it at
that.  

We repeat that we are dealing with the questions touched upon in this
article only insofar as it is our duty to comment on statements in the
press and to note all that is related to the workers’ election
campaign. The readers must know the truth. When the liquidators say—“For
unity—against a split”—it is our duty to reveal the falsehood
contained in this statement. First, why play at hide-and-seek and speak of
“unity” in general, when as a matter of fact, it is a question only
of unity with the liquidators? Why does Zhivoye Dyelo obscure
the real issue? Why doesn’t it say openly whether or not it is in agreement
with the point of view expressed by Nasha Zarya and Dyelo
Zhizni? Secondly, it is premature to speak of a split so long
as we are not con fronted by two organised, integral political collectives
functioning in the same milieu.  

This is the substance of the matter that Zhivoye
Dyelo should speak about—its shouting and abuse will lead it
nowhere.  

Unity with the liquidators is not a new, but rather an old, issue. More
than two years ago, in January 1910, a most determined attempt was made to
establish such unity; it was formulated in an agreement and sealed by a
unanimous resolution. The attempt failed, that is admitted by all,
the liquidators included (see Nasha Zarya for 1911,

    

No. 11, p. 130). Why did it fail? People who are really interested in the
question ought to find the answer themselves, by examining the
documents. We shall cite here only a few of the documents, but the
most decisive.  

One of the “uniters” or “conciliators”, Mr. Ionov, who is well
known for his part in the attempt to establish unity with the liquidators,
wrote at the very time that attempt was made: 

“However harmful otzovism and liquidationism, as such, may be to the
Party, their beneficial effect on the factions [the Menshevik and the
Bolshevik factions] seems to be beyond doubt. Pathology recognises two
kinds of abscess—harmful and harmless. The harmless type is a disease
beneficial to the organism. As it grows, it draws various injurious sub
stances from the entire organism and thus helps improve the health of that
organism. I believe that a similar role was played by liquidationism in
respect of Menshevism and by otzovism-ultimatumism in respect of
Bolshevism.”  

Here is one documented confirmation of the fact that the declared
condition for unity with the liquidators was that they should completely
renounce liquidationism. That was in January 1910. In February 1910,
Mr. Potresov wrote the following in Nasha Zarya, No. 2:


“I ask the reader,” wrote Mr. Potresov, “whether it is possible that
there can exist, in this year of 1909, as some thing that is actually real
and not a figment of a diseased imagination, a liquidationist tendency, a
tendency to liquidate what is already beyond liquidation and actually no
longer exists as an organised whole”. (Nasha Zarya, 1910, No. 2,
p. 61.)  

All practical workers know that the liquidators acted exactly
as directed by Mr. Potresov. Vozrozhdeniye, another well-known
organ of the liquidators, to which the same Martov, Larin, Levitsky and
Co. contributed, quoted these words of Mr. Potresov’s in its issue of
March 30, 1910, and added approvingly on its own behalf: “There is nothing
to liquidate—and for ourselves we [i.e., the editors of
Vozrozhdeniye I may add, the dream of resuscitating that
hierarchy, in its old, underground shape is nothing but a harmful,
reactionary utopia...”  (Vozrozhdeniye, 1910, No. 5. p. 51).

 

Were there any other persons and trends, besides ours, who interpreted
these statements as a breach on the part of the liquidators with
the old, previously existing political collective? There certainly
were. The proof:

(1) An article by Mr. Izgoyev in Russkaya Mysl, 1910, No. 8—“A
Vekhi Writer Among Marxists”. Mr. Izgoyev always assesses the
events taking place among the Marxists from a consistently Vekhi
viewpoint. “The answer [given by Mr. Potresov to the questions of the
working-class movement] fully accords,” wrote Mr. Izgoyev, “with
what was written in Vekhi, which he reviles, and what the
publicists of Russkaya Mysl are saying” (Russkaya Mysl,
1910, No. 8, p. 67).

(2) The Menshevik Plekhanov wrote in May 1910 apropos of Mr. Potresov’s
words quoted above: “There is no doubt, however, that a man for whom
our Party does not exist, does not himself exist for our
Party. [Plekhanov’s italics.] Now all the members of the Party will
have to say that Mr. Potresov is no comrade of theirs, and some of them,
will, perhaps, stop accusing, me on the score that I have long since ceased
to regard him as such.”  

The fact is established, and no subterfuges and evasions can alter
matters. The liquidators broke with the previously existing political
collective as far back as 1910. No historian of Russian political life can
evade this fact unless he wants to depart from the truth. In 1911,
Levitsky, Martov, Dan, Larin, Chatsky and Co. repeatedly made statements
fully in line with Potresov’s. We have only to recall how Larin, in
Dyelo Zhizni (for 1911, No. 6, p. 15), preached to the workers
that it is not difficult “to form circles ...  of several hundred people
... in each town”, but that it would be just a “masquerade”!  

It is our profound conviction that the inevitable conclusion to be
drawn from this, from more than two years’ experience, is that unity
with the liquidators is an impossibility. Nor is an agreement with
them possible. Agreements in this case are inconceivable because
it is a question of the existence or non-existence of what the liquidators
have contemptuously dubbed “the hierarchy”. And no abuse from Zhivoye
Dyelo—an organ of the very same liquidators of the very
same trend—can change anything. The liquidators are
outside.... That is an irrevocable fact.  
 

It may be objected, perhaps, that this fact implies a split. It does
not. A split means the formation of two political collectives
instead of one. At the present time, however, in March 1912, an observer of
our political life, one equipped with the finest telescope and looking from
the vantage point of St. Petersburg, Moscow, Kiev, New York or
elsewhere—will be able to discern only one organised, integral
political collective, and the only result of the liquidators’ abuse is that
this collective is gaining strength among the workers.  

The trouble with the liquidators is that they have indeed
liquidated their relations with the old, but they have created
nothing new. When they do create something, we shall see what it is
and, in our capacity of political observers, inform readers about it. But
so far the fact remains that there is no other integrated political
collective, consequently, there is no split.  

The liquidators have long since given notice that they are going to
form an “open” political association. But that has nothing to do with the
facts. Mr. Levitsky “himself”, Potresov’s and Martov’s closest
colleague, expressed, in a leading article in Nasha Zarya, No. 11
(1911), his regret that “we do not see a single, more or less
serious, attempt to organise a legally existing political
[Mr. Levitsky’s italics] association”. Mr. Levitsky thinks that both the
“masses” and the “leaders” are to blame for this. But it is not now a
question of who is to blame, but of establishing a fact. If
Mr. Levitsky and his friends form a legally existing political association,
if it actually pursues a Marxist (and not a liberal) labour
policy, then ... then we shall see. Only you had better make haste,
gentlemen, not much time re mains to the elections, and Herculean efforts
are needed to do in months what has not been done in years (or to
do it in a way diametrically opposed to the way it was
done before).  

The liquidators have decapitated themselves. And it is no use weeping
for the hair when the head is gone.  

An observer of Russian political life may discover only one political
collective in the sphere which interests us. Around it he will find
individuals and unorganised small groups which offer no complete answer
even to the most urgent political problems. In other words, there
is disintegration

    

everywhere. As in every case of disintegration there are some who vacillate
and some who hope (in vain, alas!) to prevail upon the liquidators
actually to break with liquidationism. But only hopeless
politicians can try to feed themselves on hopes a mere six months before
the elections.  

Take, for instance, the question of slogans for the election campaign,
of tactics, of agreements. There is only one formulated, clear, explicit,
and complete answer, and this answer is already known to all the leading
workers throughout Russia. There is no other answer. Once more,
Messrs. Liquidators: It’s no use weeping for the hair when the head is
gone.  


P.S. Trotsky, apparently, classes himself among those who “hope” that
the liquidators may mend their ways; for, writing in Zhivoye Dyelo
he gives a simplified paraphrase of the introductory section of the
December 1908 resolutions on the essence of the June Third regime. We shall
be very glad if Trotsky succeeds in convincing Larin and Martov, for
instance, not to mention others, that they all ought to agree on one
definite, explicit, and clear answer to the question of what the substance
of our present “Constitution” is. They are shouting about the usefulness
of “unity”, about the harm of “the circle outlook”, and yet they cannot
elaborate a united opinion even of their “own” circle, either on
questions of principle, or on practical questions of our entire activity!
But, to compensate for this, there is phrase-mongering galore!
“Social-Democracy, “writes Trotsky, “is able to inscribe its great tasks
on the inner surface of the cranium, not only as a formula....” What an
elegant writer Trotsky is—as elegant as Potresov and Nevedomsky.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Golos Zemli (Voice of the Land)—a liberal-bourgeois
newspaper, published in St. Petersburg in 1912.  

Russkoye Slovo (Russian Word)—a daily
liberal-bourgeois newspaper, published in Moscow from 1895 until it was
banned in 1917.  

Kievskaya Mysl (Kiev Thought)—a daily
liberal-bourgeois newspaper, published in Kiev from 1906 to 1918. Menshevik
liquidators were among its most active contributors.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Political Parties in the Five Years of the Third Duma









Lenin: Political Parties in the Five Years of the Third Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
Political Parties in the Five Years of the Third Duma




Published:
Zvezda, No. 14 (50), March 4, 1912.

      Signed: K. T..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 497-502.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

In the Rech Year Book for 1912—that miniature
political encyclopaedia of liberalism—we find an article by Mr. Milyukov:
“Political Parties in the State Duma in the Past Five
Years”. Written by the acknowledged leader of the liberals, and an
outstanding historian at that, this article deserves our special attention,
all the more so since it deals with what may be termed the most
important pre-election subject. The political results of the activity
of the parties, the question of their role, scientific generalisations
regarding the alignment of social forces, the slogans of the forth coming
election campaign simply ask to be written about, and Mr. Milyukov
had to touch on all these points, once he had tackled the subject,
no matter how much he tried to confine himself to a plain relation of the
facts concerning the “external history” of the Duma.  

The result is an interesting picture, illustrating the old, but ever
new, subject: how is Russian political life reflected in the mind of a
liberal?  

“The party of people’s freedom,” writes Mr. Milyukov, “which in the
First Duma predominated numerically and in the Second Duma morally, was
represented in the Third Duma by only 56–53 deputies. After holding the
position of a leading majority it became an opposition party, retaining,
however, its dominant position in the ranks of the opposition, both
numerically and qualitatively and by the strict group discipline which
characterised the speeches and voting of its representatives.”  
 

The leader of a party, writing about political parties, declares that
his party “retained ... its domination ... qualitatively”. Not bad—only
this self-advertisement might have been somewhat more subtle.... And, then,
is it true that the Cadets dominated in respect of strict group discipline?
This is not true, for we all remember the numerous speeches of
Mr. Maklakov, for example, who isolated him self from the Cadet group and
took up a position to the right of it. Mr. Milyukov made an incautious
statement:

for, while it is safe to advertise the “qualities” of one’s party,
because such an appraisal is entirely subjective, the facts at once refute
the advertisement of party discipline. It is characteristic that the Right
wing of the Cadets—both in the Duma, in the person of Maklakov, and in
the press, in the person of Messrs. Struve and Co. in Russkaya
Mysl—took their own line and, far from adhering to strict
discipline, they destroyed all discipline in the Cadet Party.  

“To its left,” continues Mr. Milyukov, “the people’s freedom group
had only 14 Trudoviks and 15 Social-Democrats. The Trudovik group retained
but a shadow of the importance it had formerly had in the First and the
Second Dumas. The somewhat better organised Social-Democratic group came
out from time to time with sharp invectives regarding ‘class
contradictions’, but, in essence, it could not pursue any tactics other
than those also pursued by the ‘bourgeois’ opposition.”  

This is all, literally all, that the distinguished historian has to say
about the parties to the left of the Cadets in the twenty pages of his
article. But the article is supposed to be devoted to an examination of the
political parties in the State Duma—it goes into the minutest details of
every shift in the ranks of the landowners, dealing at length with the
sundry “moderate-Right” or “Right-Octobrist groups” and with every step
taken by those groups. Why, then, are the Trudoviks and the
Social-Democrats practically ignored? For to describe them as Mr. Milyukov
does is tantamount to ignoring them.  

The only possible answer is: because Mr. Milyukov has a particular
dislike for these parties, and even a plain statement of generally known
facts regarding these parties would run counter to the interests
of the liberals. In fact,

    

Mr. Milyukov is perfectly well aware of the reshuffling effected in the
composition of the electors which reduced the Trudoviks to “a shadow of
the former importance they had had” in the Dumas. This reshuffling, which
was effected by Mr. Kryzhanovsky and other heroes of June 3, 1907,
undermined the Cadet majority. But can this justify the ignoring and, even
worse, the distortion of data relating to the importance of parties having
very small representation in the landowners’ Duma? The Trudoviks are very
poorly represented in the Third Duma, but they have played a very great
role during these five years, for they represent millions of peasants. The
interests of the landowners especially demanded the reduction of peasant
representation. But, we should like to ask, what interests prompt the
liberals to brush aside the Trudoviks?  

Or take Mr. Milyukov’s ill-tempered sally against the
Social-Democrats. Is it possible for him not to know that the “tactics”
of the latter are distinguished from that of the Cadets not only because
there is a, difference between a proletarian and a bourgeois opposition,
but also because democracy differs from liberalism? Of course, Mr. Milyukov
knows this perfectly well, and he could quote examples from the modern
history of all European countries to illustrate the difference between
democrats and liberals. The point is that when it concerns Russia the
Russian liberal refuses to see the distinction between himself and
the Russian democrats. It is to the advantage of the Russian
liberal to pose before the Russian readers as a representative of the whole
“democratic opposition” in general. But this advantage has nothing in
common with the truth.  

Actually, it is common knowledge that the Social-Democrats in the Third
Duma pursued tactics absolutely different from those of the
bourgeois opposition in general and of the Cadet (liberal) opposition in
particular. It may be safely asserted that, had Mr. Milyukov tried to deal
with any one specific political issue, he would not have found a single
one on which the Social-Democrats did not pursue fundamentally
different tactics. Having chosen as his subject a survey of the
political parties in the Third Duma, Mr. Milyukov distorted the principal
and cardinal point: that there were three main groups of political parties,
which

    

pursued three different kinds of tactics—namely, the government parties
(from Purishkevich to Guchkov), the liberal parties (Cadets, Nationalists
and Progressists), and the democratic parties (the Trudoviks representing
bourgeois democracy, and working-class democrats). The first two
generalisations are clear to Mr. Milyukov, he sees perfectly well the
essence of the affinity between Purishkevich and Guchkov on the one hand,
and all the liberals on the other. But he does not see the distinction
between the latter and the democrats, because he will not see it.

II

This is repeated when he deals with the class basis of the
various parties. To the right of him Mr. Milyukov sees this basis and
reveals it; but he grows blind the moment he turns to the left. “The very
law of June 3,” he writes, “was dictated by the united nobility. It was
the Right wing of the Duma majority that undertook to defend the interests
of the nobility. To this the Left wing of the majority added the defence of
the interests of the big urban bourgeoisie”. How edifying, isn’t it? When
the Cadet looks to the right he draws distinct lines of “class
contradictions”: here the nobility, there the big bourgeoisie. But the
moment the liberal turns his glance to the left he puts the words “class
contradictions” in ironical quotation marks. The class distinctions
disappear: the liberals, in the capacity of a general “democratic
opposition”, are supposed to represent the peasants, the workers, and the
urban democrats!  

No, gentlemen, this is not scientific history, nor is it serious
politics—it is cheap politics and self-advertisement.  

The liberals represent neither the peasants nor the workers. They
merely represent a section of the bourgeoisie—urban, landowning, etc.


The history of the Third Duma is so generally known that even
Mr. Milyukov cannot help admitting that on frequent occasions the liberals
voted together with the Octobrists—not only against (the
government), but also in favour of certain positive
measures. These facts, in view of the common history of Octobrism and
Cadetism (which in 1904–05, up to October 17, 1905, were one),
prove to everyone to whom

    

historical reality means anything at all that the Octobrists and the Cadets
are the two flanks of one class, the two flanks of the bourgeois
Centre, which vacillates between the government and the
landowners, on the one hand, and democracy (the workers and the peasants),
on the other. Mr. Milyukov fails to draw this fundamental
conclusion from the history of “the political parties in the Third Duma”
only because it is not to his interest to do so.  

In a new way and under new circumstances, the Third Duma has
confirmed the fundamental division of Russian political forces and
Russian political parties of which there were definite signs in the middle
of the nineteenth century, and which acquired a growingly distinct shape in
the period 1861–1904, rose to the surface and became fixed in the open
arena of the struggle of the masses in 1905–07, remaining unchanged in the
1908–12 period. Why is this division valid to this day? Because the
objective problems of Russia’s historical development—problems which have
always and everywhere, from France in 1789 to China in 1911, formed the
content of democratic change and democratic revolutions—have as yet not
been solved.  

This is grounds for the inevitably stubborn resistance of the
“bureaucracy” and the landowners, as well as for the vacillations of the
bourgeoisie, for whom changes are essential but who are afraid that the
changes may be made use of by democracy in general and by the workers in
particular. In the sphere of Duma politics this fear was particularly
apparent among the Cadets in the First and the Second Dumas, and among the
Octobrists in the Third Duma, i.e., when those parties represented the
“leading” majority. Although the Cadets contend with the Octobrists, they
take the same stand on questions of principle and it is really more a
matter of rivalry than of a fight. They share with them a cosy place near
the government, alongside the landowners; hence the apparent
keenness of the conflict between the powers that be and the Cadets, their
closest rivals.  

While ignoring the distinction between the democrats and the liberals,
Mr. Milyukov goes into extraordinary detail and examines at great length,
with gusto, one might say, the shifts in the ranks of the landowners:
Rights, moderate-Rights, Nationalists in general, independent Nationalists,

    

Right Octobrists, plain Octobrists, Left Octobrists. No serious
significance can be attached to the divisions and shifts within these
limits. At most they are connected with the substitution of a Tverdoonto
for an

Ugryum-Burcheyev[1] in an administrative post, with the change of
persons, with the victories of circles or coteries. In everything
essential, their political lines are absolutely identical.  

“Two camps will contend [in the elections to the Fourth Duma]”,
insists Mr. Milyukov, in the same way as the entire Cadet press never tires
of insisting. That is not true, gentlemen. There are three
principal camps that are contending and will contend: the
government camp, the liberals, and working-class democracy as the centre
towards which all the forces of democracy in general gravitate. The
division into two camps is a trick of liberal politics, which,
unfortunately, does occasionally succeed in misleading some sup porters of
the working class. Only when it realises the inevitability of a division
into three main camps, will the working class be able actually to pursue,
not a liberal labour policy, but a policy of its own, taking
advantage of the conflicts between the first camp and the second, but
not allowing itself to be deceived, even for a moment by the sham
democratic phrases of the liberals. The workers must not allow themselves
to be deceived, nor must they allow the peasants, the mainstay of bourgeois
democracy, to be deceived. That is the conclusion to be drawn from
the history of the political parties in the Third Duma.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Characters from the works by M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin.  

Tverdoonto—a retired administrator travelling abroad, from
the series of essays Abroad.  

Ugryum-Burcheyev—a satirical portrait of a mayor, drawn by
Saltykov-Shchedrin in his History of a Town, who came to be
recognised as a typical example of reactionary, stupid and narrow-minded
officials.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Report to the International Socialist Bureau on the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: Report to the International Socialist Bureau on the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Report to the International Socialist Bureau on the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]




Written: Written early in March 1912 

Published:

      Published on March 18, 1912, in Circular No. 4 of the International Socialist Bureau.

      Translated from the German.

      Published according to the Circular text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 503-505.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The last few years have been years of indecision and
disorganisation for the R.S.D.L.P. For three years the Party could not
convene either a conference or a congress, and during the last two years
the Central Committee has been unable to develop any activity. True enough,
the Party has continued to exist, but only in the form of isolated groups
in all the larger cities and, in view of the absence of a Central
Committee, each of these groups has led a life of its own, somewhat
isolated from the others.  

Not so long ago, under the influence of the new awakening of the
Russian proletariat, the Party again began to gain in strength, and quite
recently we were able, at last, to convene a conference (something that had
been impossible ever since 1908), at which the organisations of
St. Petersburg and Moscow, of the North-West and the South, the Caucasus
and the central industrial region were represented. In all, twenty
organisations established close ties with the Organising Commission
convening this conference; that is to say, practically all the
organisations, both Menshevik and Bolshevik, active in Russia at the
present time.  

During its twenty-three sessions the Conference, which assumed the
rights and duties of the supreme authority of the Party, discussed all the
questions on the agenda, among which were a number that were extremely
important. The Conference made a comprehensive evaluation of the present
political situation and of Party policy, this evaluation fully
corresponding to the resolutions of the Conference held in

    

1908 and to the decisions of the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee
in 1910. The Conference devoted special attention to the Duma elections
which are to he held in a few months’ time, and adopted a resolution in
three sections which gives a very explicit and detailed explanation of the
intricate and involved election law, analyses the question of election
agreements with other parties, and thoroughly elucidates the position and
tactics of the Party in the forth coming election campaign. The Conference
also discussed and adopted resolutions on the questions of combating the
famine, of workers’ insurance, of trade unions, of strikes, etc.  

Further, the Conference considered the question of the
“liquidators”. This trend denies the existence of the illegal Party,
declares that the Party is already liquidated and that the attempts to
revive the illegal Party are a reactionary utopia, and maintains that the
Party can be revived only as a legally existing organisation. Nevertheless,
this trend, which has broken with the illegal Party, has so far been unable
to found a legally existing party. The Conference placed on record that for
four years the Party had been waging a fight against this trend, that the
Conference held in 1908 and the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee in
1910 had both declared against the liquidators, and that in spite of all
the attempts made by the Party, this trend continued to maintain its
factional independence and to carry on a struggle against the Party in the
columns of publications appearing legally. The Conference, therefore,
declared that the liquidators, grouped around the magazines Nasha
Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni (to which Zhivoye Dyelo
should now be added), had placed themselves outside the ranks of the
R.S.D.L.P.  

Finally, the Conference elected a Central Committee and an editorial
board for Sotsial-Demokrat, the Party’s Central Organ. In
addition, the Conference specially noted the fact that many groups abroad
more or less adhering to socialism are, in any case, entirely divorced from
the Russian proletariat and its socialist activity; consequently, these
groups are absolutely irresponsible, and under no circumstances can they
represent the R.S.D.L.P. or speak in its name; that the Party does not hold
itself in any way responsible

    

or answerable for these groups, and that all relations with the
R.S.D.L.P. must be carried on solely through the Central Committee, whose
address abroad is: Vladimir Ulyanov, 4, Rue Marie Rose, Paris XIV (for the
Central Committee).  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The International Socialist Bureau (I.S.B.)—the permanent
Executive-Information Bureau of the Second International. The decision to
set up this Bureau representing the various socialist parties

   

existing at the time was taken at the Paris Congress of the International
(September 1900). The Russian representatives elected to the Bureau were
G. V. Plekhanov and B. N. Krichevsky; V. I. Lenin became a member of the
Bureau in 1905, as the representative of the R.S.D.L.P. In 1912 the Sixth
(Prague) All-Russia Party Conference re-elected Lenin as the Party
representative to the Bureau.  

Lenin’s official report to the Bureau regarding the Conference that
took place was distributed in Circular No. 4 of the I.S.B. to all the
socialist parties on March 18, 1912 by its Secretary, C. Huysmans, with a
request that it be published in their respective organs. It appeared in the
central organ of the Belgian Labour Party Le Peuple of March 23,
1912, and in the central organ of the German Social-Democratic Party
Vorwärts, No. 72 of March 26, 1912 (Supplement
No. 1). Vorwärts accompanied this notification with a
scurrilous commentary by Trotsky










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]




Written: Written early in March 1912 

Published:

      Printed as a leaflet in March 1912.

      Published according to the text of the leaflet and verified with a handwritten copy corrected by V. I. Lenin.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 506-512.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Worker comrades, and all citizens of Russia!  

The elections to the Fourth Duma are to be held in the very near
future. Various political parties and the government itself are already
energetically preparing for the elections. The Russian Social-Democratic
Labour Party, the party of the class-conscious proletariat, that by its
glorious struggle in 1905 dealt the first serious blow to tsarism and
forced it to concede representative institutions, calls on each and every
one of you who enjoy electoral rights, as well as the great majority
deprived of rights, to play a most energetic part in the elections. All
those who strive for the liberation of the working class from wage slavery,
all those who hold the cause of Russia’s freedom dear, must start work at
once so that at the elections to the Fourth Duma, the landowners’ Duma,
they may unite and strengthen the fighters for freedom, and advance the
class-consciousness and organisation of Russian democrats.  

If is five years since the government coup of June 3, 1907, when
Nicholas the Bloody, the Khodynka

Tsar,[2] “the victor and destroyer” of the First and Second Dumas,
threw aside his pledges, promises, and manifestos, so that, together with
the Black-Hundred landowners and the Octobrist merchants, he could take
vengeance on the working class and all the revolutionary elements in
Russia, in other words, on the vast majority of the people, for 1905.  

Vengeance for the revolution is the hallmark of the entire period of
the Third Duma. Never before has Russia known such raging persecution on
the part of tsarism. The gallows erected during these five years beat all
records of three centuries of Russian history. The places of exile, penal
establishments and prisons overflow with political

    

prisoners in unheard-of numbers, and never before has there been such
torture and torment of the vanquished as under Nicholas II. Never before
has there been such a wave of embezzlement, such tyranny and violence on
the part of officials, who are forgiven everything because of their zeal in
the struggle against “sedition”; never before have the ordinary people,
and the peasants in particular, been so humiliated by any representative of
authority. Never before has there been such avid, ferocious, reckless
persecution of the Jews, and after them of other peoples, not belonging to
the dominant nation.  

Anti-Semitism and the most crude nationalism became the only political
platform of the government parties, and Purishkevich became the one
complete, undiluted, and perfect personification of all the methods of rule
by the present tsarist monarchy.  

And, what have these frenzied acts of the counter-revolutionaries led
to?  

The consciousness that it is impossible to continue living in this way
is penetrating into the minds of even the “higher”, exploiting, classes
of society. The Octobrists them selves, the dominant party in the Third
Duma, the party of landowners and merchants, terrified of the revolution
and cringing before authority, are more and more expressing the conviction
in their own press that the tsar and the nobility, which they have served
so faithfully and truly, have led Russia into an impasse.  

There was a time when the tsarist monarchy was the gendarme of Europe,
protecting reaction in Russia and assisting in forcibly suppressing all
movements for freedom in Europe. Nicholas II has brought things to such a
pass, that he is now not only a European, but an Asiatic gendarme who, with
the help of intrigues, money and the most brutal violence, tries to
suppress all movements for freedom in Turkey, Persia, and China.  

But no tsarist atrocities can halt Russia’s progress. No matter how
these feudal survivals, the Purishkeviches, Romanovs and Markovs, disfigure
and cripple Russia, she is still advancing. With each step of Russia’s
development the demand for political freedom is becoming ever more
insistent. In the twentieth century Russia cannot live without

    

political freedom any more than any other country can. Is it possible to
expect political reforms from the tsarist monarchy, when the tsar himself
dissolved the first two Dumas and rode roughshod over his own Manifesto of
October 17, 1905? Is it possible to conceive of political reforms in modern
Russia, when the gang of officials mocks at all laws, knowing that in doing
so, they have the protection of the tsar and his associates? Do we not see
how, taking advantage of the tsar’s protection, or that of his relatives,
Illiodor yesterday, Rasputin today, Tolmachov yesterday, Khvostov today,
Stolypin yesterday, Makarov today, trample under foot all and every law? Do
we not see that even the tiny, ludicrously pathetic “reforms” of the
landowners’ Duma, reforms directed towards refurbishing and strengthening
tsarist rule, are repudiated and distorted by the Council of State or the
personal decrees of Nicholas the Bloody? Do we not know that the
Black-Hundred gang of murderers who shoot at the backs of the deputies whom
the rulers want out of the way, who sent to penal servitude the
Social-Democratic deputies to the Second Duma, who are always organising
pogroms, who insolently rob the treasury on all sides—do we not know that
that gang enjoys the special blessings of the tsar and receives his
poorly-disguised aid, direction and guidance? Look at the fate, under
Nicholas Romanov, of the main political demands of the Russian people for
the sake of which the best representatives of the people have been waging a
heroic struggle for more than three-quarters of a century, for the sake of
which millions rose up in 1905. Is universal, equal and direct suffrage
compatible with the Romanov monarchy, when even the non-universal, unequal
and indirect suffrage of the elections to the First and Second Dumas was
trampled underfoot by tsarism. Is freedom of unions, associations, strikes,
compatible with the tsarist monarchy, when even the reactionary, ugly law
of March 4,

1906[3] has been brought to nought by the governors and the ministers?
Do not the words of the Manifesto of October 17, 1905 about the “immutable
principle of freedom of citizens”, about the “real inviolability of the
individual”, about “freedom of conscience, speech, assembly, and
unions”, sound like mockery? Every subject of the tsar witnesses this
mockery daily.  
 

Enough of liberal lies! As if a union between freedom and the old rule
were possible, as if political reforms were conceivable under a tsarist
monarchy. The Russian people have paid for their childish illusions with
the hard lessons of the counter-revolution. Anyone seriously and sincerely
desiring political freedom, will raise the banner of a republic
proudly and bravely, and all the live forces of Russian democracy
will certainly be drawn to that banner by the politics of the
tsarist-landowner gang.  

Time was, and not so long ago, when the slogan “Down with the
autocracy” seemed too advanced for Russia. Nevertheless, the
R.S.D.L. Party issued this slogan, the advanced workers caught it up and
spread it throughout the country; and in two or three years this slogan
became a popular saying. To work then, worker comrades and all citizens of
Russia, all those who do not want to see our country sink finally into
stagnation, barbarity, lack of rights and the appalling poverty of tens of
millions. The Russian Social-Democrats, the Russian workers will succeed in
making “Down with the tsarist monarchy, long live the Russian Democratic
Republic!” a nation-wide slogan.  

Workers, remember 1905. Millions of toilers then were given new life,
raised to class-consciousness, to freedom, through the strike
movement. Tens of years of tsarist re forms did not and could not give you
a tenth part of those improvements in your lives which you then achieved by
mass struggle. The fate of the Bill on workers’ insurance, made
unrecognisable by the landowners’ Duma with the aid of the Cadets, has once
again shown what you can expect “from above”.  

The counter-revolution has taken away almost all our gains, but it has
not taken and cannot take away the strength, courage and belief in their
cause of the young workers, nor of the all-Russian proletariat that is
growing and becoming stronger.  

Long live the new struggle to improve the lot of workers who do not
wish to remain slaves doomed to toil in workshops and factories! Long
live the 8-hour working day! He who desires freedom in Russia must
help the class which dug a grave for the tsarist monarchy in 1905, and
which will throw the mortal enemy of all the peoples of Russia

    

into that grave during the forthcoming Russian revolution.  

Peasants! You sent your deputies, the Trudoviks, to the First and
Second Dumas, believing in the tsar, hoping by peaceful means to win his
agreement to the transfer of landed estates to the people. You have now
been able to convince yourselves that the tsar, the biggest landowner in
Russia, will stop at nothing in defence of the landowners and officials; at
neither perjury nor lawlessness, oppression or bloodshed. Are you going to
tolerate the yoke of the former serf-Owners, silently bear the affronts and
insults of the officials, and die in hundreds of thousands, nay millions,
from the agonies of starvation, from disease caused by hunger and extreme
poverty, or will you die in the fight against the tsarist monarchy and
tsarist-landowner Duma, in order to win for our children a more or less
decent life, fit for a human being.  

This is the question which the Russian peasants will have to
decide. The working-class Social-Democratic Party calls on the peasants to
struggle for complete freedom, for the transfer of all land from the
landowners to the peasantry, without any compensation whatsoever. Sops
thrown to the peasants cannot remedy their poverty or relieve their
hunger. The peasants are not asking for charity, but for the land which has
been drenched in their blood and sweat for centuries. The peasants do not
need the tutelage of the authorities and the tsar, but freedom from
officials and the tsar, freedom to arrange their own affairs.  

Let the elections to the Fourth Duma sharpen the political
consciousness of the masses and draw them again into decisive
battles. Three main parties are contesting at the elections: (1) the Black
Hundreds, (2) the liberals, and (3) the Social-Democrats.  

The Rights, Nationalists, and Octobrists belong to the Black
Hundreds. They all support the government; this means that any differences
which may exist between them are of no serious significance
whatsoever. Merciless struggle against all these Black-Hundred
parties—this must be our slogan!  

The liberals are the Cadet Party (the “Constitutional Democrats” or
“people’s freedom” party). This is the party

    

of the liberal bourgeoisie, which seeks to share power with the tsar and
the feudal landowners in such a way, that their power is not basically
destroyed, and does not pass to the people. While the liberals detest the
government which prevents them from taking power, while they help to expose
it, and introduce vacillation and disintegration into its ranks, their
hatred of the revolution and fear of mass struggles is even greater than
their hatred of the government, and their attitude towards the popular
liberation movement is even more wavering and irresolute, so that in
decisive moments they treacherously go over to the side of the
monarchy. During the counter-revolution, the liberals, echoing the
“Slavonic dreams” of tsarism, posing as a “responsible opposition”,
grovelling before the tsar as “His Majesty’s Opposition”, and pouring
dirt on the revolutionaries and the revolutionary struggle of the masses,
have turned away more and more from the struggle for freedom.  

The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party was able to raise the
revolutionary banner even in the reactionary Third Duma, it has succeeded
even there in helping the organisation and revolutionary enlightenment of
the masses, and the peasants’ struggle against the landowners. The party of
the proletariat is the only party of the advanced class, the class capable
of winning freedom for Russia. Today, our Party goes into the Duma, not in
order to play at “reforms”, not in order to “defend the Constitution”,
“convince,” the Octobrists or “to dislodge reaction” from the Duma, as
the liberals who are deceiving the people say they will, but in order to
call the masses to the struggle from the Duma rostrum, to explain the
teachings of socialism, to expose every government and liberal deception,
to expose the monarchist prejudices of the backward sections of the people,
and the class roots of the bourgeois parties,—in other words in order to
prepare an army of class-conscious fighters for a new Russian revolution.


The tsarist government and the Black-Hundred landowners have recognised
to the full the tremendous revolutionary force represented by the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma. Hence, all the efforts of the police
and Ministry of the Interior are directed towards preventing the Social
Democrats from entering the Fourth Duma. Unite then,

    

workers and citizens! Rally around the R.S.D.L.P. which at its recent
conference, recovering from the breakdown during the evil years, again
gathered its forces and raised aloft its banner. Let each and every one
take part in the elections and the election campaign, and the efforts of
the government will be defeated, the red banner of revolutionary
Social-Democracy will be hoisted from the rostrum of the Duma in
police-ridden, oppressed, blood-drenched, down-trodden and starving Russia!


Long live the Russian Democratic Republic!  

Long live the 8-hour day!  

Long live the confiscation of all landed estates!  

Workers and citizens! Support the election campaign of the R.S.D.L.P.!
Elect the candidates of the R.S.D.L.P.!  

Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic
Labour Party 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin wrote “The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.” in
Paris, early in March 1912, shortly after the Prague Conference. “The
Election Platform” was published in Russia by the Central Committee of the
Party as a separate leaflet and distributed in 18 localities including the
main working-class centres. Reprinted from the leaflet, it appeared as a
supplement to No. 26 of Sotsial-Demokrat. It was also reprinted by
many local Bolshevik organisations and by the Russian Bureau of the C.C. of
the R.S.D.L.P. in Tiflis. The significance of this document is dealt with
by V. I. Lenin in his article “The Platform of the Reformists and the
Platform of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats”.





[2]
Khodynka Tsar—at Khodynka Field on the outskirts of Moscow,
a carnival was arranged on the occasion of the coronation of Tsar
Nicholas II on May 18, 1896. Criminal negligence on the part of the
authorities led to a tremendous crush in which about 2,000 people lost
their lives and tens of thousands were injured.





[3]
The law of March 4, 1906—temporary regulations providing for
a certain freedom of associations, unions and meetings, but which at the
same time laid down a number of obstacles, and in fact reduced the law to a
scrap of paper. It gave the Minister of the Interior the right not only to
suppress associations and unions, but also to refuse official recognition
to new unions.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Editorial Board of Zvezda









Lenin: To the Editorial Board of Zvezda







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Editorial Board of Zvezda
P.S. To “The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.”[2]




Written: Written on March 13 (26), 1912 

Published:

      Published for the first time in the Fourth Edition of the Collected Works, from the manuscript.

      Sent from Paris to St. Petersburg.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      page 513.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This

       platform[1]

is being sent only for the information of all, particularly the
compilers of platforms. It is time to cease writing
platforms when there already exists one confirmed and published by
the Central Committee. (Leaflets have already been issued about
this in Russia, but as we only possess one of them, we
cannot send it, but are sending you a handwritten copy.) It would be
particularly stupid to draw up a legal platform. Each and
every article about the platform and “its principles” must be
printed with the signature of the author and with the subheading:
An Essay in Comment.  

Incidentally, I would very strongly advise the editors, known
to you, not to approve any platform. For the platform to
be confirmed by anyone except the C.C. is a liquidationist trick. Besides,
in essence, no good will be done by the editors approving a platform. Let
the editors agree with the existing platform or remain silent.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 506 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
This document is a postscript to the authorised copy of the leaflet
“The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.” As the manuscript had no
heading it has been provided by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism of the
Central Committee of the C.P.S.U.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Put Your Cards on the Table









Lenin: Put Your Cards on the Table







V. I.  

      Lenin
Put Your Cards on the Table[1]




Written: Written on March 12 or 13 (25 or 26), 1912 

Published:

      First published on January 21, 1935 in Pravda, No. 21.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 514-520.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Our nobility, ministers, members of the Council of State,
etc., are well acquainted with the language of the Duchy of

Monaco.[2] It is well known who introduced this language to our Council
of State! That is why we were somewhat surprised when we came across the
expression which heads this article, in Zhivoye Dyelo, No. 8.


But the important thing is not the mode of expression. The prestige
among the liquidators of the writer using this expression (L. Martov), the
importance of the subject touched on (“put your cards on the table” in
relation to the election campaign, its principles, tactics, etc.), all this
compels us to take up this slogan, irrespective of how it has been
expressed.  

“Put your cards on the table” is an excellent slogan. And in the
first place, we should like to see it applied to the paper Zhivoye
Dyelo. Put your cards on the table, gentlemen!  

People who are experienced in literary affairs can immediately gauge
the character of a publication by its contributors, even by isolated
expressions which indicate the trend of the publication if that
trend belongs to those in any degree established and well-known. Such
people only need to take one glance at Zhivoye Dyelo to realise
its adherence to the liquidationist trend.  

But it is not so easy for the general public to understand the trend
followed by newspapers, particularly when the subjects in question are not
theoretical principles, but cur rent politics. It is here that it is very
important and appropriate to remember the extremely apt slogan put forward
by L. Martov—“Put your cards on the table”. For it so happens that in
Zhivoye Dyelo the cards are under the table!  
    


 

Those ideas which Zhivoye Dyelo is beginning to pro pound have
been worked out at all systematically and consistently only in the
course of the past two years in Nasha Zarya, Zhizn,
Vozrozhdeniye, and Dyelo Zhizni. A considerable amount of
material has accumulated in this period. What is lacking are
summaries, particularly those produced by the people who for two
years have been en gaged in the elaboration of those ideas. What is lacking
is an open exposition, by those holding liquidationist views, of
the conclusions they have drawn from two years of “work” by Nasha
Zarya.  

It is precisely at this point that the lovers of talks about an
“open workers’ party” turn out to be lovers of a game with
hidden cards. You read, for instance, in the leader appearing in
No. 8, that “the path of the struggle for the general, for general
improvement and basic change in working and living conditions”
lies through “the defence of partial [author’s italics]
rights”. You read in the same issue about some “Petersburg leaders of the
open labour movement”, that they “as previously” will
... “popularise among Social-Democrats those methods for the revival and
creation of a proletarian Social-Democratic party which they have hitherto
defended”.  

Put your cards on the table[ What is this theory of the defence of
partial rights? This theory has not been stated in any properly formulated,
official, openly announced postulates, recognised by groups, or
representatives of groups of workers. Is it, for instance, the theory
propounded to us by V. Levitsky in Nasha Zarya, No. 11 for 1911?
And then, how can the paper’s readers know what methods were
advocated by some unnamed leaders of the open movement, for the “revival
and creation of the party”, which apparently has not been
created, i.e., does not exist? Why not name those leaders, if they are
indeed leaders of an “open” movement, if these words are not merely a
conventional phrase?  

The question of “methods of revival and creation of the
party” is not some incidental question, which can be touched on and
resolved in passing among other political questions of interest to any
newspaper. On the contrary, this is a basic question, It is impossible to
talk about a Party

    

election campaign, about the election tactics of the Party, about Party
candidates, until this question has been resolved; and resolved it must be,
in the most unambiguous, positive manner, for apart from a clear-cut
theoretical answer, a practical decision is required.  

The arguments which we frequently meet with to the effect that during
an election campaign the elements of revival and creation of the Party,
etc., etc., will emerge or rally, are sophistry, and sophistry of the worst
kind. It is sophistry because a party is something organised!
There is not and cannot be an election campaign for the working
class, without decisions, tactics, a platform, and
candidates common to the whole class, or at any rate to its
advanced section.  

Sophistry of this kind, obscure statements made in the name of
anonymous, unknown, and—for the proletariat—elusive open
leaders (who does not call himself a “leader of the open labour
movement”? How many bourgeois shelter behind this name?)—all this
represents a great danger which the worker must be warned against. The
danger is that all this talk about “open action” is meant merely as a
blind while in reality, the worst form of hidden dictatorship
of a group results.  

They inveigh against the “underground” although it is there we see
open decisions which have now become pretty well known thanks to the
bourgeois press (Golos Zemii, Kievskaya Mysl,
Russkoye Slovo, Golos Moskvy, Novoye
Vremya—how many hundreds of thousands of readers have now
been openly informed of quite definite decisions, which mean
genuine unity in the election campaign). It is those who cry out
against the underground or for “open political
activity” who provide an example of people leaving one shore and not
landing on the other. The “old” has been abandoned, but there is only
talk of the “new”.  

We know, and all openly know, that “the methods of revival
and creation” spoken of by Zhivoye Dyelo are merely those which
have been developed and defended in Nasha Zarya. We know of no
others, either stated openly or in any other form. There has been no
attempt whatsoever to discuss these methods, openly or otherwise, by
representatives of the groups, nor has any formal and properly
formulated,

    

official exposition of these methods been made. They use the
words “open”, “openly” in a hundred ways to cover what is
really something completely closed in the full meaning of the word,
something emanating from a circle, from a coterie of writers.  

We know some writers, who are responsible to no one, and are
indistinguishable from the free-lances of the bourgeois press. We know
their speeches about “methods”, about the liquidation of the
“old”.  

We know nothing more, and nobody knows anything more about
open political activity. Here you have a paradox—it seems to be
a paradox, but in reality it is a direct and natural product of
all the conditions of Russian life—that through the
above-mentioned series of the most widespread bourgeois papers, the masses
were informed more accurately, swiftly and directly about “underground”
political activities, decisions, slogans, tactics, etc., than about the
non-existent decisions of “the leaders of the open movement”!


Or maybe someone will assert that an election campaign can be carried
out without formulated decisions? That it is possible for tens and hundreds
of thousands of voters scattered all over the country to determine tactics,
platform, agreements and candidacies without formulated decisions?  

In speaking of “putting cards on the table” Martov touched the
liquidators’ raw spot, and it is impossible to over estimate the effort
that must be made to warn the workers. The masses are offered ... the
thoughts and projects of “leaders of the open movement”, who are not
openly named, that is, the Potresovs, Levitskys, Chatskys, Yezhovs,
and Larins, without formulated decisions, without any definite replies to
practical questions, without the participation of at least tens or hundreds
of advanced workers in the discussion of every sentence, every word of the
important decisions.  

They keep their cards hidden because any attempt to turn them face up
would reveal quite clearly to the workers that all this has nothing to do
with a working-class party or a working-class policy, that it is preaching
by liberal publicists who take a liberal’s attitude to the
workers, who liquidate the old and are powerless to provide any thing new
to replace it.  
 

The danger is great. Under cover of phrases about the “open”
tomorrow, the workers are left not only without an “open”
decision, but without any decision at all on the urgent
practical problems of the present election campaign, of present-day Party
life.  

Let class-conscious workers give some thought to this dangerous
situation.  


P. S.

(1) Please send immediately books on the electoral law of June 3, 1907, or
another copy of the handbook of

1910.[3] Also the electoral law with the comments of a
lawyer. Consult “your people” and send them promptly. Unless I
get them I cannot work on the voter’s

handbook.[4]

(2) I am again receiving Zvezda irregularly. Speak about it again
in your dispatch department. Give my (old) address. It mustn’t be sent so
irregularly.

(3) The article “Fundamentals of a Platform” does not require
the approval of the Editorial Board; publish it with the signature and with
the subheading “An Essay in Comment”; the Board, must not
approve any platform; remember, one clumsy step and a squabble is
unavoidable. Let the Board refrain and keep silent. The approval of the
platform is the job of quite another body.

(4) Send me newspapers, journals, books. It is impossible to work without
them.

(5) Write and tell me exactly when a daily newspaper is likely to come out,
its size, etc.

(6) Fight against Zhivoye Dyelo more energetically—then victory
is guaranteed. Otherwise things will be bad. Don’t be afraid of
polemics. Two or three polemical articles a week are imperative.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

“Put Your Cards on the Table” was written in Paris in
March 1912 for publication in the Bolshevik newspaper Zvezda, but
was not

   

printed at the time. It was sent to the Editorial Board with a covering
letter intended as a postscript.





[2]
The language of the Duchy of Monaco—the language of
gambling.





[3]
This refers to the book The State Duma, Third
Convocation. Handbook, 1910.





[4]
The pamphlet Voter’s Handbook (Our Election Law) was
published in St. Petersburg in 1912.  

Lenin attached peat importance to the publication of the Voter’s
Handbook and compiled and edited the material for this book. In a
letter to the Editorial Board of Zvezda dated April 9 (22), 1912,
he recommended that the 2nd and 3rd chapters of his article “The Campaign
for the Elections to the Fourth Duma” be included

He urged that they issue a “serious work” which “would be of value as an
effective guide to the elections”. However, the Zvezda editors
were able to issue only the first part of the book which dealt with the
electoral law and the regulations concerning the elections to the Duma.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Deputy T. O. Belousov’s Withdrawal from the Social-Democratic Group in the Duma









Lenin: Deputy T. O. Belousov's Withdrawal from the Social-Democratic Group in the Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
Deputy T. O. Belousov’s Withdrawal from the Social-Democratic Group in the Duma




Published:
Zvezda, No. 17 (53), March 13, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 521-526.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We were greatly surprised to find in No. 7 of Zhivoye
Dyelo a reprint from Rech of Mr. Belousov’s acrimonious

statement.[1] There is nothing surprising in the fact that
Rech opened its columns to this statement of the latest turn
coat. It is natural for Rech to print the outcries of a former
Social-Democrat who alleges that the appraisal of his defection given by
the Social-Democratic group in the Duma was prompted by “feelings of
revenge”. But why does Zhivoye Dyelo reprint this? And is it not
strange that the same Zhivoye Dyelo carries an article, “The
Withdrawal of Deputy Belousov”, with bitter-sweet statements to the effect
that “we must not be upset by the cases of desertion which have
occurred.”  

Zhivoye Dyelo does “not deem it proper to go into an
appraisal of Belousov’s step so long as the motives by which he was guided
have not been made public”. Nevertheless, it does attempt it ... but stops
half-way and merely pulls faces at “this kind of desertion”!  

Why this game? Surely it is time for the press to do its duty by openly
discussing facts of political importance.  

The Social-Democratic group in the Duma gave a its unanimous
opinion that the proper procedure for Mr. Belousov would ho immediately
to resign his of flee as deputy since he was elected by the votes of
Social-Democrats and had been a member of the Social-Democratic group in
the Duma for four and a half years.  
 

Mr. Belousov’s answer, printed in Rech, entirely
evades this issue. But the voice of class-conscious workers
must not permit this question to be passed over in
silence. Mr. Belousov may prefer to keep silent, but we have no right
to. What would be the use of the working-class press if it refrained from
discussing facts which are of importance to working-class representation in
the Duma?  

Is it permissible, from the standpoint of the obligations of any
democrat, for a deputy who was elected as a Social-Democrat and
for four and a half years had belonged to the Social-Democratic group in
the Duma to withdraw from the group a few months before the elections,
without at the same time resigning from the Duma? This is a
question of general interest. No democrat who is aware of his obligations
to his constituents—not in the sense of being a “solicitor” on behalf
of local interests, but of the obligations of a politician who in
the elections paraded before all the people under a
definite banner—not a single democrat will deny that this is an
extremely important question of principle.  

Let all workers who read the working-class press and who are interested
in the question of workers’ representation in the State Duma pay the
closest attention to Mr. Belousov’s withdrawal, let them ponder over and
discuss this question. They mast not keep silent. It would be
unworthy of a class-conscious worker to keep silent on an occasion like
this. The workers must learn to stand by their rights, by the
right of all voters to insist that deputies elected by them remain true to
their banner, their right to show these deputies that they dare
not desert, that they cannot do so with impunity.  

Is the Social-Democratic group in the Duma right in insisting that a
deputy who has belonged to it for four and a half years, and who was
elected to the State Duma by Social-Democratic votes, is in duty bound,
now that he has withdrawn from the group, to resign from the Duma as
well? Yes, it is absolutely right! If we are for unity, solidarity,
integrity and loyalty to principles on the part of working-class
representatives, not only in words, but in fact, then we must
voice our opinion, we must, each and every one of us, individually and
collectively, write to

    

Zvezda and to the Duma group (also sending copies of the letters
to the local press) stating that we emphatically and irrevocably condemn
Mr. Belousov’s conduct, that not only every supporter of the working class,
but every democrat as well, must condemn conduct of this
kind. What, indeed, will our “popular representation” be like,
if deputies who were elected under a definite banner and who during
nine-tenths of the Duma sessions professed allegiance to that banner,
declare on the eve of new elections: “I withdraw from the group,
but I retain my mandate, I desire to remain a representative of
the ‘people’”!  

Not so fast, Mr. Turncoat! What people do you now represent?
Surely not the people that elected you as a Social-Democrat!
Not the people who, for nine-tenths of the Duma sessions, saw you
in the ranks of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma! You are not a
representative of the people but a deceiver of the people; for during the
time left to the elections it is impossible, physically
impossible, for the people (even if they enjoyed complete political
liberty) to study from the facts, on the basis of your conduct,
who you are, what you have become, where you
have landed, who or what is attracting you. You are in duty bound
to quit the Duma, otherwise everyone will have a right to treat you as a
political adventurer and a fraud!  

There may be many reasons for a withdrawal. There may be a change of
views so obvious, definite, open, and motivated by universally known facts,
as to prompt a withdrawal which raises no doubts, in which there is nothing
reprehensible or dishonourable. But, surely, it is not an accident that at
present, and only at present, only in this case, has the
Duma group published a protest in the press! The Social-Democratic group
states openly that Mr. Belousov “expressed the desire that the fact of his
withdrawal from the group should not be made public”. In his answer, re
printed by Zhivoye Dyelo, Mr. Belousov is abusive, but he does not
deny the fact. We ask: what must every worker think of a man who, while
leaving the group, expresses the desire to conceal his withdrawal? If this
is not deception, what is?  

The Social-Democratic group states in plain words that it “is quite
unable to gauge the limits of the further evolution

    

of its former member”. Let the reader give some thought to these highly
significant words! The Social-Democratic group in the Duma made no such
grave statements in the case of others who have left it. In the present
case it is, therefore, a vote of complete non-confidence. More than that,
it is a warning to all the voters, to the whole people that no confidence
whatsoever may be placed in this deputy. The Social-Democratic group has
issued this unanimous warning to all. It is now up to every class-conscious
worker to reply that he has heard the warning, has understood it and agrees
with it, that he will not tolerate in silence the creation in Russia, among
people professing to be democrats, of such parliamentary morals (or,
rather, parliamentary immorality) which allow deputies to grab mandates for
personal gain, for the purpose of “freely” manipulating these
spoils. This has been the case in all bourgeois parliaments, and everywhere
the workers who are aware of their historic role are fighting these
practices and, in the process of the struggle, are training their
own working-class members of parliament, men who are not out for mandates,
not out to profit by parliamentary manipulations, but are the trusted
envoys of the working class.  

The workers should not allow themselves to he hood winked by
sophistry. One such piece of sophistry is the statement of Zhivoye
Dyelo: “we do not deem it proper to go into an appraisal of
T. 0. Belousov’s step so long as the motives by which he was guided have
not been made public”.  

To begin with, we read in the statement of the Social-Democratic group
in the Duma: “In justifying his withdrawal, Mr. Belousov explained that as
much as two years ago the group had become utterly alien to him.” Is not
this making a motive public? Is this not plain language? If Zhivoye
Dyelo does not believe the statement of the group, let it say so
outright—let it not twist and squirm, let it not tell us that it does
“not deem it proper to go into”, when, as a matter of fact, the group has
already gone into and made public the motives, or the motive,
which it considers to be the most important.  

Secondly, we read in Mr. Belousov’s reply printed in the Cadet
Rech and the liquidationist Zhivoye Dyelo: “I

    

declare that in its statement the group said absolutely nothing [?!] about
the real motives of my rupture with it. I know that circumstances beyond
its control do not permit the group to make public my differences with it,
which I have set forth both in my oral and written statements”.  

Now, see how it all works out. The group officially makes public what
Mr. Belousov represented as his motive. Mr. Belousov fulminates
(“insinuations, innuendoes”, etc.), but does not deny that this was what
he said; he declares that circumstances beyond the control of the group
do not permit the latter to “make public” something else. (If it
is true that circumstances do not permit it to be made public, why
do you, sir, make a public hint at what cannot be made public?
Does not your method smack of insinuation?) Yet Zhivoye Dyelo
reprints Mr. Belousov’s flagrant and crying untruth and adds, on its own
behalf: “We do not deem it proper to go into ... so long as the
motives ... have not been made public”—the very motives which cannot be
made public because circumstances beyond control “do not permit” it! In
other words, Zhivoye Dyelo will withhold its opinion of
Mr. Belousov’s withdrawal until the publication of things which (according
to the statement of Mr. Belousov himself) cannot be made public.  

Is it not obvious that, instead of exposing the falsehood of
Mr. Belousov’s statement reprinted in its pages, Zhivoye Dyelo
covers up the falsehood?  

There is little more that we can add. One who pleads the
non-publication of things which cannot be made public, thereby gives his
own game away. But it is indispensable and obligatory for everybody who
holds dear working-class representation in the Duma to appraise those
things which have already been made public and are already
known. Mr. Belousov asserts: “My withdrawal from the group has not altered
the tendency of my political and public activity one iota”. These are
hollow words. This is what all renegades say. These words contradict the
statement made by the group. We believe the Social-Democratic group, and
not the turncoat. As regards Mr. Belousov’s “tendency”, we, as well as
most other Marxists, know one thing—that it has been a sharply
liquidationist tendency. Mr. Belousov has gone to such lengths of
liquidationism that the group

    

has finally “liquidated” his connections with the Social-Democratic
movement. All the better for the movement, for the workers, for the cause
of the workers.  

And not only the workers but all democrats must demand Mr. Belousov’s
resignation from the Duma.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
In February 1912, the Menshevik-liquidator T. O. Belousov, deputy to
the Third Duma from Irkutsk Gubernia, notified the Social-Democratic group
of his withdrawal from the group. The group unanimously demanded that
Belousov immediately resign his seat, and published this demand in
Zvezda, No. 12, February 23, 1912. Two days later, Belousov
published a letter in Rech, which also appeared in Zhivoye
Dyelo, in which he criticised the statement of the group and tried to
justify his withdrawal from it. The Irkutsk Stock-Exchange Committee at its
meeting of February 29 (March 13) discussed the question of Belousov’s
resignation from the Duma, and these representatives of commerce and
industry asked him to continue as a member of the Duma. Belousov expressed
his thanks to the Committee “for their support and faith in him”. When he
wrote his article Lenin was unaware of Belousov’s correspondence with the
Irkutsk Stock-Exchange Committee, but on Its publication Zvezda
informed its readers of the contents of this correspondence.  

Following the appearance of Lenin’s article in Zvezda Belousov
sent a new statement to the group full of abuse of the revolutionary
Social-Democrats.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Famine









Lenin: Famine







V. I.  

      Lenin
Famine




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 8, March 17 (30), 1912.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Gazeta text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 527-528.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Again famine—as in the past, in the old, pre-1905,
Russia. Crops may fail anywhere, but only in Russia do they lead
to such grave calamities, to the starvation of millions of peasants. The
present disaster, as even the supporters of the government and the
landowners are compelled to admit, surpasses in extent the famine of 1891.


Thirty million people have been reduced to the direst straits. Peasants
are selling their allotments, their live stock, everything saleable, for
next to nothing. They are selling their girls—a reversion to the worst
conditions of slavery. The national calamity reveals at a glance the true
essence of our allegedly “civilised” social order. In different forms, in
a different setting, and with a different “civilisation”, this system is
the old slavery, it is the slavery of millions of toilers for the
sake of the wealth, luxury and parasitism of the “upper” ten thousand. On
the one hand there is hard labour, always the lot of slaves, and on the
other the absolute indifference of the rich to the fate of the slaves. In
the past, slaves were openly starved to death, women were openly taken into
the seraglios of the masters, slaves were openly tortured. In our day, the
peasants have been robbed—by means of all the tricks and achievements,
all the progress of civilisation—robbed to such an extent that they are
starving, eating goosefoot, eating lumps of dirt in lieu of bread,
suffering from scurvy, and dying in agony. At the same time the Russian
landlords, with Nicholas II at their head, and the Russian capitalists are
raking in money wholesale—the proprietors of places of amusement in the
capital say that business has never been so good. Such barefaced, unbridled
luxury as that now flaunted in the big cities has not been seen for many
years.  
 

Why is it that in Russia alone, of all countries, we still witness
these medieval spells of famine alongside of the progress of modern
civilisation?  Because in the conditions under which the new vampire,
capital, is stealing upon the Russian peasants the latter are bound hand
and foot by the feudal landowners, by the feudal, landowning, tsarist
autocracy. Robbed by the landowner, crushed by the tyranny of officials,
entangled in the net of police restrictions, harassed and persecuted, and
placed under the surveillance of village policemen, priests, and rural
superintendents, the peasants are just as defenceless in the face of the
elements and of capital, as the savages of Africa. Nowadays it is only in
savage countries that one meets with cases of people dying from hunger in
huge numbers as they do in twentieth-century Russia.  

But famine in present-day Russia, after so many boastful speeches by
the tsarist government on the benefits of the new agrarian policy, on the
progress of the farms that have left the village commune, etc., is sure to
teach the peasants a great deal. The famine will destroy millions
of lives, but it will also destroy the last remnants of the savage,
barbarian, slavish faith in the tsar, which has prevented the peasants from
seeing that there must inevitably be a revolutionary fight against the
tsarist monarchy and the landowners. The peasants can find a way out of
their condition only by abolishing the landed estates. Only the overthrow
of the tsarist monarchy, that bulwark of the landlords, can lead to a life
more or less worthy of human beings, to deliverance from starvation and
hopeless poverty.  

It is the duty of every class-conscious worker and every
class-conscious peasant to make this clear. This is our main task in
connection with the famine. The organisation, wherever possible, of
collections among the workers for the starving peasants and the forwarding
of such funds through the Social-Democratic members of the Duma—that, of
course, is also one of the necessary jobs.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Peasantry and the Elections to the Fourth Duma









Lenin: The Peasantry and the Elections to the Fourth Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Peasantry and the Elections to the Fourth Duma




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta, No. 8, March 17 (30), 1912.

      Published according to the Rabochaya Gazeta text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 529-532.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The tsarist government has already begun to “prepare” for
the elections to the Fourth Duma. The rural superintendents, prodded by the
circulars of the governors and the minister, are trying to do their bit,
the police and the Black Hundreds are showing their zeal, the “holy
fathers”, who have been ordered to do their level best for the “Right”
parties, are not letting the grass grow under their feet. It is high time
the peasants also began to think of the elections.  

The elections are of particular importance for the peas ants, but their
position in the elections is a very, difficult one. The peasants are the
least politically organised—both as compared with the workers and as
compared with the liberal, Cadet Party. Without political organisation, the
peasants, who, owing to the conditions under which they live, are the most
disunited section of the population, will be absolutely unable to offer
resistance to the landowners and officials who are now persecuting and
ill-treating them worse than ever before. A group of peasant deputies to
the Fourth Duma, really devoted to the cause of the peasantry,
politically-conscious and capable of defending all its interests,
politically organised and working steadily to extend and strengthen their
ties with the peasants in the villages—such a group could be of immense
service in helping to unite the peasant masses in their struggle for
freedom and for life.  

Can such a group be formed in the Fourth Duma? In the Third Duma, there
was a group of 14 Trudoviks, who championed the democratic
interests of peasants; unfortunately, they all too often became dependent
on the liberals, the Cadets, who are leading the peasants by the nose,
deceiving them with the illusion of “peace” between peasants and

    

landowners, between the peasants and the landowning tsarist
monarchy. Besides, it is a known fact that even the “Right”
peasants in the Third Duma took a more democratic stand than the Cadets on
the question of land. The agrarian bill introduced by forty-three peasant
deputies in the Third Duma proves this incontrovertibly; and the recent
“sally” of Purishkevich against the Right peasant deputies shows that the
Black Hundreds have, in general, every reason to be dissatisfied with these
“Right” peasant deputies.  

Thus the mood of the peasantry, which during the period of the Third
Duma has been taught the cruel lessons of the new agrarian policy,
of the “land misregulation” and of that most terrible calamity—the
famine—warrants the belief that it is fully capable of sending
democratic representatives to the Fourth Duma. The main drawback
is the electoral law! Framed by the landowners for their benefit, and
endorsed by the landowners’ tsar, it provides that the deputies who are to
represent the peasants in the Duma shall be elected not by the peasant
electors bat by the landowners. The landowners can choose which
peasant electors they like to represent the peasants in the Duma! It is
obvious that the landowners will always choose peasants who follow the
Black Hundreds.  

Hence, if the peasants are to elect their own deputies to the
Duma, if they are to elect truly reliable and staunch champions of their
interests, they have only one means. That is to follow the example
of the workers and choose as electors only Party members, class-conscious
and reliable men thoroughly devoted to the peasantry, and no others.  

The working-class Social-Democratic Party resolved at its conference
that already at the meetings of the delegates (who elect the
electors) the workers must decide who is to be elected to
represent them in the Duma. All the other electors must stand down in their
favour, on pain of being boycotted and branded as traitors.  

Let the peasants do the same. Preparations for the elections must be
started at once, and in this connection it is necessary to make their
condition clear to the peasants and wherever possible form village groups,
even if only small ones, of politically-conscious peasants, to conduct the
election campaign. At the meetings of their delegates,

    

before electing the electors, the peasants must decide who is to
be elected to the Duma from the peasants, and all the other peasant
electors must be requested, on pain of being boycotted and branded as
traitors, to turn down any offers made them by the landowners, and
categorically to decline their nomination in favour of the
candidate decided on by the peasants.  

All class-conscious workers, all Social-Democrats, and all true
democrats in general, must lend the peasantry a helping hand in the
elections to the Fourth Duma. May the severe lessons of the famine and of
the plunder of the peasants’ land not have been in vain. May there be a
stronger and more solid group of peasant deputies in the Fourth Duma, a
group of real democrats loyal to the peasantry.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Anonymous Writer in Vorwärts and the State of Affairs in the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: The Anonymous Writer in Vorwärts and the State of Affairs in the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Anonymous Writer in Vorwärts and the State of Affairs in the R.S.D.L.P.[5]




Written: Written in March 1212 

Published:

      First published as a separate pamphlet in German, Paris, 1912.

      Translated from the German.

      Signed: Editorial Board of Sotsial Demokrat, Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P..

      Published according to the pamphlet text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 533-546.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

    

PREFACE

Vorwärts of March 26 carried an official
statement on the Conference of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
and an anonymous article whose author, in line with a resolution adopted by
Russian Social-Democratic groups

abroad,[6] heaps abuse on the Conference. The Conference was the
culmination of the four years’ struggle of the R.S.D.L.P. against the
liquidators, and it was held in spite of all the intrigues of the
liquidators who endeavoured at all costs to hinder the rebuilding of the
Party. The Conference placed the liquidators outside the Party. It is
therefore quite natural that the liquidators and their supporters should
now attack the Conference.  

Since Vorwärts refuses to print our reply to the infamous
lying article of the anonymous writer and continues its campaign in favour
of the liquidators, we are publishing this reply as a separate pamphlet for
the information of the German comrades. It is devoted, mainly, to a brief
statement of the significance, course and results of the fight against the
liquidators.  

Editorial Board of Sotsial-Demokrat, Central
Organ of the R.S.D.L.P. 

P.S. Our pamphlet had already been sent to the printer when we received
Plekhanov’s Diary of a Social-Democrat No. 16 (April 1912). This
issue provides the best proof that Vorwärts was deceived by
the anonymous writer and, in its turn, misled the German workers.  
 

Plekhanov, while definitely stating that he is still no supporter of
the Conference held in January 1912, says in so many words that what the
Bund is convening is not a conference of existing Party
organisations but a “constituent” conference, i.e., one which is
expected to found a new party; that the organisers of the conference follow
a “typical anarchist principle”; that they adopted a
“liquidationist resolution”; that this new conference “is being convened
by liquidators 

 

Some German comrades displayed an amazing naïveté in taking
seriously all those dreadful words like “usurpation”, “coup
d’état”, etc., which tiny groups of Russian Social-Democrats abroad
like to use in their attacks on the Conference of the Russian organisations
of the R.S.D.L.P. Still, we must not forget the saying that a man who has
been condemned to death may abuse his judges for 24 hours.  

The article in the March 26 issue of Vorwärts entitled
“Russian Party Life” reproduces the official statement of the Conference,
which says that the liquidators have been expelled from the Party. It is a
perfectly clear statement:

the Russian organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. have taken the viewpoint that
it is impossible to work jointly with the liquidators. One may, of course,
have a different point of view on this matter, but in that case the author
should have dealt in greater detail with the motives leading to the
decision and with the entire history of the four years’ fight against the
liquidationist trend! The anonymous author of the article in
Vorwärts, however, has not a single word to say on the merits
of this fundamental issue. It is, indeed, a sign of a very low
opinion of the readers when an author completely ignores the substance of
the matter but unburdens himself with melodramatic outpourings. How
helpless, then, is our anonymous author if his reply to the fact that the
Party has broken with the liquidationist trend contains nothing but abuse.


It is only necessary to quote at random several curious passages from
the article of the unknown author. He says that the “trends” or
“groups” represented by Vperyod, Pravda, Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata, etc., did not take part in the Conference. We
should like to ask, what would you say of a German Social-Democrat who
lamented the fact that the “group” or “trend” of Friedberg or of the
Sozialistische Monatshefte was not represented at a Party
congress? We,

    

in our Party, also adhere to the custom that organisations functioning in
Russia are entitled to take part in Party conferences, but not all sorts of
“trends” or “groups” abroad. If such “groups” are at variance with
the Russian organisations, that alone constitutes their severest
condemnation, their death sentence which they have justly deserved. The
history of the Russian political exiles, like that of exiles from all other
countries, abounds in cases of such “trends ” or “groups” having become
divorced from the activity of the Social-Democratic workers in Russia and
dying a natural death.  

Don’t the cries of our author sound absurd when he alleges that the
pro-Party (i.e., anti-liquidationist) Mensheviks who took part in the
Conference have been disavowed even by Plekhanov? The Kiev organisation
could, of course, disavow the foreign “Plekhanovites” (i.e., Plekhanov’s
followers); but no writer abroad, no matter who he is, can “disavow” the
Kiev organisation. The organisations of St. Petersburg, Moscow, Moscow
District, Kazan, Saratov, Tiflis, Baku, Nikolayev, Kiev, Ekaterinoslav,
Wilno, and Dvinsk have “disavowed” all groups abroad which assisted the
liquidators or flirted with them. The outcries and abuse of the
“disavowed” are hardly likely to change anything in this respect.  

Further, surely it is strange for the author to declare in so many
words that the “national” Social-Democratic organisations in Russia (the
Polish, Latvian, and the Bund) and the Transcaucasian Regional Committee
represent “the oldest and strongest organisations of our Russian Party,
those which, to all intents and purposes, constitute the backbone of the
movement”? The problematical existence of the Transcaucasian Regional
Committee is something generally known and was proved by the character of
its representation at the conference in 1908. The Polish and Latvian
organisations, during the first nine years of the R.S.D.L.P. (1898–1907),
led an existence entirely apart, and, in fact, remained isolated from it in
the 1907–11 period as well. The Bund seceded from the Party in 1903 and
remained out side it until 1906 (or, to be more exact, 1907). Nor have its
local branches fully rejoined the Party to this day, as was officially
established at the conference of the R.S.D.L.P.

    

in 1908.[7] Within the Latvian organisation and the Bund at one time
the liquidationist, at another the anti-liquidationist elements gained the
upper hand. As for the Poles, they sided with the Mensheviks in 1903, with
the Bolsheviks in 1905, and in 1912 made an unsuccessful attempt at a
“reconciliation” with the liquidators.  

This latter failure the author diffidently tries to cover up with the
following phrase: “At the beginning a representative of the
Social-Democrats of Poland and Lithuania also attended this
Conference”. Why only at the beginning? We find the explanation
of this diffident silence in the official communiqué of the Bund
about this Conference. There it says in black and white that the
representative of the Poles withdrew from the Conference and submitted a
written statement, which said that it had become impossible for him to
collaborate with the Conference because it revealed a spirit of bias and a
partiality for the liquidators!  

To be sure, it is much easier to heap up hollow and meaningless phrases
about “unity” (with the liquidators?), as the author is fond of doing,
than to study the real essence of the trend of the liquidators, their
refusal to help rebuild the Party, and their work of disrupting the Central
Committee of the Party. And it is all the more easy to indulge in
phrase-mongering if at the same time silence is maintained regarding the
fact that the representative of the Poles refused to work jointly (because
such work would be fruit less), not with the Bolsheviks or Leninists, God
forbid, but with the Bundists and Latvians.  

But what, really, is the origin of liquidationism, and why was it
necessary for the Conference of 1912 to constitute it self the supreme
Party authority and to expel the liquidators?  

The counter-revolution in Russia gave rise to a very pronounced process
of disintegration in the ranks of our Party. Persecutions of unparalleled
fury rained down upon the proletariat. Defection assumed wide proportions
in the ranks of the bourgeoisie. The bourgeois fellow-travellers, who had
naturally joined the proletariat as the leader of our bourgeois revolution
in 1905, began to turn their backs on the Social-Democratic Party. This
defection took two forms—that of liquidationism and of
otzovism. The nucleus of the former was made up of the majority of
Menshevik writers

    

(Potresov, Levitsky, Larin, Martov, Dan, Martynov, etc.). They declared
that the illegal Party had already been liquidated and that any attempt to
revive it was a reactionary utopia. Their slogan was: an open labour
party. Obviously, under the political conditions prevailing in Russia,
where even the party of the liberals, the Cadets, has no legal status, the
formation of an open Social-Democratic working-class party can only remain
wishful thinking. The liquidators repudiated the illegal party, but did not
fulfil their obligation to found a legal party. In the long run, all they
did was to write articles in the legal press in which they ridiculed the
“underground”, declared, in unison with the liberals, that it was dead,
and extolled the virtues of a liberal labour policy. Plekhanov was
absolutely right when he compared the liquidationist Nasha Zarya
to the German Sozialistische Monatshefte. The Menshevik Plekhanov
(to say nothing of the Bolsheviks) declared ruthless war on the
liquidationist trend, refused to contribute to any of their publications
and broke off relations with Martov and Axelrod.

“A man for whom our Party does not exist,” wrote Plekhanov in the Central
Organ about Potresov, “does not himself exist for our Party.” As far back
as December 1908, a Party conference emphatically condemned liquidationism,
which it described as “an attempt on the part of a group of Party
intellectuals to liquidate the existing organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. and
to replace it [note this well!] by a loose association that is legal,
no matter what it costs”. It is obvious that, far from denying that
it is essential to make use of all legal opportunities, the R.S.D.L.P. has
stressed this point in no unmistakable terms. However, an open legal
party in Russia is out of the question, and only opportunist
intellectuals can speak about such a party. The type of our Party
organisation may to a certain extent, of course, be compared to the German
type of Party organisation at the time the Anti-Socialist Law was in
operation: a legally functioning group in Parliament, all sorts of legally
existing workers’ associations, as an indispensable condition, but with the
illegal Party organisation as the foundation.  

The “otzovists” wanted to recall the Social-Democratic group from the
Third Duma, and issued the slogan

    

calling for a boycott of that Duma. The otzovists were joined by a section
of the Bolsheviks, on whom Lenin and others declared implacable war. The
otzovists and their defenders formed the Vperyod group, and the
writers collaborating in the magazine of that name (Maximov, Lunacharsky,
Bogdanov, Alexinsky) have been preaching various forms of the idealistic
philosophy, which they describe by the grand name of “proletarian
philosophy”, and the amalgamation of religion with
socialism. This group has never exerted any perceptible influence, and it
led some sort of existence only by pursuing a policy of compromise with
various impotent groups abroad which had lost all contact with Russia. Such
groups, inevitable in every split, vacillate now to one side, now to the
other; they engage in cheap politics, but represent no definite trend and
their activity expresses itself mainly in petty intrigue. One of these
groups is represented by Trotsky’s Pravda.  

It is clear, of course, to every Marxist that both liquidationism and
otzovism are petty-bourgeois tendencies which attract the bourgeois
fellow-travellers of the Social-Democratic Party. “Peace” or
“conciliation” with these tendencies is something excluded a
priori. The alternative facing the Social-Democratic Party was
either to perish or to rid itself entirely of these tendencies.  

That this theoretical conclusion is correct was proved by the attempt
at conciliation made in January 1910, when the last Plenary Meeting of the
Central Committee declared unanimously, with the liquidators and
otzovists concurring, that neither of these tendencies is
Social-Democratic, But things did not go further than pious
wishes. True, both the liquidators and the otzovists “signed” the
appropriate resolution, but they continued with all their might to conduct
their anti-Party propaganda, and maintained their own organisations. All
through 1910 the fight against both tendencies was steadily growing
sharper. Plekhanov’s words quoted above are dated May 1910, and in
May 1910 Lenin declared on behalf of the Bolsheviks that, since the
liquidators had violated the January resolution there could be no question
of conciliation with

them.[1]

 

The attempt to revive the Central Committee in Russia failed because
the liquidators refused their assistance. A last means of saving the cause
of “unity” was to convene a meeting of the Central Committee abroad. This
attempt was made in May 1911. Of the fifteen members of the Central
Committee, nine were abroad. Eight came to the meeting, but
two liquidators—Igorev, adherent of Golos, and a
Bundist (Ber)—immediately withdrew and thus finally wrecked the Central
Committee of the Party.  

The refusal of the liquidators to participate in the Central Committee
meant their complete secession and the dissolution of the Central
Committee. Only one central body still remained abroad at the time—the
so-called Central Committee Bureau Abroad. The Bolsheviks withdrew from it
when the Central Committee ceased to exist. Only the Poles, Latvians,
Bundists and members of the Golos group (the liquidators abroad)
remained. The reader who is familiar with the article in
Vorwärts can thus see for himself that it was the same outfit
as that of the notorious conference called by the Bund; for the
Transcaucasian Regional Committee had commissioned Golos
supporters to represent it as far back as 1908. Now, let us see what these
“oldest and strongest Russian organisations”—to use the words in which
our anonymous author describes this latest discovery of his—have done?
They could not agree and even dissolved the Bureau Abroad
themselves!  Already in the autumn of 1911 the Central Committee
Bureau Abroad published a statement in which it announced its own
dissolution, and Plekhanov, in his Diary, commented on this in the
following lines: “Requiescat in pace! This Party institution,
which became a weapon in the hands of gentry who strove to liquidate the
Party and therefore exposed the Russian Social-Democratic movement to grave
peril, could render the revolutionary proletariat only one
service: to die in good time”. (The Diary of a Social-Democrat,
Part 2. Supplement to No. 15, p. 1.) This opinion, voiced by Plekhanov, of
whom nobody can say that he is a supporter of the Conference, shows with
sufficient cogency how ridiculous is the pretence of those who shout about
“usurpation” and similar things!  

One more course remained open to bring about the unity of the
Party, viz., to call a conference of Russian organisations.

    

The national organisations of the Poles, the Latvians and the Bundists,
utterly divorced as they were from the work in Russia, could do absolutely
nothing for such a conference.  

On November 26, 1910, Trotsky issued an appeal calling for a
conference. He had the support (in words) of the Vperyod and
Golos groups (the liquidators abroad). But as might have been
foreseen, all the efforts of these groups, owing to their impotence, were
fruitless.  

In June 1911 an appeal signed by the Bolsheviks, “conciliators”
(otherwise known as “pro-Party Bolsheviks”) and the Poles was issued. The
first step in the work was to invite the strongest organisation at the
time, namely, the Kiev organisation. October 1911 saw the
inauguration of the Russian (i. e., working in Russia, set up by the
Russian organisations) Organising Commission for the convening of a
conference. This Commission was formed by the Kiev, Ekaterinoslav, Tiflis,
Baku and Ekaterinburg organisations, which were soon joined by twenty more
organisations. The enlistment of representatives of the Russian
organisations revealed at once the absolute preponderance of the
Bolsheviks (so-called “Leninists”) and the pro-Party Mensheviks.

  Inde ira[2]

of the groups abroad which found themselves “disavowed”, because they had
no followers in Russia.  

In January 1912 the Russian Organising Commission at last convened the
Conference, which all the Russian organisations, without
exception, had been invited to attend. Neither the liquidators, nor the
“non-Russians” (the Poles, the Latvians, and the Bund), nor the
vacillating groups abroad sent delegates. When the Conference was convinced
that the Russian organisations were represented as fully as
possible considering the unprecedentedly difficult conditions under which
the Party worked, when it established that without a central body in Russia
the Party was doomed, that the split abroad was continuing and that the
forthcoming elections to the Fourth Duma demanded the rebuilding of the
Party without any further delay, it had to constitute itself the
supreme authority of the Party, elect a Central Committee and
place the liquidators outside the Party.  
 

Such was the course and the outcome of the protracted fight. The future
will show whether the liquidators will succeed in creating an “open”
party, or whether they will concoct some kind of fiction of a party on the
basis of a rotten compromise.  

Are there any clear and easily verifiable data on the strength of the
liquidators and the pro-Party people, the followers of the Conference, in
Russia itself? Yes, there are. There exist two—and only
two—all-Russia political organs in Russia, to which Marxist writers and
members of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma contribute. These organs
represent trends—not like the sheets abroad, which are full of
abuse, but in the form of open and serious literary work carried on over a
number of years. To be sure, they are not Party organs; they are strictly
legal and keep within the bounds fixed by the regime now existing in
Russia. However, all the most important shades of theoretical
thought in the ranks of the Social-Democratic movement find in these
organs, on the whole, an unquestionably correct expression. Only
two “trends”—liquidationism and anti liquidationism (the
followers of the Conference)—are represented; for no other more
or less serious “trends” exist. All those tiny groups, such as
the Pravda, Vperyod, “pro-Party Bolsheviks” (or
“conciliators”, inclining to conciliatory sentiments), etc., count for
nothing. The views of the liquidators find expression in Russia in the
monthly Nasha Zarya (founded in 1910) and in the weekly
Zhivoye Dyelo (last issue No. 8). The views of the Party people
(Bolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks) find expression in the monthly

Prosveshcheniye[8] (founded in 1911—previously appeared
under the name of Mysl) and in the newspaper Zvezda (last
issue No. 53). There is nothing more erroneous than the view that the
pro-Party Social-Democrats repudiate “legal” activity. The very opposite
is the truth, since in this activity too they are stronger than
the liquidators. The sole undisputed all-Russia open organisation of
legally functioning Social-Democrats is the Social-Democratic group in the
Duma. It is strictly legal and is not directly connected with the
Party. But all its members are known, and it is also known which trend each
of them represents.  
 

The liquidationist Zhivoye Dyelo counts among its permanent
contributors two members of the group in the Duma—Astrakhantsev
and

      Kuznetsov.[3]

In the anti-liquidationist Zvezda there are eight members of the
group—Voronin, Voiloshnikov, Yegorov, Zakharov, Pokrovsky, Predkaln,
Poletayev, and Surkov. Two members of the Duma, Chkheidze and Gegechkori,
contribute to neither of these organs. One (Shurkanov) contributes to both.


The ratio is 2 to 8! These are indeed indisputable, easily verifiable
and clear data enabling us to judge of the relation of forces between the
liquidators and the anti-liquidators.  

This being so it is unnecessary to waste words on the unknown author’s
tall talk to the effect that the overwhelming majority follows the
liquidators, etc. These phrases à la Tartarin de Tarascon
are all too reminiscent of

      Trotsky,[4]

so that it is not worth while discussing them seriously.  

The struggle within the R.S.D.L.P. at times assumes very bitter
forms. Nothing else could be expected under the conditions of life in
exile; nothing else could ever be expect ed in any other country whose lot
it was to endure counter revolution and exile.  

It is nothing but frivolous on the part of anyone to “condemn” these
forms of the struggle in high-sounding phrases, to brush them aside and
merely indulge in philistine and unctuous reflections on the “merits of
unity”. Anyone who seriously intends to study the history of the
R.S.D.L.P. in the trying period 1908–11 will find at his disposal plenty
of illegal and even more of legal literature. This literature contains
highly instructive material on the nature of the trends, the fundamental
significance of the differences, the roots of the fight, the circumstances
and conditions of its development, etc.  
 

No Social-Democratic Party in the world was ever formed—particularly
in the period of bourgeois revolutions—with out a hard struggle and a
number of splits with the bourgeois fellow-travellers of the
proletariat. The same is true of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party, which ever since 1898 has been taking shape, growing, gaining in
strength and becoming tempered, despite all obstacles, in the hard struggle
against such fellow-travellers.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See V. I. Lenin, Collected Works, Vol. 16, “Notes of a
Publicist, II”.—Ed.  

[2]
Hence the ire.—Ed.  

[3]
Until recently there was also Belousov. Now this extreme liquidator—a
Russian Bissolati—has resigned from the group in the Duma. The latter has
publicly warned all the voters of this; and has demanded his resignation
from the Duma. A minor example showing to what lengths consistent
liquidationism goes at times!  —Lenin

[4]
At the time of the Copenhagen Congress Trotsky published in
Vorwärts an anonymous article full of such vile attacks upon
the R.S.D.L.P. that not only Lenin, but Plekhanov and Warski as well, both
members of the Russian delegation, felt obliged to send a written protest
to the Executive Committee.  —Lenin
 



[5]
The pamphlet is a reply to an anonymous, scurrilous article by Trotsky
in Vorwärts against the Prague Conference and its decisions.





[6]
This refers to the anti-Party, slanderous resolution adopted on
March 12 (N. S.), 1912 in Paris at the meeting of the representatives of
the Bund Committee Abroad, the Vperyod group, Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata, Trotsky’s Vienna Pravda, and of the
pro-Party

   

Mensheviks and conciliators. This resolution was adopted in opposition to
the All-Russia (Prague) Party Conference and its decisions. It was
published as a separate leaflet in the Vienna Pravda, and in
Informatsionny Listok No. 4 of the Bund. Lenin, as the
representative of the R.S.D.L.P. on the International Socialist Bureau
wrote an official statement on this and then a letter to Huysmans,
Secretary of the International Socialist Bureau (see pp. 547–50 of this
volume).





[7]
This refers to the resolution, of the Fifth Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. (All-Russia Conference of 1908) “On the Amalgamation of Local
National Organisations”.





[8]
Prosveshcheniye (Enlightenment)—a monthly
theoretical, legal, Bolshevik magazine, published in St. Petersburg from
December 1911 to June 1914. It was founded on Lenin’s initiative to replace
the Moscow Bolshevik magazine Mysl, suppressed by the tsarist
government. The circulation of the new magazine reached 5,000
copies. V. V. Vorovsky, A. I. Ulyanova-Yelizarova, N. K. Krupskaya,
M. S. Olminsky, M. A. Savelyev contributed to its columns. In response to
Lenin’s request, Maxim Gorky assumed the responsibility for the literary
section of the magazine. While in Paris, and later in Cracow and Poronin,
Lenin took an active part in the work of the magazine, edited articles
published in it and regularly corresponded with the members of the
Editorial Board. Among his articles published in the magazine, are the
following:

“Fundamental Problems of the Election Campaign”, “The Three Sources and
Three Component Parts of Marxism”, “Critical Remarks on the National
Question”, “The Right of Nations to Self-Determination”, “Disruption of
Unity Concealed by Shouts for Unity”, “The Methods of Struggle of the
Bourgeois Intellectuals Against the Workers”, and others.  

The magazine exposed the opportunist-liquidators, otzovists,
Trotskyites, and also bourgeois Nationalists, and threw light on the
struggle of the working class in the conditions of a new revolutionary
upsurge; popularised the Bolshevik, slogans in the election campaign to the
Fourth Duma; it attacked revisionism and centrism in the parties of the
Second International and gave news of the international working-class
movement. The magazine played an outstanding role in the international
Marxist education of the advanced workers in Russia.  

On the eve of the First World War the magazine was suppressed by the
tsarist government. Its publication was renewed in the autumn of 1917, but
only one double number appeared; it carried Lenin’s articles “Can the
Bolsheviks Retain State Power?” and “A Review of the Party Programme”










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to Huysmans, Secretary of the International Socialist Bureau









Lenin: A Letter to Huysmans, Secretary of the International Socialist Bureau







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to Huysmans, Secretary of the International Socialist Bureau[1]




Written: Written late in March 1912 

Published:

      Printed on April 12, 1912 in circular No. 7 of the International Socialist Bureau.

      Translated from the French.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the circular text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 547-550.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear Comrade,


In connection with the resolution adopted by a number of groups abroad
and also by the editors of two periodicals published abroad, who claim to
belong to the R.S.D.L.P., I, as representative of the Central Committee of
the R.S.D.L.P., state the following: 

(1) While for several years it was impossible to convene a conference
of the Russian organisations, or to form a Central Committee, or revive the
previously elected Central Committee which might have united those
organisations, the recently held Party Conference succeeded in bringing
together twenty-three Party organisations active in Russia.  

All the reports on this Conference, already delivered to most of the
Russian Party organisations, were received with warm sympathy everywhere,
and all these organisations declared that they would support the Central
Committee elected by the Conference. In the issue of Rabochaya
Gazeta (organ of the Central Committee of the Party) of March 30,
1912, we were already able to publish a number of resolutions adopted by
the organisations in St. Petersburg (Vasilyevsky Ostrov District), Moscow,
Kiev, Samara and Nikolayev expressing warm sympathy with the Conference and
promising to support it and the Central Committee. (Since the publication
of that issue, we have received a similar resolution from Tiflis.) Thus we
cannot attach the least significance to the protests of small groups abroad
which are not backed by any Party organisations in Russia.  

(2) The Conference of Party members active in Russia, which has aroused
the protest of all the small groups abroad,

    

dealt especially with the disorganising activities of the groups abroad and
with the disrupting effect which these groups often have upon the Party
work in Russia. These groups, which are not connected with any organisation
functioning in Russia, taking advantage of the fact that they are not
responsible to anybody, permit themselves to speak in the name of the
Party. This malady, which has gnawed at our Party for a long time, is a
result of Russia’s political regime, which, on the one hand, condemns our
Party to an underground existence and, on the other, compels a great number
of Party functionaries to live abroad in exile.  

The Conference severely condemned the disorganising activities of these
groups, all of them existing abroad and absolutely irresponsible. As far as
the Party is concerned, there is nothing unexpected in the attacks by which
these groups are trying to discredit the Conference that condemned their
conduct.  

(3) Among those who signed the resolution we see the Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata group. This signature speaks volumes, for it
explains the true meaning of the hostile campaign launched against the
Conference by the liquidationist press, as well as by the bourgeois press,
in Russia, and even by some foreign newspapers.  

The point is that in its resolution summarising the results of the
fight among the various trends in our Party in the past four years, the
Conference came out emphatically against the trend represented by Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata. In order that you may be quite clear on this
question, I consider it worth while to quote the resolution in question.


Here it is in full.  

“Whereas: 

“(1) The Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party for nearly four years
has been waging a determined fight against the liquidationist trend, which
was characterised at the conference of the Party in December 1908 as 

“‘an attempt on the part of a group of Party intellectuals
to liquidate the existing organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. and to replace it
at all costs, even at the price of downright renunciation of the programme,
tactics, and traditions of the Party, by a loose association functioning
legally’; 
 

“(2) The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee held in
January 1910, continuing the fight against this trend, unanimously declared
it to be a manifestation of bourgeois influence upon the proletariat and
demanded; as a condition for real Party unity and for the fusion of the
former Bolshevik and Menshevik groups, a complete rupture with
liquidationism and the utter rout of this bourgeois deviation from
socialism; 

“(3) In spite of all Party decisions and in spite of the obligation
assumed by the representatives of all the factions at the Plenary Meeting
held in January 1910, a section of Social-Democrats, grouped around the
magazines Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni, began to defend
openly the trend which the entire Party has recognised as being the product
of bourgeois influence on the proletariat; 

“(4) The former members of the Central Committee—M–l, Yuri, and
Roman, refused not only to join the Central Committee in the spring of
1910, but even to attend a single meeting to co-opt new members, and
bluntly declared that they considered the very existence of the Party
Central Committee to be ‘harmful’; 

“(5) It was precisely after the Plenary Meeting of 1910 that the
above-mentioned chief publications of the liquidators, Nasha Zarya
and Dyelo Zhizni, definitely turned to liquidationism all along
the line, not only ‘belittling [contrary to the decision of the Plenary
Meeting] the importance of the illegal Party’, but openly renouncing it,
declaring that the Party was ‘extinct’, that the Party was already
liquidated, that the idea of reviving the illegal Party was ‘a reactionary
utopia’, using the columns of legally published magazines to heap slander
and abuse on the illegal Party, calling upon the workers to regard the
nuclei of the Party and its hierarchy as ‘dead’, etc.; 

“(6) At a time when throughout Russia the members of the Party,
irrespective of factions, united to promote the immediate task of convening
a Party conference, the liquidators, banded together in entirely
independent small groups, split away from local Party organisations even in
those places where the pro-Party Mensheviks Predominated (in Ekaterinoslav,
Kiev) and finally renounced all Party connections with the local
R.S.D.L.P. organisations; 
 

“The Conference declares that by its conduct the Nasha Zarya
and Dyelo Zhizni group has definitely placed itself outside
the Party.  

“The Conference calls upon all Party members, irrespective of
tendencies and shades of opinion, to combat liquidationism, explain its
great harmfulness to the cause of the emancipation of the working class,
and bend all their efforts to revive and strengthen the illegal Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party.”  

(4) In view of all this, it is quite obvious that it is not a question
of “usurpation”, or a “split”, etc., and that this is not the cause of
the liquidators’ anger. The Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. declared against
the trend which in practice had long kept aloof from every kind of Party
work, which had done its utmost to prevent the re-establishment of the
Central Committee and had turned the last remaining Party institution (the
Central Committee Bureau Abroad) into “a weapon in the hands of gentlemen
who strove to liquidate the Party” (the words of Comrade Plekhanov, who is
not a supporter of the Conference).  

(5) As regards Social-Democratic organisations of the national
minorities, I must put it on record that the R.S.D.L.P. existed as the
R.S.D.L.P. up to 1906 (or, more correctly, up to 1907), before the national
minority organisations joined our Party (the Bund withdrew from the Party
in 1903 and remained outside it until 1906, or, rather, 1907). Hence, in
view of their absence from the Conference, it is the duty of the Central
Committee to start negotiations with these organisations for the purpose of
resuming normal relations with them.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin’s letter was sent to all socialist parties on April 12 (N. S.),
1912 by the International Socialist Bureau with a request that it be
published in their press.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Bloc of the Cadets with the Progressists and its Significance









Lenin: The Bloc of the Cadets with the Progressists and its Significance







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Bloc of the Cadets with the Progressists and its Significance




Published:
Zvezda, No. 23 (59), March 29, 1912.

      Signed: B. K..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 551-555.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Several days ago the newspapers carried the story of a
conference of “independent Progressists” on the one hand, and Cadets on
the other, held in Moscow on March 18.  

A semi-official editorial in the semi-official Cadet Rech (of
March 21) confirms that the conference Was held and gives it its
appraisal. Even a superficial study of this appraisal is sufficient to
enable one to grasp the carefully concealed nature of the matter and to
realise the disguise which serves to keep up appearances.  

The point is that both the Progressists and the Cadets are opposition
groups, and “belong to that section of the opposition which is described
as ‘responsible’”. This is what Rech says. Hence, the
Cadets cannot help admitting that there are two “sections” within the
opposition: one which deserves the title “responsible”, and another which
does not. This admission of the Cadets brings us at once to the main point.


By referring to themselves as the “responsible” opposition, which is
even more often and better described by Milyukov’s celebrated “London”
slogans about an opposition in the possessive

case,[1] the Cadets set themselves and similar groups apart from the
democratic movement, i. e., from the Trudoviks and the workers. Actually,
the term “responsible opposition” is used to describe the
liberal-monarchist bourgeois Centre, which stands midway between democracy
on the one hand and autocracy with the feudal landowners on the other. This
bourgeois liberal-monarchist Centre, which dreads consistent democracy even
more than so-called

    

“reaction”, appeared in the Russian political arena long ago. It has such
a long and instructive history behind it that we must not allow ourselves
to be deceived with regard to its true nature and still less to keep silent
or plead ignorance about it.  

This Centre became quite clearly indicated in the epoch of the decline
of serfdom. During the interval of almost half a century separating that
epoch from 1905, the influence of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in the
Zemstvos, in the municipalities, in the schools, and in the press, grew and
developed to a considerable degree. The crisis of the old regime in 1905
and the open action of all the classes in Russia gave final form to the
liberal-monarchist bourgeois Centre and embodied it in parties representing
its right flank (the Octobrists) and its left flank (the Cadets). The
separation of this Centre from democracy was extremely pronounced and
existed in all fields of public activity and at all “sharp turns” in
1905–07; however, not all the democrats and even not all working-class
democrats have grasped the essence and the meaning of this separation.


The Russian bourgeoisie is tied by thousands of economic threads to the
old landowning nobility and to the old bureaucracy. In addition to this,
the working class of Russia has shown that it is quite independent and
capable of taking care of itself; more, it has shown itself capable of
leading democracy in spite of the liberals. That is why our bourgeoisie has
turned liberal-monarchist and anti-democratic, anti-popular, in fact. That
is why it dreads democracy more than reaction. That is why it is constantly
vacillating, manoeuvring, betraying the former in favour of the
latter. That is why it turned counter-revolutionary after 1905 and obtained
a “nook” for itself in the June Third system. The Octobrists (with the
permission and under the supervision of the Purishkeviches) have become a
government party, while the Cadets have assumed the role of a
tolerated opposition.  

The decision of the Cadet conference to permit blocs with the “Left”
(don’t laugh!) Octobrists, and the present “informal” amalgamation of the
Cadets with the “independent Progressists” are links in a single long
chain, stages in the development of the liberal-monarchist bourgeois
Centre.  
 

But on the eve of the elections the opposition has to cloak itself in
“democratic” attire. The Cadet who is out to catch not only the votes of
the big and middle bourgeoisie, but also those of the democratic petty
bourgeoisie, shop assistants, etc., must stress that he is a member of the
“people’s freedom party”, a “Constitutional-Democrat”, no less! On the
eve of the elections, and for the sake of the elections, the Cadet Party,
actually representing a moderate brand of monarchist liberalism, dresses
itself in democratic finery and throws a veil over its rapprochement with
the “independent Progressists” and “Left” Octobrists.  

This explains the numerous contortions and diplomatic subterfuges we
find in Rech, its high-flown statements that “the people’s
freedom party will not adapt itself to circumstances”, and so on and so
forth. Of course, all this is merely funny. For the entire history of the
Cadet Party is nothing but a mockery of its programme, nothing but
“adaptation” to circumstances in the worst sense of the term. “Given
different political conditions,” writes Rech, “under which the
people’s freedom party would be in a position to voice in the legislative
body its entire programme, the so-called ‘Progressists’ would, of course,
be its antagonists, just as they were at the more acute occasions in the
recent past.”  

That the period of the Second Duma was a more acute occasion—that is
something the Cadet gentlemen will hardly venture to dispute. However, not
only the Progressists, but even elements more to the right, far from
opposing the Cadets, were their allies against the
democrats. Furthermore, in the Third Duma the democrats made statements
that went far beyond any clause in the programme of the Cadets, hence, the
Cadet Party was fully “in a position to voice... its entire
programme” even in a “legislative body” like the Third
Duma! If the Constitutional-Democratic Party refrained from doing so, it is
by no means the “political conditions” that are to blame (don’t say, “I
can’t”, say “I shan’t!”), but the utter alienation of the Cadets from
democracy. The Cadets could have voiced their entire programme,
but it was their own estrangement from democracy, their own
turn to the right that prevented them from doing so.  

The arguments of the Rech editorial on the bloc with the
Progressists is one of the numerous examples of the

    

ease with which the leaders of the Cadet Party, Milyukov and others, can
lead the few “Left” Cadets by the nose. They feed the Left Cadets fine
words, use flashy catchwords about “democracy” to appease the
Kolyubakins, and at the same time actually Conduct their policy in a purely
anti-democratic spirit, in the spirit of a rapprochement, of merging with
the Progressists and Left Octobrists. The Cadet Party has introduced
exactly the same kind of “division of labour” we see among all the
West-European bourgeois parliamentarians: the Kolyubakins and other “Left
Cadets” speak of “liberty” to the people, while in parliament, in its
practical policies, the Cadet Party is entirely at one with the most
moderate liberals.  

“The new group,” write the liquidators referring to the Progressists,
“only seals and aggravates the political amorphism, the political
confusion of the bourgeois voters, which is at the root of the
political helplessness of the Russian bourgeoisie.  

The political helplessness of the Russian bourgeoisie is by no means
caused by the “amorphism” of the “bourgeois voters”—only Left-Cadet
illusion-mongers can think so; it is caused by economic conditions, owing
to which the bourgeoisie is an enemy of the workers and a slave of the
Purishkeviches, a slave who never goes further than grumbling and
expressing pious wishes.  

The Left-Cadet parliamentarians, whether actuated by an idealist theory
of politics or by a vulgar fear of losing the votes of the Left-inclined
voters embittered by the Purishkeviches, may conduct their struggle against
the official Cadet Party by arguments to the effect that it is high time to
listen to reason, recall the programme, take up the cudgels against
amorphism, philistinism, unprincipledness, and so on and so forth, in line
with the usual bourgeois-democratic phrases.  

The Marxists are waging a fight against Cadets of all shades, basing
themselves on the materialist theory of politics, explaining the class
interests of the bourgeoisie as a whole, which impel it towards a
liberal-monarchist programme, towards a rapprochement with the Progressists
and “Left” Octobrists. Our response, therefore, will not be to appeal to
Cadet “reason”, to Cadet “memory”,

    

or to Cadet “principles”, but to explain to the people why the
liberals are becoming counter-revolutionaries and are breaking with
democrats. We shall not exclaim: Will the Cadets listen to reason at last,
will they recall their programme? We shall say: Will the democrats realise,
at last, what a deep gulf separates them from the counter-revolutionary
liberals—the Cadets? Will those whose economic interests do not fetter
them to the landowning nobility, or to the soft jobs and revenues of the
bureaucracy, the bar, etc., realise that, if the people’s freedom is really
dear to them, they must join the working-class democratic movement against
the Rights and against the Constitutional Democratic Party?  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the expression “His Majesty’s Opposition” used by
P. Milyukov, the leader of the Cadet Party. In a speech delivered at a Lord
Mayor’s luncheon in London on June 19 (July 2), 1909, he stated: “As long
as there is a legislative chamber that controls the budget in Russia, the
Russian Opposition, will remain His Majesty’s Opposition, and not an
Opposition to His Majesty”. (Rech, No. 167, June 21 [July 4],
1909.)










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Poor Defence of a Liberal Labour Policy









Lenin: A Poor Defence of a Liberal Labour Policy







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Poor Defence of a Liberal Labour Policy




Published:
Zvezda, No. 24 (60), April 1, 1912.

      Signed: F. L-ko.

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 556-561.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In No. 8 of Zhivoye Dyelo Martov replies to my
article, “An Organ of a Liberal Labour Policy”, published in No. 11 of

   Zvezda.[1]

The question under discussion concerns the fundamental line to be followed
by the workers in the election campaign and, therefore, merits special
attention.  

I described Zhivoye Dyelo as a publication with a
liberal labour policy on the following grounds:

(1) The slogan is sued by Martov and Dan about dislodging reaction from its
positions in the Duma, about wresting the Duma from the
hands of the reactionaries, is not a democratic, but a liberal, slogan. The
struggle against “reaction” in Russia, far from being confined to the
wresting of the Duma from the hands of the reactionaries, is not
even focussed on this.

(2) In speaking of the possibility of achieving this aim, Martov started by
embellishing our electoral law. He declared that “a majority of electors
from the landowners and the first urban curia” is guaranteed “in a
considerable number of gubernia assemblies”. I reminded him of the facts:
that this majority is guaranteed in all gubernia assemblies, that
in 28 out of 53 gubernias a majority (in the assemblies) is guaranteed to
the landowners alone, and that these gubernias send 255 out of a
total of some 440 deputies to the Duma.

(3) In speaking of dislodging reaction from its positions in the Duma,
Martov forgot that the Duma cannot become any thing more than a
landowners’ liberal opposition. The slogan issued by Martov and
Dan implies wresting the landowner from the grip of reaction.

(4) In saying that it is to the interest of the workers that power should
be transferred to the “civilised bourgeoisie”, Martov “forgot” to
mention one thing, namely, that it is to the interest of the liberals to

    

share power with Purishkevich so as to prevent democracy from possessing
“a single weapon”!

(5) In saying that, by growing stronger in the Duma, the Cadets “are
facilitating their advance towards power”, Martov forgot the experience of
1905–06 in Russia, of 1789 and subsequent years in France and of 1911 in
China. This experience tells us that power is transferred to the liberals
(or further to the left) only when democracy triumphs in spite of
the liberals.

(6) Consequently, Martov accepts Marxism only insofar as it is acceptable
to any educated liberal.  

What does Martov reply to these six points? Nothing. He maintains
absolute silence. Why then start a controversy if you have decided to say
nothing?  

While passing over in silence all my arguments, Martov tries
to “catch” me in the following passage from my article: 


   “The practical task that faces us at the elections is
   by no means ‘to dislodge reaction from its positions in the Duma’, but
   to strengthen the forces of democracy in general and of working-class
   democracy in particular. This task may sometimes clash with the ‘task’
   of increasing the number of liberals, but five

      additional[2]

   democrats are more important to us, and more useful to the proletariat,
   than fifty additional liberals.”  


Quoting this passage, Martov (pretending that be has caught “an
adherent of reaction”!) gleefully exclaims:

“I suggest that the readers ponder over this phrase”. I heartily support
this proposal.  

Martov begins to ponder and in so doing arrives at the following
syllogism: The law now provides for a second ballot
everywhere. Consequently, “there may be only one instance” when,
by repulsing fifty liberals, we can elect five democrats. Such an
“instance” involves selling the democratic vote to the Black
Hundreds in exchange for seats in the Duma.  

And Martov rejoices and prances for a full fifty lines, pretending that
he has smitten an abettor of the Black Hundreds and that in smiting F. L-ko
he has also “hit”

W. Frey[4] who “is steering the same course”.  
 

Martov must think his readers are very naïve. And how careless it
was of him to suggest to readers that they should ponder, while he
himself writes without thinking.  

The passage in my article to which Martov took such strong exception
poses two questions for thinking people to answer:

(1) Is it true that five democrats in the Duma are of greater use to the
workers than fifty liberals?

(2) Is it possible for these tasks to “clash” in actual practice?  

The pondering Martov evaded the first question
altogether. That’s a pity. You, Messrs. Liquidators, evade
questions of politics in order to accuse us of partiality for
arithmetic. Fifty liberals in the Duma will give the people a pile of
sham democratic speeches, thereby corrupting the people, and a
few “reforms” which, to begin with, will be confined to
wash-basins, and, secondly, will be held up in the Council of State and so
forth. Five democrats, on the other hand, will use the Duma
rostrum to explain to the people a number of truths of democracy
(and workers will use the rostrum also to explain some of the truths of
socialism). Which is more useful to the proletariat?  

The second question. Is Martov right when he says that the task of
electing five democrats (“additional”, i. e., in addition to those we
have at present) may clash with the task of electing fifty
liberals only in the case which he mentions? For after inviting
the readers to ponder, Martov declares without further ado: “There may be
only one such instance.”  

If Martov is right, the reader ought to accuse me, F. L-ko, either of
discussing an impossible case, or of a secret desire to sell the votes of
the democrats to the Black Hundreds in exchange for seats in the Duma (a
secret and stupid desire, I may add confidentially. Imagine
Purishkevich purchasing the votes of the friends of Petrov the Third and
Voiloshnikov in exchange for electing Voiloshnikov to the Fourth
Duma—that is the sort of probability in which the “pondering” Martov
indulges).  

If there can be another instance of these two tasks clashing,
then Martov is wrong.  

Thus, is another instance of such a clash possible? There could be,
without any doubt, if at the second ballot the democrats,
without entering into an agreement with the liberals, were to fight both
the Rights and the liberals.  
 

That is all there is to

 it.[3]


The pondering Martov, like all the liquidators, is a prisoner of the
idea of two camps, and fails to notice the fight waged by a third camp both
against the first and against the second!  

Immediately following the passage which fills Martov with indignation,
it says in my article: 

“Hence the following conclusion [“hence”, dear Martov!] which Martov
refuses to draw, even though he does pretend to agree that the Cadets are
not democrats, but liberals:

(1) in the five big cities, in the event of a second ballot, agreements are
permissible only with the democrats against the liberals;

(2) at all the ballots and in all the agreements at the
second stage, precedence should be given to agreements with the
democrats against the liberals, and only subsequently may agreements be
concluded with the liberals against the Rights”.  

Martov mentioned only the second point, and declared that I
was not telling the truth, because Martov agrees with that point (it
remains to be seen whether all the liquidators agree!), but he
maintained silence on the first point!  

Once again: either you keep silent or you argue the issue. 

In the event of a second ballot being taken in the five cities, the
general line should be: with the democrats against the
liberals. Agreements with the liberals to be prohibited (for
experience has shown that on the whole there is no danger of a
Black-Hundred victory in any of these cities).  

Are you for or against this sort of prohibition? Give
a straight answer.  

Further, what can be the practical result of this second
ballot? The votes may be divided nearly equally among the three
camps. The issue is then decided by the relative majority. Take the
simplest example: out of a total of 100 votes, the Rights command 33, the
liberals 33, and the democrats 34 votes. The democratic candidate is
elected. One vote

    

less for the Social-Democrat and one vote more for the reactionary may
decide the issue in favour of the Black Hundreds!  

There are two lines of working-class policy: the liberal
line—fear above all the election of a reactionary, therefore surrender
the leadership to the liberal without a fight! The Marxist
line—do not be dismayed by the liberal cries about the danger of a
Black-Hundred victory, but boldly plunge into a “three-cornered”
contest (to use the English expression). As a general rule there is no
danger of the Black Hundreds gaining a victory. And if in exceptional cases
a Black-Hundred candidate is elected, this will be compensated for by the
fact that here and there democrats well be elected!...  

You cannot learn to swim unless you go into the water. There can be no
contest in which all the chances are known beforehand. If the workers allow
themselves to be frightened by the liberal cries about the danger of a
Black-Hundred victory, they will never learn to fight in a
“three-cornered” contest. Everywhere in the world the camp of reaction
and the liberal camp rallied their forces earlier and were better organised
(with the aid of reactionary laws, of course) than the workers. Everywhere
in the world the liberals tell the workers the very same things that Martov
is repeating.  

Now, for one more, and final, step to show the “pondering” Martov
what it means to ponder over matters.  

At the second ballot in the five cities, agreements with the liberals
are prohibited. In other cases of a second ballot such agreements are not
prohibited. Does this mean that they will be concluded as a rule?
It seems not, doesn’t it?  

If there is no agreement, may it not happen that in
each case of a second ballot the votes will be divided nearly
equally among the three camps?  

Apparently it may be, if one really “ponders” over it.  

From this follows the conclusion that there are two lines of
working-class policy.  

The liberal labour policy: there is a swing to the left in the country;
“therefore” ... fear above all the danger of a Black-Hundred victory; the
slogan is to dislodge reaction from its positions in the Duma; but only the
liberals can dislodge it from its positions in the Duma; threfore, you must

    

not “threaten” the liberals, or “extort” seats from them—surely it is
unbecoming for “cultured” workers to extort any thing from such nice
people as the liberals!—but be prepared to make every kind of concession
in concluding agreements with the liberals, and steer clear of a
“three-cornered” contest.  

The Marxist working-class policy: there is a swing to the left in the
country; therefore, do not believe the liberal fables about the danger of a
Black-Hundred victory; when entering into agreements with the liberals, you
must by all means threaten them and extort from them seats in the
Duma; and in order to lend weight to your threats, worker comrades, don’t
fear a “three-cornered” contest; boldly engage in such a fight, and
expose the counter-revolutionary liberals to the people; to be sure,
wherever there is a fight, there is a possibility of defeat, here and there
a reactionary may be elected, but, on the other hand, here and there
democrats will be elected; it is better for five additional democrats
to get into the Duma than for fifty additional liberals; as a general rule,
the Black Hundreds will not win in the elections, for the Purishkeviches
are too well known, and the liberals are purposely trying to scare
the people by magnifying the danger of a Black-Hundred victory in order to
secure the leadership for themselves (although the Maklakovs are almost as
black as the Black Hundreds) and ward off the danger threatening them from
the “left”.  

To sum up: he made no reply to a single point of the six I brought up
in dealing with the liberal labour policy. He ignored the question of
prohibiting blocs with the liberals in the five cities. He gave no thought
to three-cornered election fights at the second ballot, although
he had promised to “ponder”. On the other hand, there are two things he
did accomplish:

(1) he defended the liberals from “threats”, and

(2) accused Voiloshnikov’s friends of plotting with Purishkevich to sell
votes to him on condition that Purishkevich, in exchange, should
help elect Voiloshnikovs to the Fourth Duma!!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 487–90 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
There was a misprint in the article: “strong” instead of
   “additional”. Martov might have easily noticed that it was absurd to
   juxtapose “strong” democrats to “additional” liberals. But that is
   not the point at issue.  —Lenin

[3]
The following “terrible” suspicion occurs to me: is it possible that
Martov’s whole article is to be explained by his not knowing that,
according to the law, the second ballot represents new elections and not a
contest between two candidates? If this is the case, it will be necessary,
before “fighting reaction” in the elections, to light ignorance of the
electoral law!  —Lenin
 



[4]
F. L–ko, W. Fey—Lenin’s pseudonyms.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Second Ballot in Russia and the Tasks of the Working Class









Lenin: The Second Ballot in Russia and the Tasks of the Working Class







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Second Ballot in Russia and the Tasks of the Working Class




Published:
Zvezda, No. 25 (61), April 3, 1912.

      Signed: M. Sh..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 562-568.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

More and more frequently we corns across examples showing
how widespread is the wrong idea people have of the second ballot under our
electoral law. Dan, writing in No. 1–2 of Nasha Zarya, said that
our tactics at the second ballot must be the same as in Western
Europe. Martov, writing in No. 8 of Zhivoye Dyelo, directly
pointed to the “German workers” as an example for the Russian workers to
follow in their tactics at the second ballot. A special article dealing
with the second ballot, recently published by Trotsky, is based on the same
error.  

The error is repeated so frequently, that we cannot help wondering
whether the “general leaning” in certain quarters to the same error of
fact is not due to the unwillingness to appreciate the tasks of
working-class democracy in the fight against the Cadets.  

In Russia, the law of June 3, 1907 does not provide for a
second ballot of the German type; in fact, it does not provide for
any “second ballot” at all in the strict sense of the term; it only
provides for supplementary or new elections. The second ballot in Germany
is a choice between two candidates only, those who have received the
highest number of votes in the first elections. In the case of the Germans,
the second ballot decides solely which of the two candidates receiving the
highest number of votes is to be elected.  

There is nothing of the sort in Russia. According to our law, any
number of any candidates may run for election in the second
ballot. Strictly speaking, it is not a second ballot, but new or
supplementary elections. Therefore, all references to the German example
are quite wrong!  
 

The main article of the law dealing with the second ballot is
Article 106 of the Regulations governing the elections. Here we read:
“Delegates of the preliminary assemblies and, likewise, electors elected
at the assemblies of voters, are recognised as such if they have received
more than half the votes cast at the assembly”.  

Here we have the clearly expressed requirement of an absolute majority
in the first round of the elections. Further, the same article states that
in cases where no absolute majority has been obtained, “supplementary
elections are to be held for the remaining vacancies” (that is to say, for
all the electors except those who have been elected by an absolute
majority).  

Who is regarded as elected at the “supplementary elections”? “Those
who obtained a relative majority of the votes,” it is stated at the end of
this article, “are to be regarded as elected.”  

The same is stipulated in the law of June 3, 1907 with regard to the
second ballot in the case of direct elections, i.e., in the cities
of St. Petersburg, Moscow, Odessa, Kiev, and Riga. Only instead of using
the expression “a relative majority of the votes”, Article 140 speaks of
“the greatest number of votes”. Finally, provision is also made for the
second ballot at the elections of members of the Duma by gubernia electoral
assemblies—in case none of the candidates received “more than half of
the votes cast”, i.e., an absolute majority. When a second ballot is taken
“those who have received a relative majority of the votes cast are
regarded as elected”. (Article 350.)  

Consequently, our electoral law does not provide for any thing like the
second ballot in Germany. In this connection there can be nothing more
erroneous than to refer to the example and conduct of the German
workers. In the official edition of the Regulations Governing the Elections
to the State Duma, issued by the Ministry of the Interior, St. Petersburg,
1912, it says in Clause 14 of the interpretations of Article 106: “Persons
who took no part in the first round of the elections may also be permitted
to participate in the supplementary elections”. It is obvious that this
refers not only to new voters, but also to new candidates. The law permits
the nomination for the second

    

ballot of a candidate who did not stand in the first elections.  

The question is, what political conclusions for our election tactics
should be drawn from this feature of the June Third election regulations.


The first, fundamental, and most general conclusion is the, following:
our law, unlike the German law, provides a wider field for
election agreements at the second ballot. In Germany it can be only a
question of choosing the lesser evil: those defeated at the first
elections (and they are all those excluded from the second ballot) can have
no other aim. In Russia, if on the one hand in the primary elections there
were no victors, on the other hand there would, strictly speaking, be no
defeated contestants, for each may try his luck a second time, in
a new contest, by concluding agreements of various kinds with one ally or
another.  

In Germany, for one thing, the working—class candidate cannot derive
any benefit for himself, i.e., any direct benefit, from the fight
between the Right parties and the bourgeois opposition parties. He may
support the liberal opposition against the Rights if both are of
practically equal strength; but he cannot take advantage of a tie between
his liberal and reactionary opponent to win the victory
himself. In Russia the latter is possible.  

Hence the second conclusion. The Russian electoral law, unlike the
German law, provides working-class democracy with a wider field
for fighting the liberals at the second ballot. In Russia, as in
most West-European countries, two wings (or two groups of parties) of the
ruling propertied classes predominate in the elections: “conservatives”
and liberals, the Black Hundreds and the “opposition”. The workers are
fighting both groups of parties. The backward sections of the
people, who at first awaken to the struggle against feudalism and
absolutism, do not immediately realise their tasks in the struggle against
capital, and usually follow the liberals for rather a long time. That is
why the working-class parties, when their influence is growing, as a rule
win over more followers from the liberals than from the Rights. Hence the
usual hypocritical wailings of the “Cadets” of all countries
about the working—class parties allegedly playing into the hands of the
reactionaries,

    

weakening the “general forces of progress”, and so on and so forth.  

In Germany, the working-class candidate can measure strength with a
liberal at the second ballot only in instances when the Rights have been
defeated in the first round of the elections, and are excluded from the
second ballot. In Russia a working-class candidate can, and therefore
should? compete in the second ballot against a liberal whenever
the Right has obtained a smaller number of votes than the liberal in the
first elections. In other words: when a second ballot is taken in Germany,
the working-class candidate can meet the liberal only “in single combat”;
in Russia, however, it is possible for the second ballot also to be a
“three-cornered contest”, i. e., one in which Right, liberal, and
working-class candidates participate. In cases of a second ballot in
Russia, therefore, there may occur more instances when the mass of
the workers will be interested in securing the election of their own
candidate.  

We have now come to the third conclusion. In Russia, bearing in mind
the present political divisions, a particularly wide field is open at the
second ballot for the so-called Left bloc in all the curias and at
all stages where the liberals are stronger than the reactionaries (the
latter including, of course, all the Rights, the Nationalists, and the
Octobrists, i. e., all the government parties without exception). Wherever
the liberals at the first elections prove stronger than the reactionaries,
and the working-class candidates weaker than the liberals, it is the
duty of the workers, both from the viewpoint of the political task
of organising the forces of democracy in general, and from the viewpoint of
electing working-class candidates to the Duma, to make common cause with
bourgeois democracy (Narodniks, Trudoviks, etc.) against the
liberals.  

Are such instances likely to occur often?  

Not very often in the gubernia electoral assemblies; here, in most
cases, the liberals will be weaker than the reactionaries, and it will,
therefore, be necessary to form a bloc of all the opposition forces in
order to defeat the reactionaries.  

In the peasant curia, the political divisions are less definite and
distinct; here the tyranny of the police is felt more

    

acutely than anywhere else; here delegates, electors, and even candidates
for election to the Duma, are most keenly aware of the necessity to
“conceal” their true “face”; there are very few worker candidates so
far as party affiliation is concerned. The political task to be performed
in this curia is, unquestionably, to organise the forces of democracy and
combat the influence and prejudices of the liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie. As for the second ballot, it is difficult to draw any definite
conclusions regarding the frequency of one contingency or another, or even
regarding the number of actual cases of a second ballot.  

In the landowner and the first urban curias the role of democrats in
general and of working-class democrats in particular is too insignificant
to be dwelt on at all.  

There remains the second urban curia. Here there are quite a few
workers and voters close to the workers: shop assistants, worker tenants,
pensioners, etc. Here there is at least something resembling a political
press and some thing in the nature of meetings. In brief, this is the
principal field for a second ballot, with the voters directly
participating. Now, how do matters in this curia stand with regard to the
party alignment of the voters?  

A fairly exact, even if indirect, answer to this question is provided
by data on the party allegiance of the electors of the second urban curia
in the elections to the Third State Duma. According to the returns
published in the Cadet Rech (1907, No. 241) for 4,897 electors out
of a total of 5,161 in 51 gubernias of European Russia, the 533 electors in
the second urban curia were divided by parties as follows: opposition
parties 405 (100 “Lefts”, 209 Cadets, and 96 Progressists), Right parties
101 (17 moderates, 19 Octobrists and 65 Rights), 21 independents and 6
whose party affiliation was unknown. The three main groups of parties
contending in the present elections are clearly indicated here: 100
democrats, 305 liberals, 101 Rights.  

The liberals are thus more than three times as strong as the Rights,
whose strength is practically equal to that of the democrats. As a
rule, therefore, there can obviously be no question here of any danger
of a Black-Hundred victory. It is further obvious that the main
task of working-class

    

democrats in this curia is to fight the liberals. At the present juncture
particularly, when, as even the liberals, Octobrists and Purishkeviches
admit, there is undoubtedly a general swing to the left in the country,
this fight must be put in the forefront. Obviously, in the first stage of
the elections the working-class candidates must wage an absolutely
independent struggle, putting forward a hundred per cent working-class
election lists. In the second stage, at the Second ballot, it will in
the majority of cases be a question of a fight of democrats against
liberals.  

In order to conduct that struggle it will be necessary for the
Marxists at the second ballot to make common cause with all
democrats (i.e., also with the bourgeois democrats, Narodniks, Trudoviks,
etc.) against the liberals. The entire behaviour of the notorious
“responsible opposition”, the Cadets, in the Third Duma, the entire
policy and tactics of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, on the one hand,
and on the other, the present movement among the shop assist ants, provide
a particularly favourable ground for this fight by the democrats, organised
by the workers, against the liberals, i.e., against the Cadet
Party. Inasmuch as the second urban curia is the one in which there will be
the greatest number of cases of a second ballot, the principal
line to be pursued by the workers at the second ballot is precisely this:
with the democrats against the Rights and against the
liberals.  

In the final analysis, we come to the conclusion that the liquidators
and their defenders are committing both a “technical” and a political
mistake on the question of the second ballot. “Technically”, they are
committing a mistake by confusing the German second ballot with the Russian
“supplementary” or new elections. Politically, they are committing a
mistake by sinking down to a liberal labour policy, by confining themselves
to general phrases about supporting the opposition against the
flights. Actually, the general task of the Marxists in present-day Russia,
the task of organising the workers as the vanguard of democracy against
both the Rights and the counter-revolutionary liberals, as well as
our special position in the principal “second ballot” curia, demand a
different slogan. In cases of a second ballot, primarily in the second
urban curia, common cause is

    

to be made more often with all democrats against the liberals and against
the Rights; and only subsequently it may be necessary at the second ballot
to join the general opposition bloc against the reactionaries.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberalism and Democracy









Lenin: Liberalism and Democracy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberalism and Democracy




Published:
Zvezda, Nos. 27 (63) and 32 (68), April 8, and April 19, 1912.

      Signed: P.P..

      Published according to the Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1974],

      Moscow,

      Volume 17,

      pages 569-578.

      Translated: Dora Cox

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

The Trudovik conference of which we have already spoken and
which was reported in several newspapers (among others, in Rech of
March 28), is of special importance from the standpoint of making clear
party alignments in the elections to the Fourth Duma. After the bloc of
moderate liberals (the Cadets and “independent Progressists”) and after
the resolutions of the working-class democrats about their tactics in the
elections, it only remained for the Trudoviks to “define themselves” in
order to complete the picture.  

By now all classes of Russian society, as represented by all
political parties of any importance and worthy of attention, have defined
their position in the election campaign. For the bourgeois parties,
particularly those that have found a “permanent” place for themselves
under the June Third regime, the elections are primarily an occasion for an
intensified publicity drive, but for working-class democrats, for Marxists,
the main task in the election campaign is to explain to the people
the nature of the various political parties, what views
are advocated and who advocates them, what are the real and vital
interests behind each party, which classes of society shelter
behind each party label.  

From this point of view we shall have to deal with the conference of
the Trudoviks repeatedly, and in the interests of the working
class, our special attention must be devoted to the fundamental question
indicated above. The Black Hundreds, the Right parties, and the
liberals (the Cadets) all ignore this question, or else they
misinterpret its presentation and solution in a thousand ways, not be cause
of any lack of understanding or because of the malice

    

of individuals, but because the class interests of the land owners
and the bourgeoisie compel them to misrepresent the essence of the
peasants’ and workers’ parties.  

On the other hand, the Trudoviks, a mainly peasant party, do not try to
evade the question, say, of what distinguishes liberalism from democracy,
but their answer to it is a wrong one. Nor is it possible to give a proper
answer to the question when approached from the peasant point of view,
i.e., that of the small proprietor. It is only from the point of view of
the wage-earner that the question is settled—this is borne out
not only by theory and science, but also by the experience of all
European countries, by the entire economic and political history of the
European parties, particularly in the nineteenth century.  

Observe, for one thing, what the liberals say of the Trudoviks and what
the Trudoviks say of themselves. The liberal Rech, chief organ of
the Cadet Party, says that the Trudoviks suffered most from the change in
the electoral law effected on June 3, 1907, and that their tactics “cannot
in any way differ perceptibly” from the tactics of the Cadets; for the
Cadets, if you please, can “repeat” and do repeat practically everything
said by the Trudoviks. “Lastly,” writes Rech, “election
agreements with the Trudoviks may perhaps turn out to be necessary in
isolated places only, and in few such places at that.”  

Consider this statement, and you will see that it is the statement of a
liberal bourgeois, whom the law of June 3 deprived of his leading position
(which he enjoyed under the law of December 11,

1905[2]), but at the same time gave him a by no means insignificant
place in the opposition, segregated from democracy. You don’t
matter much, Messrs. Trudoviks, and we are not taking you seriously—that
is what the Rech statement really amounts to. Why do they not
matter? Because the law of June 3 has made them powerless in the elections.


From the standpoint of any democrat, and particularly from the
standpoint of any worker, the parties that matter are not those that enjoy
a monopoly or privileges under the given electoral law, but those that
represent the large masses of the population, especially of the toiling and
exploited population. As it happens, however, it is precisely

    

from these masses that the law of June 3 protects the liberal
bourgeois—and that is why they do not matter to him. The liberal lawyers
and journalists want seats in the Duma, the liberal bourgeois want to share
power with the Purishkeviches, that is what they really want. As for the
development of the independent political thought of the peasant masses, the
development of their initiative as a class, this is something the liberal
does not want; more, it constitutes an outright danger to him. The liberals
need voters, they need a crowd that would trust and follow them (in order
to compel the Purishkeviches to make room), but they fear the political
independence of the crowd.  

Why, then, are they not afraid of the Trudoviks who, as an
“independent” party particularly close to the peasantry, i.e., to the
vast majority of the population, are not liberals but
representatives of bourgeois democracy? For the very reason that the
Trudoviks are democrats insufficiently independent in their
relations with the liberals, lacking the ability to fight the
liberals for influence over the masses! We must not tire of dwelling
hundreds of times on this most important problem of contemporary politics
in Russia if we take these politics seriously, conscientiously, as a matter
of principle, and not in the fraudulent (or liberal) sense of chasing after
Duma seats. As long as Russia’s political transformation along democratic
lines remains the historical task of the present epoch, the entire
crux of the problem of this transformation will inevitably consist in
the necessity for very broad, the broadest possible, masses of the
population to become conscious democrats, i.e., emphatic, consistent and
determined opponents of liberal narrow-mindedness, half-heartedness and
cowardice. And no worker can claim to be a class-conscious worker if he has
not realised that he cannot be a consistent fighter for the abolition of
wage slavery, unless he is fully aware of and works for this
political task of our times.  

When the liberals, the Cadets, say that their “tactics” do not in any
way “differ perceptibly” from Trudovik tactics, it is a case of
unmitigated ignorance or shameless lying. The political history of Russia
for the past decade teems with hundreds and thousands of refutations of
this lie. Russia’s most recent history provides proof based on our

    

Russian experience showing that the difference between the
liberals and the peasant democrats is immeasurably deeper than any question
of “tactics”; this difference has always and invariably come to the
surface during the past, say, eight years, despite the fact that the course
of events has often given rise to the most drastic changes in “tactics”;
this difference goes much deeper than any “programmes”, for a programme
expresses simply what the advanced representatives of a given class
think of the tasks and position of their class. Not the opinions
of advanced individuals, but the actions of the millions, have shown us the
root difference between the present-day economic and political
condition of the liberal bourgeoisie on the one hand, and the
bourgeois-democratic peasantry on the other. Hence the fundamental
difference between their class interests in regard to the “forces
in control” of Russia today. Hence the fundamental difference between them
on all points of departure and in the entire scope of political activity.


Both the liberal and the Trudovik may be under the illusion that they
hold the same political opinions, for both are “against
Purishkevich”. But probe just a little below these opinions of
political leaders, down to the class position of the masses, and
you will find that in real life the liberal bourgeoisie shares
political privileges with the Purishkeviches, and their controversy is
only over the question whether the Purishkeviches are to hold
two-thirds of these privileges and the Milyukovs one third, or the other
way round. Take “real life”, take the economic position of the
present-day Russian peasantry as a stratum of small proprietors in
agriculture, and you are sure to find that it is by no means a question of
dividing political privileges, by no means a question of political
privileges at all, but that even the word “life” must be written
in inverted commas, for the very existence of the Purishkeviches means
death from starvation for millions of such petty proprietors.


Modern Russia has two bourgeoisies. One is the very narrow stratum of
ripe and overripe capitalists who, in the person of the Octobrists and
Cadets, are actually concerned with sharing the present political
power, the present political privileges, with the Purishkeviches. The word
“present” in this case be must be given a rather broad meaning, so as to

    

include, for instance, the privileges which the law of June 3, 1907,
safeguards today, and the privileges which the law of December 11, 1905,
safeguarded yesterday.  

The other bourgeoisie is the very wide stratum of petty and in part
medium proprietors, who have not yet matured but are energetically
endeavouring to do so. They are mostly peasants who in the present era of
Russian history are by no means actually confronted with the
question of privileges, but with the question of how not to starve to death
because of the Purishkeviches. This is a question that concerns
the very foundations of the power of the Purishkeviches in general, the
sources of all power held by the Purishkeviches.  

The entire history of Russia’s political emancipation centres around
the struggle between these two bourgeois tendencies. Behind all the
thousands upon thousands of fine words about liberty and equality, about
“equalitarian” distribution of the land and “Narodism”, is the struggle
between these bourgeois tendencies, The result of the struggle will
inevitably be a Russia that is completely bourgeois and painted entirely or
predominantly in one of these two “colours”. It is clear that this
struggle is by no means with out significance for the wage-worker; quite
the contrary, if he is a class-conscious wage-worker he most vigorously
interferes in this fight, doing his utmost to get the peasant to follow him
and not follow the liberal.  

This also underlies the problems which the Trudovik conference could
not help touching upon. We shall deal with those in greater detail in later
articles. For the time being, we shall confine ourselves to a brief summary
of what has been said. The question of the Trudoviks and the Cadets is one
of the most important questions of Russia’s political emancipation. There
is nothing more banal than to reduce this question to one of the
“strength” of this or that party in the June Third system or of the
“advantage” to be derived from different agreements in elections based on
this system. On the contrary, the particular questions of agreements,
second ballots, etc., can, from the standpoint of the wage-worker, be
settled correctly only if the class roots of both parties, the
bourgeois democrats (Trudoviks) and the bourgeois liberals (Cadets,
“Progressists”, etc.), have been understood.  
    

II

The conference of the Trudoviks raised a number of highly
interesting and instructive political questions. We are now in possession
of a splendid commentary on its decisions—Mr. V. Vodovozov’s article on
“The Election Programme of the Trudovik Group” in No. 13 of the
St. Petersburg weekly Zaprosy

Zhizni,[3] whose closest contributors include Messrs. Kovalevsky
and Blank. Mr. Vodovozov’s commentary is “splendid”, not from our point
of view, of course, but because it correctly represents the views and
aspirations of the Trudoviks. Everyone interested in the role of the
democratic social forces in Russia must pay due attention to
Mr. Vodovozov’s article.  


   “The Trudovik group,” he writes, “proceeds from the
   belief that at the present historical moment the interests of the
   peasantry, the working class and the working intelligentsia, far from
   contradicting each other, are practically identical; therefore, one party
   could fully take care of the interests of these three classes of
   society. But, owing to the force of historical conditions, the working
   class found its representation in the Social-Democratic Party, and that is
   why the Trudovik group necessarily had to become primarily the political
   representative of the peasantry. And such it has been.”  


Here we see at a glance the fundamental mistake shared by all the
Narodniks, including those who are the most “left”. They proceed from a
“belief” which contradicts all the maxims of economic science and the
entire experience of countries which have gone through epochs resembling
the present epoch in Russia. They cling to these “beliefs” even when the
experience of Russian history compels them to admit that in our country,
too, these beliefs are refuted by the course of events.  

The Trudoviks’ second phrase contradicts their first. If one party
could have taken care of the interests both of the working class and the
peasantry, what could have given rise to a separate party of the working
class? Since such a party was created and became consolidated during a
particularly important and particularly crucial period of Russian history
(1905), and since even the Trudoviks have to admit that the working class
“found” its party “owing to the force of historical conditions”, this,
consequently, means that

    

the “beliefs” of the Trudoviks have been related by “the force
of historical conditions”.  

If the Trudoviks have turned out to be a party of the
peasantry, although, according to their own beliefs, they ought not to be a
party only of the peasantry, their beliefs must be wrong, must be an
illusion. And it is the same sort of illusion as the one entertained by
all bourgeois-democratic parties of Europe in the period of the
struggle against feudalism and absolutism. In one form or another, the idea
of a “non-class party” dominated, but the “force of historical
conditions” invariably refuted this idea and shattered this illusion. The
attempts or efforts to include different classes in “one party” have
always been characteristic of bourgeois democracy at the time when it had
to look for its main enemy in the past, not in the future—when it saw its
enemy in the feudal lords, not in the proletariat.  

The claim to “encompass” various classes makes the Trudoviks akin to
the Cadets. The latter, too, want to be a party standing above
classes, they also insist that the interests of the working class, the
peasantry and the working intelligentsia are “practically identical”. And
when they speak of the working intelligentsia, they include the Maklakovs
too! The class-conscious workers will always combat the various concepts of
parties that stand above classes, against every attempt to gloss over the
gulf between the class of wage-workers and the class of the petty
proprietors.  

The Trudoviks resemble the Cadets in sharing bourgeois illusions as to
the possibility of fusing the different classes. The difference between
them lies in the class to which the particular party will be drawn
under the influence of events, against the wishes of that party and
sometimes in spite of the ideas entertained by some of its members. The
Trudoviks have been taught by history to keep closer to the truth, to call
themselves a peasant party. The Cadets continue to call themselves
democrats, although in actual fact they are counter-revolutionary liberals.


Unfortunately, the Trudoviks are far from being aware of the latter
truth—so much so that in the official decisions of their conference they
failed to give any characterisation of the Cadets. All we read in
the official resolutions is that agreements should be concluded “in
the first place
    

with the Social-Democrats, and subsequently with the
Constitutional-Democrats”. This is insufficient. The question of election
agreements can be settled correctly, consistently, and in a principled
manner, only if there exists complete clarity as to the class
nature of the parties concluding the agreement, as to what constitutes
their fundamental divergence, and on what points their interests
temporarily coincide.  

These matters are dealt with only in Mr. Vodovozov’s
commentary. Rech, which noted and discussed that article, took
care to leave its readers entirely in the dark with regard to
these very points. In our opinion, these points ought to be dwelt
on with all due attention.  

“The Trudovik group,” writes Mr. Vodovozov, “is fully aware that the
present regime in Russia is a regime of absolutism and arbitrary rule; that
is why it has emphatically disapproved of all the actions and steps taken
by the Constitutional-Democratic Party to proclaim urbi et

      orbi[1]

that in Russia we have a constitutional regime, and why it has assumed a
negative attitude to the solemn receptions given to the representatives of
the British and French Parliaments as a demonstration of Russian
constitutionalism. The Trudovik group has never doubted that only a radical
and profound revolution in the entire political and social system can lead
Russia on to the highroad of proper and sound development; that is why it
has been in sympathy with all expressions of such convictions in our public
life. It is this conviction that has implied the existence of a deep gulf
between it and the Constitutional-Democratic Party....” Further on the
author repeats the same idea about “the peaceful evolutionism of the
Cadets and Cadet tactics produced by this evolutionism”, “owing to which
the Trudoviks have always been farther removed from the
Constitutional-Democrats than from the Social-Democrats”.  

It is obvious why the Cadet Rech was obliged to take care to
withhold these reflections from its readers. For these reflections
represent a clearly expressed desire to draw a line between democratism and
liberalism. The line is unquestionably there, but Mr. Vodovozov, although
he speaks

    

of a “deep gulf”, has a very shallow conception of this line. According
to him, the difference, at bottom, is one of tactics and of the appraisal
of the situation: the Trudoviks are in favour of a radical revolution,
while the Cadets are peaceful evolutionists; according to the Trudoviks the
regime in Russia is one of absolutism, according to the Cadets we have,
thank God, a constitution. Such differences may exist between the Right and
the Left wings of the same class.  

Are these all the differences there are between the Trudoviks and the
Cadets?  Has not Mr. Vodovozov himself admitted that the Trudoviks are a
party of the peasantry? If we take the class position of the
peasantry in relation, say, to Purishkevich and Purishkevichism, are there
no features that distinguish this position from that of the liberal
bourgeoisie?  

If there are no such distinguishing features, then there is no profound
difference between the Trudoviks and the Cadets even in their attitude to
feudalism and absolutism. If there are such distinguishing features, then
it is the difference of Class interests, and not the difference of
“opinion” on absolutism and the Constitution or on peaceful evolution,
that must be stressed.  

The Trudoviks want to be more radical than the Cadets. That is very
good. But their radicalism would be more consistent and profound if they
had a clear idea of the class essence of the liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie, if they plainly referred in their platform to the
counter-revolutionary liberalism of the Cadets.  

It is therefore in vain that Mr. Vodovozov tries to “justify” himself
by pleading external obstacles owing to which, he claims, the Trudoviks
“were obliged to draft a resolution in which the most essential points
were concealed behind a reference, one not very intelligible to most
readers, to the ‘platform of the Trudovik group’, which is hardly
accessible to them”. But, to begin with, the Trudoviks were not obliged to
confine themselves to the arena fenced off by such obstacles; by confining
themselves to this arena, they, just like our liquidators, are betraying
how little they differ from the Cadets. Secondly, it was always possible,
no matter what the arena, to formulate the class essence of the Cadet
liberalism and its counter-revolutionary nature.  
 

Thus we see that the vacillations of the Trudoviks between the Cadets
and the Social-Democrats are not fortuitous, but the result of very
profound and fundamental conditions, those under which the peasantry has to
live. The intermediary position of aloofness from the direct fight between
the bourgeois and the proletarian nourishes illusions about a party that
stands outside or above classes. What brings the Trudoviks and the Cadets
close to one another are the common bourgeois prejudices characteristic
both of the big and the small proprietor. Hence, as bourgeois democrats,
the Trudoviks lack consistency even in their struggle against the
foundations of the power of the Purishkeviches.  

The task of the class-conscious workers is to help rally the forces of
the peasant democracy, those who are least dependent on the liberals and
least liable to yield to their influence, those who are most consistent and
determined. Such is the condition of the vast mass of the peasantry that
the striving for “a radical and profound revolution”, as formulated by
Mr. Vodovozov, has extremely strong, widely ramified and deep-seated roots.


 

Notes
 

[1]
Far and wide—Ed.  
 



[2]
The law of December 11 (24), 1905, convening the “legislative” State
Duma was published by the tsarist government during the height of the
Moscow armed uprising. The law ensured a tremendous majority of landlords
and capitalists in the Duma. The First Duma, elected on the basis of the
law of December 11, 1905, was a Cadet Duma.





[3]
Zaprosy Zhizni (Demands of Life)—a weekly magazine
published in St. Petersburg from 1909 to 1912. Among its contributors were
Cadets, Popular Socialists, and Menshevik-liquidators.











Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 17

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





