# Volume 26

==========

## Table of contents





Lenin Collected Works: Volume 26







Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 26



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 26
October 1917 — January 1918


Preface




1917




  The Bolsheviks Must Assume State
  Power


8k 



  Marxism and Insurrection 
15k 


  The Russian Revolution and Civil
  War  39k
      


  Heroes of Fraud and the Mistakes of
  the Bolsheviks 
22k 



  From a Publicist's Diary

19k
      


    The Tasks of the Revolution
22k 



    Letter to I. T. Smilga 8k 



    The Crisis Has Matured 20k 



    Can the Bolsheviks Retain State
    Power? 116k 



    To Workers, Peasants, and Soldiers!
   7k




    Letter to the Central Committee the
    Moscow and Petrograd Committees and the
    Bolshevik Members of the Petrograd and Moscow
    Soviets  6k 



    Theses for a Report at the October 8
    Conference  7k 



    Letter to the Petrograd City
    Conference  9k 



    Revision of the Party
    Programme 65k 



    Advice of an Onlooker 7k 



    Letter to the Bolshevik Comrades
    Attending the Congress of Soviets of the
    Northern Region 16k 



    Meeting of the Central Committee of
    the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)  October 10 (23),
    1917 7k




    Meeting of the Central Committee of
    the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)  October 16 (29),
    1917 7k




    Letter to Comrades 48k 



    Letter to Bolshevik Party Members
--k



    The Tasks of Our Party in the
    International 17k 



    Letter to the Central Committee of the
    R.S.D.L.P.(B.) 12k 



    Socialist-Revolutionary Party Cheats
    the Peasants Once Again  20k 



    Letter to Central Committee
    Members 8k



    To the Citizens of Russia!
8k 



    Meeting of the Petrograd Soviet of
    Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies 44k 



    Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets
    of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies 12k 



    Draft Regulations On Workers'
    Control 12k 



    Direct-Line Conversation With
    Helsingfors12k 



    Conference of Regimental Delegates of
    the Petrograd Garrison12k 



    Wireless Message of the Council of
    People’s Commissars October 30 (November
    12), 19175k 



    Draft Rules For Office
    Employees4k 



    Speeches at a Meeting of the
    C.C.—Nov. 1 (14), 191712k 



    Resolution of C.C. of the
    R.S.D.L.P.(B) on the Opposition within the
    C.C.—November 2 (15), 1917 8k



    Ultimatum from the C.C. Majority of
    the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) to the Minority4k



    Draft Resolution on Freedom of the
    Press8k



    Meeting of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee—November 4 (17),
    191720k



    Speech at a Joint Meeting of the
    Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and
    Soldiers’ Deputies and Delegates From the
    Fronts8k



    To the Population8k



    Reply to Questions From
    Peasants8k



    From the Central Committee of the
    Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
    (Bolsheviks)4k



    From the Central Committee of the
    Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
    (Bolsheviks)12k



    Direct-Line Conversation Between the
    Government and Field H.Q. November 9 (22),
    191712k



    Wireless Message to All Regimental,
    Divisional, Corps, Army, and Other Committees,
    to all Soldiers of the Revolutionary, Army and
    Sailors of the Revolutionary Navy10k



    Foreword to the Pamphlet,How the
    Socialist Revolutionaries Cheated the
    People5k



    Meeting of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee November 10 (23),
    19177k



    From the Council of People's
    Commissars to the Revolutionary Military
    Committee3k



    The Extraordinary All-Russia Congress
    of Soviets of Peasants' Deputies November
    10-25 (November 23-December 8),
    191720k



    Alliance Between the Workers and
    Exploited Peasants

8k




    Draft Decree on the Right of
    Recall6k


    Report on the Right of Recall at a
    Meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee November 21 (December 4),
    19177k


 
    Speech at the First All-Russia
    Congress of the Navy, November 22 (December
    5), 1917. Minutes

--k



    Foreword to the Pamphlet, Material
      On the Agrarian Question5k


    Outline Programme For Peace
    Negotiations 6k



    Decree on the Arrest of the Leaders of
    the Civil War Against the Revolution
  3k


    The Tasks of the Public Library In
    Petrograd 3k


    Meeting of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee, December 1(14),
    19179k


    Speech Delivered at the Second
    All-Russia Congress of Soviets of
    Peasants’ Deputies, December 2 (15),
    1917

8k



    Manifesto to the Ukrainian People With
    An Ultimatum to the Ukrainian
    Rada10k



    Report on the Economic Condition of
    Petrograd of Petrograd Workers and the Tasks
    of the Working Class Delivered at a Meeting
    of the Workers' Section of the Petrograd
    Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies
    December 4 7k



    On the Opening of the Constituent
    Assembly9k



    Draft of a Manifesto to the Peasantry
    From The Second All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets of Peasants’
    Deputies9k


    Note to Fe. Dzerzhinsky With a Draft
    of a Decree on Fighting
    Counter-Revolutionaries and
    Saboteurs6k


    Speech at a Meeting of the Central
    Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.), December
    11(24), 1917. Minutes3k



    Draft Resolution on the Provisional
    Bureau of the Bolshevik Group In the
    Constituent Assembly3k


    Theses on the Constituent Assembly
12k


    Speech at the Extraordinary All-Russia
    Congress of Railwaymen, December 13(26),
    1917 5k


    For Bread and Peace 5k


    Speech On the Nationalisation of the
    Banks Delivered at a Meeting of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee,
    December 14(27), 1917. Minutes 14k



    Draft Decree on the Nationalisation of
    the Banks 12k


    Questions to Delegates to the Army
    Congress On the Demobilisation of the Army
  
7k


    Draft Resolution of the Council of
    People’s Commissars
  
3k


    Resolution of the Council of
    People’s Commissars On Negotiations
    With the Rada  4k

Fear of the Collapse of the Old and the Fight For the New
  
10k


    How to Organise Competition?
25k


    Draft Decree on Consumers’
    Communes
6k


    Resolution of the Council of
    People’s Commissars On the Rada’s
    Reply to the C.P.C 4k

January-February 1918



  Speech at the Send-Off of the
  Socialist Army’s First Troop
  Trains. January 1 (14), 1918. Newspaper
    Report 4k


    Declaration of Rights of the Working
    and Exploited People
  
10k


    Letter to the Army Congress On the
    Demobilisation of the Army
  
3k


    Direct-Line Conversation With
    L. D. Trotsky, Chairman of the Soviet Peace
    Delegation At Brest-Litovsk, January 3(16),
    1918 4k


    Resolution of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee, January 3(16). 1918
  
3k


    Declaration of the
    R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks) Group At The
    Constituent Assembly Meeting, January
    1918 6k


    People From Another World 6k


    Draft Decree on the Dissolution of the
    Constituent Assembly
  
8k


    Speech On the Dissolution of the
    Constituent Assembly Delivered to the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee,
    January 6 (19), 1918
  
11k



    On the History of the Question of the
    Unfortunate Peace 21k


    Afterword to the Theses on the
    Question of the Immediate Conclusion of a
    Separate and Annexationist Peace
8k


    Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets
    of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
    Peasants’ Deputies, January 10-18,
    1918 62k


    Instructions to the Red Guard H. Q
4k


    Extraordinary All-Russia
    Railwaymen’s Congress, January 5-30
    (January 18-February 12), 1918  39k


    Meeting of Presidium of the Petrograd
    Soviet With Delegates Prom Food Supply
    Organisations, January 14(27), 1918
9k


    Draft Decree on the Nationalisation of
    the Merchant Marine and Inland Water
    Transport 4k


    Speeches at a Meeting of the Central
    Committee Of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), January 19
    (February 1), 1918.  Minutes  8k


    Wireless Message Addressed to
    All. Special to the Peace Delegation in
    Brest-Litovsk 3k


    Wireless Message Addressed to All
  
3k


    Speech to Propagandists On Their Way
    to the Provinces. January 23 (February
    5). 1918. Newspaper Report 12k


    Trotsky Russian Peace
    Delegation. Brest-Litovsk. Reply
2k


    Speech at a Meeting of the Land
    Committee Congress and the Peasant Section
    of the Third Congress Of Soviets, January 28
    (February 10), 1918. Newspaper Report
  
5k


    Statements Made At the Morning Sitting
    of the Central Committee of the
    R.S.D.L.P.(B.). February 18, 1918
    Minutes 5k



    Speeches at the Evening Sitting of the
    Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.),
    February 18, 1918. Minutes
  
8k


    Draft Wireless Message to the
    Government of the German Reich 3k



  Direct-Line Conversation With the
  Moscow Soviet. February 20, 1918
3k

 


Volume 26 Transcription/Mark-up:
    Charles Farrell, Brian Baggins, David Walters, Conal Tuohy, and
    R. Cymbala,  1999, 2000 

  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 




==========

## 
  The Bolsheviks Must Assume State
  Power








The Bolsheviks Must Assume Power



V. I. Lenin
The Bolsheviks Must Assume Power[1]
A Letter to the Central Committee
      and the Petrograd And Moscow Committees
      Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)


Written: September 12-14, 1917
      
First Published: 1921 in Proetarskyaya
      Revolutsia No. 2 
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 19-21

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The Bolsheviks, having obtained a majority in the Soviets of
      Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies of both capitals, can
      and must take state power into their own hands.

      They can because the active majority of revolutionary elements
      in the two chief cities is large enough to carry the people with
      it, to overcome the opponent’s resistance, to smash him,
      and to gain and retain power. For the Bolsheviks, by immediately
      proposing a democratic peace, by immediately giving the land to
      the peasants and by reestablishing the democratic institutions
      and liberties which have been mangled and shattered by Kerensky,
      will form a government which nobody will be able to
      overthrow.

      The majority of the people are on our side.
      This was
      proved by the long and painful course of events from May 6 to
      August 31 and to September 12.[2] The majority gained in the Soviets of
      the metropolitan cities resulted from the people coming
      over to our side. The wavering of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks
      and the increase in the number of internationalists within their
      ranks prove the same thing.

The
      Democratic Conference represents not a majority of
      the revolutionary people, but only the compromising upper
      strata of the petty bourgeoisie. We must not be deceived by
      the election figures: elections prove nothing. Compare the
      elections to the city councils of Petrograd and Moscow with the
      elections to the Soviets. Compare the elections in Moscow with
      the Moscow strike of August 12. Those are objective facts
      regarding that majority of revolutionary elements that are
      leading the people.

      The Democratic Conference is deceiving the peasants; it is
      giving them neither peace nor land.

      A Bolshevik government alone will satisfy the demands of
      the peasants.
*   *   *

      Why must the Bolsheviks assume power at this very moment?

      Because the impending surrender of Petrograd will make our
      chances a hundred times less favourable.

      And it is not in our power to prevent the surrender of
      Petrograd while the army is headed by Kerensky and Co.

      Nor can we "wait" for the Constituent Assembly, for by
      surrendering Petrograd Kerensky and Co. can always
      frustrate its convocation. Our Party alone, on taking
      power, can secure the Constituent Assembly’s convocation;
      it will then accuse the other parties of procrastination and
      will be able to substantiate its accusations.

      A separate peace between the British and German imperialists
      must and can be prevented, but only by quick action.

      The people are tired of the waverings of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. It is only our victory in the
      metropolitan cities that will carry the peasants with us.
*   *   *

      We are concerned now not with the "day", or "moment" of
      insurrection in the narrow sense of the word. That will be only
      decided by the common voice of those who are in
      contact with the workers and soldiers, with the
      masses.

      The point is that now, at the Democratic Conference, our Party
      has virtually its own congress, and this congress
      (whether it wishes to or not) must decide the fate
      of the revolution.

      The point is to make the task clear to the Party. The
      present task must be an armed uprising in Petrograd and
      Moscow (with its region), the seizing of power and the overthrow
      of the government. We must consider how to agitate for
      this without expressly saying as much in the press.

      We must remember and weigh Marx’s words about insurrection,
      "Insurrection is an art", [6] etc.
*   *   *

      It would be naive to wait for a "formal" majority for the
      Bolsheviks. No revolution ever waits for that. Kerensky and
      Co. are not waiting either, and are preparing to surrender
      Petrograd. It is the wretched waverings of the Democratic
      Conference that are bound to exhaust the patience of the workers
      of Petrograd and Moscow! History will not forgive us if we do
      not assume power now.

      There is no apparatus? There is an apparatus—the Soviets
      and the democratic organisations. The international situation
      right now, on the eve of the conclusion of a
      separate peace between the British and the Germans, is in
      our favour. To propose peace to the nations right now means
      to win.

      By taking power both in Moscow and in Petrograd at
      once (it doesn’t matter which comes first, Moscow may
      possibly begin), we shall win absolutely and
      unquestionably.

      N. Lenin
     

Footnotes

[1] These
      letters were discussed by the Central Committee on September 15
      (28), 1917, which decided to call a meeting shortly to discuss
      tactics. The following question was put to the vote:
      preservation of only one copy of Lenin’s letters. The vote
      was six in favour, four against and six abstentions. Kamenev, an
      opponent of the Party’s course towards a socialist
      revolution, motioned a resolution aimed against Lenin’s
      proposals to organise an armed uprising. Kamenev’s motion
      was defeated.


    

[2]
Mar 6: announcement of the first coalition Provisional
      Government; August 31: the Petrograd Soviet of
      Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies passed a Bolshevik
      resolution calling for the establishment of a Soviet Government;
      September 12: the date set by the Central Executive
      Committee of the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies and the Executive Committee of the All-Russia Soviet of
      Peasants’ Deputies, both dominated by
      socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, for the convocation of
      a Democratic Conference. The Democratic Conference took place in
      Petrograd, September 14-22. See here for more details.


     


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
  Marxism and Insurrection








Marxism and Insurrection



V. I. Lenin
Marxism and Insurrection
A Letter to the Central Committee
      of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)


Written: September 13-14, 1917
      
First Published: 1921 in Proetarskyaya
      Revolutsia No. 2
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 22-27

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      One of the most vicious and probably most widespread distortions
      of Marxism resorted to by the dominant "socialist" parties is
      the opportunist lie that preparation for insurrection, and
      generally the treatment of insurrection as an art, is "Blanquism".

    
Bernstein,
      the leader of opportunism, has already earned himself
      unfortunate fame by accusing Marxism of Blanquism, and when our
      present-day opportunists cry Blanquism they do not improve on or
      "enrich" the meagre "ideas" of Bernstein one little bit.

    
      Marxists are accused of Blanquism for treating insurrection as
      an art! Can there be a more flagrant perversion of the truth,
      when not a single Marxist will deny that it was Marx who
      expressed himself on this score in the most definite, precise
      and categorical manner, referring to insurrection specifically
      as an art, saying that it must be treated as an art,
      that you must win the first success and then proceed from
      success to success, never ceasing the offensive against
      the enemy, taking advantage of his confusion, etc., etc.?

    
      To be successful, insurrection must rely not upon conspiracy and
      not upon a party, but upon the advanced class. That is the first
      point. Insurrection must rely upon a revolutionary upsurge
      of the people. That is the second point. Insurrection must
      rely upon that turning-point in the history of the growing
      revolution when the activity of the advanced ranks of the people
      is at its height, and when the vacillations in the ranks of the
      enemy and in the ranks of the weak, half-hearted and
      irresolute friends of the revolution are strongest. That is
      the third point. And these three conditions for raising the
      question of insurrection distinguish Marxism from
      Blanquism.

      Once these conditions exist, however, to refuse to treat
      insurrection as an art is a betrayal of Marxism and a betrayal
      of the revolution.

    
      To show that it is precisely the present moment that the Party
      must recognise as the one in which the entire course of
      events has objectively placed insurrection on the order
      of the day and that insurrection must be treated as an art, it
      will perhaps be best to use the method of comparison, and to
      draw a parallel between July 3-4 and the September days.

    
      On July 3-4 it could have been argued, without violating the
      truth, that the correct thing to do was to take power, for our
      enemies would in any case have accused us of insurrection and
      ruthlessly treated us as rebels. However, to have decided on
      this account in favour of taking power at that time would have
      been wrong, because the objective conditions for the victory of
      the insurrection did not exist.

    
      (1) We still lacked the support of the class which is the
      vanguard of the revolution.

    
      We still did not have a majority among the workers and soldiers
      of Petrograd and Moscow. Now we have a majority in both
      Soviets. It was created solely by the history of July
      and August, by the experience of the "ruthless treatment" meted
      out to the Bolsheviks, and by the experience of the Kornilov
      revolt.

    
      (2) There was no country-wide revolutionary upsurge at that
      time. There is now, after the Kornilov revolt; the situation in
      the provinces and assumption of power by the Soviets in many
      localities prove this.

    
      (3) At that time there was no vacillation on any
      serious political scale among our enemies and among the
      irresolute petty bourgeoisie. Now the vacillation is
      enormous. Our main enemy, Allied and world imperialism (for
      world imperialism is headed by the "Allies"), has begun to
waver between a war to a victorious finish and a separate
      peace directed against Russia. Our petty-bourgeois democrats,
      having clearly lost their majority among the people, have begun
      to vacillate enormously, and have rejected a bloc, i.e., a
      coalition, with the
      Cadets.

      (4) Therefore, an insurrection on July 3-4 would have been a
      mistake; we could not have retained power either physically or
      politically. We could not have retained it physically even
      though Petrograd was at times in our hands, because at that time
      our workers and soldiers would not have fought and died
      for Petrograd. There was not at the time that "savageness", or
      fierce hatred both of the Kerenskys and of the
      Tseretelis and Chernovs. Our people had still not been tempered
      by the experience of the persecution of the Bolsheviks in which
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks participated.

    
      We could not have retained power politically on July 3-4
      because, before the Kornilov revolt, the army and the
      provinces could and would have marched against Petrograd.

    
      Now the picture is entirely different.
    
      We have the following of the majority of a class, the vanguard
      of the revolution, the vanguard of the people, which is capable
      of carrying the masses with it.
      
    
      We have the following of the majority of the people,
      because Chernov's resignation, while by no means the only
      symptom, is the most striking and obvious symptom that the
      peasants will not receive land from the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries' bloc (or from the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries themselves). And that is the chief
      reason for the popular character of the revolution.

    
      We are in the advantageous position of a party that knows for
      certain which way to go at a time when imperialism, as a
      whale and the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary bloc as
      a whole are vacillating in an incredible fashion.

    
Our victory is assured, for the people are close to
      desperation, and we are showing the entire people a sure way
      out; we demonstrated to the entire people during the "Kornilov
      days" the value of our leadership, and then proposed to the
      politicians of the bloc a compromise, which they
      rejected, although there is no let-up in their
      vacillations.

    
      It would be a great mistake to think that our offer of a
      compromise had not yet been rejected, and that the Democratic
      Conference may still accept it. The compromise was
      proposed by a party to parties; it could not have been
      proposed in any other way. It was rejected by parties. The
      Democratic Conference is a conference, and nothing
      more.

    
      One thing must not be forgotten, namely, that the majority of
      the revolutionary people, the poor, embittered peasants, are not
      represented in it. It is a conference of a minority of the
      people—this obvious truth must not be forgotten. It
      would be a big mistake, sheer parliamentary cretinism on our
      part, if we were to regard the Democratic Conference as a
      parliament; for even if it were to proclaim itself a permanent
      and sovereign parliament of the revolution, it would
      nevertheless decide nothing. The power of decision lies
      outside it in the working-class quarters of Petrograd
      and Moscow.

      All the objective conditions exist for a successful
      insurrection. We have the exceptional advantage of a situation
      in which only our victory in the insurrection can put an end to
      that most painful thing on earth, vacillation, which has worn
      the people out; in which only our victory in the insurrection
      will give the peasants land immediately; a situation in which
      only our victory in the insurrection can foil the game
      of a separate peace directed against the revolution —foil
      it by publicly proposing a fuller, juster and earlier peace, a
      peace that will benefit the revolution.

    
      Finally, our Party alone can, by a victorious insurrection, save
      Petrograd; for if our proposal for peace is rejected, if we do
      not secure even an armistice, then we shall become "defencists",
      we shall place ourselves at the head of the war
      parties, we shall be the war party par excellence,
      and we shall conduct the war in a truly revolutionary manner. We
      shall take away all the bread and boots from the capitalists. We
      shall leave them only crusts and dress them in bast shoes. We
      shall send all the bread and footwear to the front.

    
      And then we shall save Petrograd.
    
      The resources, both material and spiritual, for a truly
      revolutionary war in Russia are still immense; the chances are a
      hundred to one that the Germans will grant us at least an
      armistice. And to secure an armistice now would in itself mean
      to win the whole world.

*    *    *

      Having recognised the absolute necessity for an insurrection of
      the workers of Petrograd and Moscow in order to save the
      revolution and to save Russia from a "separate" partition by the
      imperialists of both groups, we must first adapt our political
      tactics at the Conference to the conditions of the growing
      insurrection; secondly, we must show that it is not only in
      words that we accept Marx's idea that insurrection must be
      treated as an art.

    
      At the Conference we must immediately cement the Bolshevik
      group, without striving after numbers, and without fearing to
      leave the waverers in the waverers' camp. They are more useful
      to the cause of the revolution there than in the camp
      of the resolute and devoted fighters.

    
      We must draw up a brief declaration from the Bolsheviks,
      emphasising in no uncertain manner the irrelevance of long
      speeches and of "speeches" in general, the necessity for
      immediate action to save the revolution, the absolute necessity
      for a complete break with the bourgeoisie, for the removal of
      the present government, in its entirety, for a complete rupture
      with the Anglo-French imperialists, who are preparing a
      "separate" partition of Russia, and for the immediate transfer
      of all power to revolutionary democrats, headed by the
      revolutionary proletariat.

      Our declaration must give the briefest and most trenchant
      formulation of this conclusion in connection with the programme
      proposals of peace for the peoples, land for the peasants,
      confiscation of scandalous profits, and a check on the
      scandalous sabotage of production by the capitalists.

    
      The briefer and more trenchant the declaration, the better. Only
      two other highly important points must be clearly indicated in
      it, namely, that the people are worn out by the vacillations,
      that they are fed up with the irresolution of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks; and that we are
      definitely breaking with these parties because they
      have betrayed the revolution.

    
      And another thing. By immediately proposing a peace without
      annexations, by immediately breaking with the Allied
      imperialists and with all imperialists, either we shall at once
      obtain an armistice, or the entire revolutionary proletariat
      will rally to the defence of the country, and a really just,
      really revolutionary war will then be waged by revolutionary
      democrats under the leadership of the proletariat.



      Having read this declaration, and having appealed for
      decisions and not talk, for action and not
      resolution-writing, we must dispatch our entire group
      to the factories and the barracks. Their place is
      there, the pulse of life is there, there's the source of
      salvation for our revolution, and there is he motive force of
      the Democratic Conference.

    
      There, in ardent and impassioned speeches, we must explain our
      programme and put the alternative: either the Conference adopts
      it in its entirety, or else insurrection. There is no
      middle course. Delay is impossible. The revolution is lying.

    
      By putting the question in this way, by concentrating our entire
      group in the factories and barracks, we shall be able to
      determine the right moment to start the insurrection.

      In order to treat insurrection in a Marxist way, i.e., as an
      art, we must at the same time, without losing a single moment,
      organise a headquarters of the insurgent detachments,
      distribute our forces, move the reliable regiments to the most
      important points, surround the Alexandriusky Theatre, occupy the
      Peter and Paul Fortress,1' arrest the General Staff and the
      government, and move against the officer cadets and the Savage
      Division12 those detachments which would rather die than allow
      the enemy to approach the strategic points of the city. We must
      mobilise the armed workers and call them to fight the last
      desperate fight, occupy the telegraph and the telephone exchange
      at once, move our insurrection headquarters to the central
      telephone exchange and connect it by telephone with all the
      factories, all the regiments, all the points of armed fighting,
      etc.

    
      Of course, this is all by way of example, only to illustrate the
      fact that at the present moment it is impossible to remain loyal
      to Marxism, to remain loyal to the revolution unless
      insurrection is treated as an art.

      N.Lenin 
     


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
  The Russian Revolution and Civil
  War








The Russian Revolution And Civil War



V. I. Lenin
The Russian Revolution And Civil War
They Are Trying To Frighten Us With Civil War


Written: September 29, 1917
      
First Published: 1917 in Rabochy Put No. 12
      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 28-42
      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna
      
Transcription & HTML Mark-up: Charles
    Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      The bourgeoisie, frightened by the refusal of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries to join a bloc with the Cadets, and by
      the probability of the democrats being quite capable of forming
      a government without them and governing Russia against them, are
      doing their best to intimidate the democrats.

    
      Scare them as much as you can! This is the slogan of the whole
      bourgeois press. Scare them with all your might! Lie, slander,
      but frighten them!

    
Birzhevka
      does its scaring by fabricating news about Bolshevik
      activities. Others by spreading rumours about Alexeyev's
      resignation, and about the imminent German offensive against
      Petrograd, as if the facts do not prove that it is the Kornilov
      generals (to whom Alexeyev undoubtedly belongs) who are capable
      of opening the front to the Germans in Galicia and near Riga and
      near Petrograd, and that it is the Kornilov generals who are
      arousing the greatest hatred in the army against the General
      Staff.

    
      To make this method of intimidating the democrats more "solid" and
      convincing, they refer to the danger of "civil war". Of all the
      methods of intimidation, that of scaring with civil war is
      perhaps the most widespread. Here is the way the
      Rostov-on-the-Don Committee of the people's freedom party
      formulated this widespread idea, heartily welcomed in philistine
      circles, in its resolution of September 1
      (Rech  No. 210):

    
      "The Committee is convinced that civil war may sweep away all
      the gains of the revolution and drown in rivers of blood our
      young, still unstable freedom, and is of the opinion that it is
      necessary to make an energetic protest against developing the
      revolution as proposed by the unrealisable socialist utopias if
      we are to save the gains of the revolution."

    
      Here, the fundamental idea which is to be met with innumerable
      times in Rech editorials, in the articles of Plekhanov
      and Potresov, in the editorials of Menshevik papers, etc., etc.,
      is expressed in the clearest, most precise, well considered and
      substantial form. It will therefore be useful to take up this
      idea in greater detail.

    
      Let us try to make a more concrete analysis of the civil war
      question, on the basis of the half year's experience of our
      revolution, among other things.

    
      This experience, similarly to the experience of all European
      revolutions, from the end of the eighteenth century on shows
      that civil war is the sharpest form of the class struggle, it is
      that point in the class struggle when clashes and battles,
      economic and political, repeating themselves, growing,
      broadening, becoming acute, turn into an armed struggle of one
      class against another. More often than not—one may say
      almost always—in all more or less free and ~. advanced
      countries the civil war is between those classes whose
      antagonistic position towards each other is created and deepened
      by the entire economic development of capitalism, by the entire
      history of modern society the world over—civil war is
      between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat.

    
      During the past half year of our revolution, we have experienced
      very strong spontaneous outbursts (April 20-21,[1] July 3-4) in
      which the proletariat came very close to starting a civil
      war. On the other hand, the Kornilov revolt was a military
      conspiracy supported by the landowners and capitalists led by
      the Cadet Party, a conspiracy by which the bourgeoisie has
      actually begun a civil war.

    
      Such are the facts. Such is the history of our own
      revolution. More than anything we must learn from this history,
      we must give a great deal of thought to the course it has taken
      and to its class significance.

    
      Let us try to compare the germs of the proletarian civil war and
      the bourgeois civil war in Russia from the standpoint of (1) the
      spontaneous nature of the movement; (2) its aims; (3) the
      political consciousness of the masses participating in it; (4)
      the forces in the movement; (5) its tenacity. We think that if
      all the parties which are now "unnecessarily throwing about" the
      words "civil war" were to approach the question in this way, and
      make a real attempt to study the germs of the civil war, the
      class-consciousness of the entire Russian revolution would gain
      a very great deal.

    
      Let us begin with the spontaneous nature of the movement. For
      the July 3-4 movement we have the testimony of such witnesses as
      the Menshevik Rabochaya
      Gazeta and the Socialist-Revolutionary Dyelo
      Naroda which have recognised the spontaneous origin of the
      movement. This testimony I quoted in an article published in

      Proletarskoye
      Dyelo


      and issued as a separate leaflet entitled 
An Answer.

      For obvious
      reasons, however, the Mensheviks and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who are defending themselves and the
      part they played in persecuting the Bolsheviks, officially
      continue to deny the spontaneous nature of the outburst of July
      3-4.

    
      Let us put the controversial matter aside for the present. Let
      us take what is undisputed. No one denies the spontaneous nature
      of the April 20-21 movement. The Bolshevik Party joined this
      spontaneous movement under the slogan "All Power to the
      Soviets"; independently of the Bolsheviks it was joined by the
      late Linde, who led 30,000 armed soldiers into the street ready
      to arrest the government. (The action of these troops, let us
      say in parenthesis, has not been investigated and studied. If it
      is examined closely, and April 20 is given its place in the
      historic sequence of events, i.e., if it is seen as a link in
      the chain which extends from February 28 to August 29, it
      becomes clear that the fault and the error of the Bolsheviks was
      the insufficient revolutionism of their tactics, and by no means
      the excessive revolutionism the philistines accuse us of.)

    
      The spontaneous nature of the movement leading to the
      proletariat beginning civil war is thus beyond doubt. On the
      other hand, there is not even a trace of anything resembling
      spontaneity in the Kornilov revolt; it was merely a conspiracy
      of generals who hoped by fraud and by the force of military
      command to carry part of the army with them.


    
      It is beyond all doubt that the spontaneity of the movement is
      proof that it is deeply rooted in the masses, that its roots are
      firm and that it is inevitable. The proletarian revolution is
      firmly rooted, the bourgeois counter-revolution is without
      roots—this is what the facts prove if examined from the
      point of view of the spontaneous nature of the movement.

    
      Let us now look at the aims of the movement. The movement of
      April 20-21 came very close to adopting the Bolshevik slogans,
      whereas that of July 3-4 was directly connected with them, was
      under their influence and guidance. The Bolshevik Party spoke
      quite openly, definitely, clearly, precisely, for all to hear,
      in its papers and in verbal propaganda of the chief
      aims of the proletarian civil war—the dictatorship
      of the proletariat and the poor peasantry, peace and an
      immediate offer of peace, confiscation of the landed estates.

    
      We all know the aims of the Kornilov revolt, and no one among
      the democrats disputes that those aims were a dictatorship of
      the landowners and the bourgeoisie, dispersal of the Soviets,
      and preparations for the restoration of the monarchy. The Cadet
      Party, this main Kornilovite party (by the way, it ought to be
      called from now on the Kornilov party), possesses a larger press
      and greater forces for propaganda than the Bolsheviks, but it
      has never dared and still does not dare to tell the people
      openly either about the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie or about
      the dispersal of the Soviets, or about the Kornilovite aims in
      general!

    
      As far as the aims of the movement are concerned, the facts tell
      us that the proletarian civil war can come out with an open
      exposition of its final aims before the people and win the
      sympathies of the working people, whereas the bourgeois civil
      war can attempt to lead part of the masses only by concealing
      its aims; this is the tremendous difference in them as far as
      the class-consciousness of the masses is concerned.

    
      The only objective data on this question seem to be those on
      party affiliation and elections. There do not appear to be any
      other facts which allow a clear judgment of the
      class-consciousness of the masses. It is clear that the
      proletarian-revolutionary movement is represented by the
      Bolshevik Party, and the bourgeois counter-revolutionary
      movement by the Cadet Party, and this can hardly be disputed
      after six months experience of the revolution. Three comparisons
      of a factual nature can be made that concern the question under
      consideration. A comparison of the May elections to the local
      councils in Petrograd with the August elections to the city
      council shows a decrease in Cadet votes and a tremendous
      increase in Bolshevik votes. The Cadet press admits that, as a
      rule, Bolshevism is strong wherever masses of workers or
      soldiers are concentrated.

    
      In the absence of any statistics concerning the fluctuation of
      the party membership, attendance at meetings, etc., the
      conscious support of the party by the masses may be
      judged only from published data concerning cash collections for
      the party. These data show a tremendous mass-scale heroism on
      the part of worker Bolsheviks in collecting money for Pravda
      for the papers that have been suppressed, etc. The reports of
      such collections have always been published. Among the Cadets we
      see nothing of the kind; their party work is obviously being
      "nourished" by, contributions from the rich. There is no trace
      of active aid on the part of the masses.

    
      Lastly, a comparison of the movements of April 20-21 and July
      3-4 on the one hand, and the Kornilov revolt on the other, shows
      that the Bolsheviks indicated point-blank to the masses who
      their enemy in the civil war is, namely, the bourgeoisie, the
      landowners and capitalists. The Kornilov revolt has already
      demonstrated that the troops who followed Kornilov did so
      because they had been completely deceived, a fact made
      obvious the moment the Savage Division and Kornilov's
      contingents came up against the Petrograd masses.

    
      Furthermore, what data indicate the strength of the
      proletariat and the bourgeoisie in the civil war? The Bolsheviks
      are strong only in the numbers and class-consciousness of the
      proletarians, in the sympathy with the Bolshevik slogans
      displayed by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik "rank and
      file" (i.e., workers and poor peasants). It is a fact that these
      slogans actually won over the majority of the active
      revolutionary masses in Petrograd on April 20-21,[2]June
      18,20 and July 3-4.

    
      A comparison of the data on the "parliamentary" elections and
      the data on the above-named mass movements fully corroborates,
      in respect of Russia, an observation often made in the West,
      namely, that the revolutionary proletariat is incomparably
      stronger in the extra-parliamentary than in
      the parliamentary struggle, as far as influencing the
      masses and drawing them into the struggle is
      concerned. This is a very important observation in respect of
      civil war.

    
      It is quite clear why in all the circumstances and the entire
      situation of parliamentary struggle and elections the strength
      of the oppressed classes is less than the strength they can
      actually develop in civil war.

    
      The strength of the Cadets and the Kornilov revolt is the
      strength of wealth. The press and a long series of political
      actions show that Anglo-French capital and imperialism are
      in favor of the Cadets and the Kornilov movement. It is
      common knowledge that the entire Right wing of the Moscow
      Conference21 of August 12 gave frantic support to Kornilov and
      Kaledin. It is common knowledge that the French and British
      bourgeois press "aided" Kornilov. There are indications of his
      having been aided by the banks.

      All the power of wealth stood behind Kornilov—and What a
      miserable and rapid failure! There are only two social forces
      among Kornilov's supporters apart from the wealthy—the
      Savage Division and the Cossacks. In the case of the former it
      is only the power of ignorance and deception, and this
      power is the more formidable the longer the press remains in the
      hands of the bourgeoisie. After a victory in the civil war, the
      proletariat would undermine this source of "power" once
      and for all.

    
      As to the Cossacks, they are a section of the population
      consisting of rich, small or medium landed proprietors (the
      average holding is about 50 dessiatines) in one of those
      outlying regions of Russia that have retained many medieval
      traits in their way of life, their economy, and their
      customs. We can regard this as the socio-economic basis for a
      Russian Vendée [3] But what have the facts of the
      Kornilov-Kaledin movement proved? Not even Kaledin, the "beloved
      leader" supported by the Guchkovs, Milyukovs, Ryabushinskys and
      Co., has succeeded in creating a mass movement!! Kaledin marched
      towards civil war much more "directly", much more forthrightly
      than did the Bolsheviks. Kaledin went specifically "to rouse the
      Don", and still he has not aroused a mass movement in his "home"
      region, in a Cossack region far removed from Russian democracy
      in general. On the part of the proletariat, on the contrary, we
      observe spontaneous outbursts of the movement in the very centre
      of the influence and power of anti-Bolshevik, all-Russia
      democracy.

    
      Objective data on the attitude of various strata and economic
      groups of the Cossacks towards democracy and towards the
      Kornilov revolt are lacking. There are only indications to the
      effect that the majority of the poor and middle Cossacks are
      rather inclined towards democracy and that only the officers and
      the top layer of the well-to-do Cossacks are entirely in favour
      of Kornilov.

    
      However that may be, the extreme weakness of a mass Cossack
      movement in favour of a bourgeois counter-revolution has been
      historically proved since the experience of August 26-31.

    
      There remains the last question, that of the tenacity of the
      movement. As far as the Bolshevik, proletarian revolutionary
      movement is concerned, we have proof that the struggle against
      Bolshevism has been conducted during the six months existence of
      a republic in Russia both ideologically, with a gigantic
      preponderance of press organs and propaganda forces on the side
      of the opponents of Bolshevism (even if we risk classing the
      campaign of slander as "ideological" struggle), and by means of
      repressions, which include hundreds of people arrested, our main
      printing-plant demolished, and the chief newspaper and a number
      of other papers suppressed. The result can be seen in the
      facts—a tremendous growth of support for the Bolsheviks in
      the August Petrograd elections, and in both the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik' parties, a strengthening
      of the internationalist and Left trends that are drawing close
      to Bolshevism. This means that the tenacity of the proletarian
      revolutionary movement in republican Russia is very great. The
      facts tell us that the combined efforts of the Cadets, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks have not succeeded
      in weakening that movement in the least. On the contrary, it was
      the alliance of the Kornilovites with "democracy" that
      strengthened Bolshevism. The only possible means of struggle
      against the proletarian revolutionary trend are ideological
      influence and repressions.

    
      Data on the tenacity of the Cadet-Kornilov movement are still
      lacking. The Cadets have suffered no persecution at all. Even
      Guchkov has been set free and Maklakov and Milyukov were not
      even arrested. Rech has not been suppressed. The Cadets are
      being spared. The Kornilovite Cadets are being courted by
      Kerensky's government. Suppose we put it this way: assuming that
      the Anglo-French and the Russian Ryabushinskys will give
      millions and millions more to the Cadets, to

      Yedinstvo,
Dyen,
      etc., for the new election campaign in Petrograd, is it probable
      that the number of their votes will now increase, after the
      Kornilov revolt? Judging by meetings, etc., the answer to this
      question can hardly be anything but negative.
      
    
      *   *    *
    

      Summing up the results of the analysis in which we compared the
      data furnished by the history of the Russian revolution, we
      arrive at the conclusion that the beginning of the proletariat's
      civil war has revealed the strength, the class-consciousness,
      deep-rootedness, growth, and tenacity of the movement. The
      beginning of the bourgeoisie's civil war has revealed no
      strength, no class-consciousness among the masses, no depth
      whatsoever, no chance of victory.

    
      The alliance of the Cadets with the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks against the Bolsheviks, i.e., against the
      revolutionary proletariat, has been tried in practice for a
      number of months, and this alliance of the temporarily disguised
      Kornilovites with the "democrats" has actually strengthened and
      not weakened the Bolsheviks, and led to the collapse of the
      "alliance", and to the strengthening of the Left opposition
      among the Mensheviks.

    
      An alliance of the Bolsheviks with the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks against the Cadets, against the bourgeoisie, has
      not yet been tried; or, to be more precise, such an alliance has
      been tried on one front only, for five days only, from August 26
      to August 31, the period of the Kornilov revolt, and this
      alliance at that time scored a victory over the
      counter-revolution with an ease never yet achieved in any
      revolution; it was such a crushing suppression of the bourgeois,
      landowners', capitalist, Allied-imperialist and Cadet
      counter-revolution, that the civil war from that side ceased to
      exist, was a mere nothing from the very outset, collapsed before
      any "battle" had taken place.

    
      In the face of this historic fact the entire bourgeois press and
      all its chorus (the Plekhanovs, Potresovs, Breshko
      Breshkovskayas, etc.) are shouting with all their might that an
      alliance of the Bolsheviks with the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries "threatens" the horrors of civil war!

    
      This would be funny, if it were not so sad. It is sad indeed
      that such an open, self-evident, glaring absurdity, such a
      flouting of the facts of the whole history of our revolution,
      can still find listeners.... This only proves that the selfish
      bourgeois lie is still widespread (and this cannot be avoided as
      long as the press is monopolised by the bourgeoisie), a lie that
      shouts down and drowns the most undoubted, palpably obvious
      lessons of the revolution.

    
      If there is an absolutely undisputed lesson of the revolution,
      one fully proved by facts, it is that only an alliance of the
      Bolsheviks with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      only an immediate transfer of all power to the Soviets would
      make civil war in Russia impossible, for a civil war begun by
      the bourgeoisie against such an alliance, against the Soviets of
      Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, is inconceivable;
      such a "war~~ would not last even until the first battle; the
      bourgeoisie, for the second time since the Kornilov revolt,
      would not be able to move even the Savage Division, or the
      former number of Cossack units against the Soviet Government!

    
      The peaceful development of any revolution is, generally
      speaking, extremely rare and difficult, because revolution is
      the maximum exacerbation of the sharpest class contradictions;
      but in a peasant country, at a time when a union of the
      proletariat with the peasantry can give peace to people worn out
      by a most unjust and criminal war, when that union can give the
      peasantry all the land, in that country, at that exceptional
      moment in history, a peaceful development of the revolution is
      possible and probable if all power is transferred to the
      Soviets. The struggle of parties for power within the Soviets
      may proceed peacefully, if the Soviets are made fully
      democratic, and "petty thefts" and violations of democratic
      principles, such as giving the soldiers one representative to
      every five hundred, while the workers have one representative to
      every thousand voters, are eliminated. In a democratic republic
      such petty thefts will have to disappear.

    
      When confronted with Soviets that have given all the land to the
      peasants without compensation and offer a just peace to all the
      peoples—when confronted with such Soviets the alliance of
      the British, French and Russian bourgeoisie, the Kornilovs,
      Buchanans,[4]

      Ryabushinskys, Milyukovs, Plekhanovs,
      and Potresovs is quite impotent and is not to be feared.

    
      The bourgeoisie's resistance to the transfer of the land to the
      peasants without compensation, to similar reforms in other
      realms of life, to a just peace and a break with imperialism,
      is, of course, inevitable. But for such resistance to reach the
      stage of civil war, masses of some kind are necessary, masses
      capable of fighting and vanquishing the Soviets. The bourgeoisie
      does not have these masses, and has nowhere to get them. The
      sooner and the more resolutely the Soviets take all power, the
      sooner both Savage Divisions and Cossacks will split into an
      insignificant minority of politically-conscious Kornilov
      supporters and a huge majority of those in favour of a
      democratic and socialist (for it is with socialism that we shall
      then be dealing) alliance of workers and peasants.

    
      When power passes to the Soviets, the resistance of the
      bourgeoisie will result in scores and hundreds of workers and
      peasants "keeping track of", supervising, controlling, and
      registering every single capitalist, for the interests of the
      workers and peasants will demand struggle against the
      capitalists' deception of the people. The forms and methods of
      this accountancy and control have been developed and simplified
      by capitalism itself, by such capitalist creations as banks, big
      factories, trusts, railways, the post office, consumers'
      societies, and trade unions. If the Soviets punish those
      capitalists who evade the most detailed accounting or who
      deceive the people, punish them by confiscating all their
      property and arresting them for a short time, that will be
      sufficient to break all the resistance of the bourgeoisie by
      bloodless means. For it is through the banks, once they are
      nationalised, through the unions of employees, through t.he post
      office, the consumers' societies, and the trade unions, that
      control and the accounting will become universal, all-powerful,
      and irresistible.

    
      And Russia's Soviets, the alliance of her workers and poor
      peasants, are not alone in the steps they take towards
      socialism. If we were alone, we should not be able to accomplish
      this task peacefully, for it is essentially an international
      task. But we have enormous reserves, the armies of the most
      advanced workers in other countries, where Russia's break with
      imperialism and the imperialist war will inevitably accelerate
      the workers' socialist revolution that is maturing.

    *    *    *

      Some speak about "rivers of blood" in a civil war. This is
      mentioned in the resolution of the Kornilovite Cadets quoted
      above. This phrase is repeated in a thousand ways by all the
      bourgeois and opportunists. Since the Kornilov revolt all the
      class-conscious workers laugh, will continue to laugh and cannot
      help laughing at it.

    
      However, the question of "rivers of blood" in the present time
      of war can and must be studied by an approximate computation of
      forces, consequences, and results; it must be taken seriously
      and not as an empty stock phrase, not as simply the hypocrisy of
      the Cadets, who have done everything in their power to enable
      Kornilov to drown Russia in "rivers of blood", and to restore
      the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, the power of the
      landowners, and the monarchy.

    
      "Rivers of blood," they say. Let us analyse this aspect of the
      question as well.

    
      Let us assume that the vacillations of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries continue; that these parties do not
      hand over power to the Soviets; that they do not overthrow
      Kerensky; that they restore the old rotten compromise with the
      bourgeoisie in a somewhat different form (say, "non-partisan"
      Kornilovites instead of Cadets); that they do not replace the
      apparatus of state power by the Soviet apparatus, do not offer
      peace, do not break with imperialism, and do not confiscate the
      landed estates. Let us assume that this is the outcome of the
      present wavering of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks, of this present "September 12".

    
      The experience of our own revolution tells us most clearly that
      the consequence of this would be a still further weakening of
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, their further
      separation from the masses, an incredible growth of indignation
      and bitterness among the masses, a tremendous growth of sympathy
      with the revolutionary proletariat, with the Bolsheviks.

    
      Under such conditions, the proletariat of the capital will be
      still closer to a Commune, to a workers' uprising, to the
      conquest of power, to a civil war in its highest and most
      decisive form, than it is at present; after the experience of
      April 20-21 and July 3-4 such a result must be recognised as
      historically inevitable.

    
      "Rivers of blood," shout the Cadets. But such rivers of blood
      would give victory to the proletariat and the poor peasantry,
      and it is a hundred to one that this victory would bring peace
      in place of the imperialist war, i.e., that it would save the
      lives of hundreds of thousands of men who are now shedding their
      blood for the sake of a division of spoils and seizures
      (annexations) by the capitalists. If April 20-21 had ended by
      the transfer of all power to the Soviets, and the Bolsheviks in
      alliance with the poor peasantry had won in the Soviets, it
      would have saved the lives of the half million Russian soldiers,
      who certainly perished in the battles of June 18, even if it had
      cost "rivers of blood".

    
      This is how every class-conscious Russian worker and soldier
      figures, this is how he must figure, if he weighs and analyses
      the question of civil war now being raised everywhere; and, of
      course, such a worker or soldier, who has experienced many
      things and given thought to them, will not be frightened by the
      cries of "rivers of blood" raised by individuals, parties and
      groups willing to sacrifice more millions of Russian soldiers
      for the sake of Constantinople, Lvov, Warsaw, and "victory over
      Germany".

    
      No "rivers of blood" in an internal civil war can even
      approximately equal those seas of blood which the Russian
      imperialists have shed since June 19 (in spite of the very great
      chances they had of avoiding this by handing over power to the
      Soviets).

    
      All you Milyukovs, Potresovs and Plekhanovs be careful about
      your arguments against "rivers of blood" in civil war while this
      present war continues, for the soldiers have seen seas of blood
      and know what they mean.

    
      The international situation of the Russian revolution now, in
      1917, the fourth year of a terrifically burdensome and criminal
      war, that has worn out the peoples, is such that an offer of a
      just peace on the part of a Russian proletariat victorious in
      the civil war would have a hundred to one chance of achieving an
      armistice and peace without the shedding of further seas of
      blood.

    
      For a combination of warring Anglo-French and German imperialism
      against the proletarian socialist Russian Republic is impossible
      in practice, while a combination of British, Japanese and
      American imperialism against us is extremely difficult to
      realise and is not at all dangerous to us, if only because of
      Russia's geographical position. On the other hand, the existence
      of revolutionary and socialist proletarian masses in all the
      European states is a fact; the maturing and the inevitability of
      the worldwide socialist revolution is beyond doubt, and such a
      revolution can be seriously aided only by the progress of the
      Russian revolution and not by delegations and not by playing at
      Stockholm conferences with the foreign Plekhanovs or Tseretelis.

    
      The bourgeoisie wails about the inevitable defeat of a Commune
      in Russia, i.e., defeat of the proletariat if it were to conquer
      power.

    
      These are false, selfish class wailings.

    
      If the proletariat gains power it will have every chance of
      retaining it and of leading Russia until there is a victorious
      revolution in the West.

    
      In the first place, we have learned much since the Commune, and
      we would not repeat its fatal errors, we would not leave the
      banks in the hands of the bourgeoisie, we would not confine
      ourselves to defence against the Versaillais (or the
      Kornilovites) but would take the offensive against them and
      crush them.

    
      Secondly, the victorious proletariat would give Russia peace,
      and no power on earth would be able to overthrow a government of
      peace, a government of an honest, sincere, just peace, after all
      the horrors of more than three years butchery of the peoples.

    
      Thirdly, the victorious proletariat would give the peasantry the
      land immediately and without compensation. And a tremendous
      majority of the peasantry—worn out and embittered by the
      "playing around with the landowners" practised by our
      government, particularly the coalition government, particularly
      the Kerensky government—would support the victorious
      proletariat absolutely, unreservedly, with every means in its
      power.

    
      You Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries are all talking
      about the "heroic efforts" of the people. Only recently I came
      across this phrase for the nth time in the leading article of
      your Izvestia
      of the Central Executive Committee. With you it is a mere
      phrase. But the workers and peasants read it and think about it,
      and such deliberation—reinforced by the experience of the
      Kornilov revolt, by the "experience" of Peshekhonov's ministry,
      by the "experience" of Chernov's ministry, and so
      forth—every such deliberation inevitably leads to the
      conclusion that this "heroic effort" is nothing but confidence
      of the poor peasantry in the city workers as their most faithful
      allies and leaders. The heroic effort is nothing but the victory
      of the Russian proletariat over the bourgeoisie in civil war,
      for such a victory alone will save the country from painful
      vacillations, it alone will show the way out, it alone will give
      land and peace.

    
      If an alliance between the city workers and the poor peasantry
      can be effected through an immediate transfer of power to the
      Soviets, so much the better. The Bolsheviks will do everything
      to secure this peaceful development of the revolution. Without
      this, even the Constituent Assembly, by itself, will not save
      the situation, for even there the Socialist-Revolutionaries may
      continue their "playing" at agreements with the Cadets, with
      Breshko-Breshkovskaya and Kerensky (in what way are they better
      than Cadets?), and so on, and so forth.

    
      If even the experience of the Kornilov revolt has taught the
      "democrats" nothing, and they continue the destructive policy of
      vacillation and compromise, we say that nothing is more ruinous
      to the proletarian revolution than these vacillations. That
      being the case, do not frighten us, gentlemen, with civil
      war. Civil war is inevitable, if you do not wish to break with
      Kornilovism and the "coalition" right now, once and for
      all. This war will bring victory over the exploiters, it will
      give the land to the peasants, it will give peace to the
      peoples, it will open the right road to the victorious
      revolution of the world socialist proletariat.
    
Footnotes

[1]  The
      reference is to the following facts. On April 20 (May 3), the
      newspapers carried a note from Foreign Minister Milyukov to the
      Allied Governments in which the Provisional Government
      reaffirmed its intention to honour all the treaties of the
      Tsarist government and to carry on the war to a victorious
      end. There was massive indignation over this imperialist policy,
      and on April 21 (May 4), the workers of Petrograd responded to a
      call issued by the Bolshevik Party and downed tools. They staged
      a demonstration which demanded peace and was attended by more
      than 100,000 workers and soldiers. Protest demonstrations were
      also staged in Moscow, the Urals, the Ukraine, Kronstadt and
      other towns and districts. Resolutions protesting against
      Milyukov's note were received by the Petrograd Soviet from many
      urban Soviets.  The April demonstration led to a government
      crisis. Mass pressure forced Milyukov and Guchkov to resign from
      the Cabinet. The first coalition government was formed on May 5
      (18), and consisted of 10 capitalist ministers and leaders of
      the parties collaborating with them, namely, Kerensky and
      Chernov from the Socialist-Revolutionary Party; Tsereteli and
      Skobelev from the Mensheviks, etc. The bourgeois government was
      saved by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks who
      openly sided with the bourgeoisie. 

    
[2]  On
      June 9 (22), 1917, the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets
      prohibited the demonstration set by the Bolshevik Central
      Committee for June 10 (23). The decision to stage the
      demonstration was adopted at an enlarged meeting of the Central
      Committee and the Petrograd Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
      together with delegates from the districts, army units, trade
      unions and factory committees. The demonstration was to have
      shown the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets that the
      Petrograd workers and soldiers wanted the Soviets to take all
      state power. The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
      decided to prevent the demonstration from taking place and
      pushed a resolution through congress to that effect. The
      Bolshevik Central Committee did not wish to oppose the Congress
      decision and at Lenin's suggestion withdrew its decision on the
      night of June 9 (22). Members of the Central Committee Petrograd
      Committee, and Party activists went to the factories and
      barracks to convince the workers and soldiers to stay in. Their
      efforts were successful and the workers and soldiers agreed that
      a demonstration would be badly timed.  The Menshevik and
      Socialist-Revolutionary leadership of the Congress of Soviets
      decided to stage a demonstration on June 18 (July 30) as an
      expression of confidence in the Provisional Government .  Lenin
      led the Central and Petrograd Committees in a great effort to
      prepare a demonstration showing the true feelings of the
      masses. On the eve of the demonstration, June 17 (30),
      Pravda carried an appeal from the Central Committee,
      the Petrograd Committee, the Central Committee's Military
      Organisation, and the Central Council of Factory Committees
      calling on the people to demonstrate the strength of the
      revolution. Some 500,000 workers and soldiers took part in the
      demonstration on June 18 (July 1), with the overwhelming
      majority carrying the revolutionary slogans of the Bolshevik
      Party. Only a small group carried the slogans of the
      collaborating parties, which urged support for the Provisional
      Government. The demonstration showed the mounting revolutionary
      activity of the masses and the Bolshevik Party's growing
      influence, it was a great victory for the Bolshevik Party. It
      showed that the masses put no trust in the Provisional
      Government, and the Menshevik and Socialist Revolutionary policy
      of collaborating with the bourgeoisie.   

    
[3]
Vendée—a province in France, which was a
      hotbed of counter-revolution during the French bourgeois
      revolution at the end of the 18th century. The backward peasants
      of the VendÃ©e, who were strongly influenced by the Catholic
      clergy, were a tool in the hands of the counter-revolutionaries
      in their fight against revolutionary France.  

    

[4]
Buchanan—(1855-1924)—British diplomat and
      ambassador to Russia
      (1910-1918). He helped the reactionaries in their
      anti-revolutionary fight and in August 1917 gave support to
      Kornilov's counter-revolutionary revolt.  

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
  Heroes of Fraud and the Mistakes of
  the Bolsheviks







Heroes of Fraud and the Mistakes of the Bolsheviks




V. I. Lenin
Heroes of Fraud and the Mistakes of the Bolsheviks
      [1]


Written: September 22, 1917
      
First Published: 1917 in Rabochy Put No. 19
      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 43-51

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The so-called Democratic Conference is over. Thank God, one more
      farce is behind us and still we are advancing, provided fate has
      no more than a certain number of farces in store for our
      revolution. 

    
      In order correctly to judge the political results of the
      Conference, we must attempt to ascertain its precise class
      significance as indicated by objective facts. 

    
      Further break-up of the government parties, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks; their obvious loss of
      the majority among the revolutionary democrats; one more step
      towards linking up Mr. Kerensky and Messrs. Tsereteli, Chernov
      and Co. and exposing the Bonapartism they share—such is the
      class significance of the Conference. 

    
      In the Soviets, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
      have lost their majority. They therefore have had to resort to a
      fraud—they have violated their pledge to call a new
      congress of the Soviets in three months. They have evaded
      reporting back to those who elected the Central Executive
      Committee of the Soviets; and they have rigged the "Democratic"
      Conference. The Bolsheviks spoke of this fraud prior to the
      Conference, and the results fully confirmed their
      correctness. The Lieberdans[2] and the Tseretelis, Chernovs and Co. saw
      that their majority in the Soviets was dwindling, therefore they
      resorted to a fraud. 

    
      Arguments like that which says that co-operatives and also
      "properly" elected city and Zemstvo representatives "are already
      of great significance among the democratic organisations", are
      so flimsy that it is nothing but crass hypocrisy to advance them
      seriously. First of all, the Central Executive Committee was
      elected by the Soviets, and its refusal to deliver a report and
      relinquish office to the Soviets, is a Bonapartist
      fraud. Secondly, the Soviets represent revolutionary democracy
      insofar as they are joined by those who wish to fight in a
      revolutionary way. Their doors are not closed to members of the
      co-operatives and city dwellers. Those same
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks ran the Soviets. 

    
      Those who remained only in the co-operatives, who
      confined themselves only to municipal (city and
      Zemstvo) work, voluntarily separated themselves from the ranks
      of revolutionary democracy, thereby attaching themselves to a
      democracy that was either reactionary or neutral. Everybody
      knows that co-operative and municipal work is done not
      only by revolutionaries, but also by
      reactionaries; everybody knows that people are elected to
      co-operatives and municipalities primarily for work that is
      not of general political scope and importance. 

    
      The aim of the Lieberdans, Tsereteli, Chernov and Co. when they
      rigged the Conference was to bring up reserves secretly from
      among the adherents of Yedinstvo and "non-partisan"
      reactionaries. That was the fraud they perpetrated. That was
      their Bonapartism, which allies them with the Bonapartist
      Kerensky. They robbed democracy while hypocritically keeping up
      democratic appearances—this is the essence of the matter. 

    
      Nicholas II stole, figuratively, large sums from democracy. He
      convened representative institutions but gave the landowners a
      hundredfold greater representation than the peasants. The
      Lieberdans, Tseretelis, and Chernovs steal petty sums from
      democracy; they convoke a Democratic Conference where
      both workers and peasants point with full justice to
      the curtailment of their representation, to lack of
      proportionality, to discrimination in favour of members
      of the co-operatives and municipal councils closest to the
      bourgeoisie (and reactionary democracy). 

    
      The Lieberdans, Tseretelis and Chernovs have parted ways with
      the masses of poor workers and peasants. They saved themselves
      by the fraud that keeps their Kerensky going.   

    
 
      The demarcation of classes is progressing. A protest is growing
      in the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties, a direct
      split is maturing because the "leaders" have betrayed the
      interests of the majority of the population. The leaders are
      relying on the support of a minority, in defiance of
      the principles of democracy. Fraud is inevitable as far
      as they are concerned. 

    
      Kerensky is revealing himself more and more as a Bonapartist. He
      was considered a Socialist-Revolutionary. Now we know that he is
      not merely a "March" Socialist-Revolutionary who ran over to
      them from the Trudoviks "for advertising purposes". He is an
      adherent of Breshko-Breshkovskaya, the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Mrs. Plekhanov, or Mrs. Potresov in their Dyen. The
      so-called Right wing of the so-called socialist parties, the
      Plekhanovs, Breshkovskayas, Potresovs, is where Kerensky
      belongs ; this wing, however, does not differ
      substantially from the Cadets in anything.

      The Cadets have good reason to praise Kerensky. He pursues
      their policies and confers with them and with Rodzyanko
      behind the back of the people ; he has been exposed by
      Chernov and others as conniving with Savinkov, a friend of
      Kornilov's. Kerensky is a Kornilovite ; by sheer
      accident he has had a quarrel with Kornilov himself,
      but he remains in the most intimate alliance with other
      Kornilovites. This is a fact, proved by the revelations
      about Savinkov, by Dyelo Naroda and by the continuation
      of the political game, Kerensky's "ministerial leapfrog" with
      the Kornilovites disguised under the name of the "commercial and
      industrial class". 

    
      Secret pacts with the Kornilov gang, secret hobnobbing (through
      Tereshchenko and Co.) with the imperialist "Allies"; secret
      obstruction and sabotage of the Constituent Assembly; secret
      deception of the peasants by way of service to Rodzyanko, i.e.,
      the landowners (by doubling the price of bread)—this is
      what Kerensky is really doing. This is his
      class policy. This is his Bonapartism. 

    
      To conceal this from the Conference, the Lieberdans, Tseretelis
      and Chernovs had to resort to a fraud. 

    
      The Bolshevik participation in this hideous fraud, in this
      farce, had the same justification as their participation in the
      Third Duma [3]; even in a "pigsty" we must uphold our
      line, even from a "pigsty" we must send out material exposing
      the enemy for the instruction of the people. 

    
      The difference, however, is this, that the Third Duma was
      convened when the revolution was obviously ebbing, while at
      present there is an obvious upsurge of a new revolution
      ; of the scope and the pace of this upsurge, however, we
      unfortunately know very little. 

*    *    *

      The most characteristic episode of the Conference was, in my
      opinion, Zarudny's speech. He tells us that as soon as Kerensky
      "as much as hinted" at reorganising the government, all the
      ministers began to hand in their resignations. "The following
      day," continues the naïve, childishly naÃ¯ve (a good thing
      if he is only naïve), Zarudny, "the following day,
      notwithstanding our resignation, we were called, we were
      consulted, and finally we were prevailed upon to stay." 

    
      "General laughter in the hall," remarks at this point the
      official Izvestia.

      Gay folk, those participants in the Bonapartist deception of the
      people by the republicans. We are all revolutionary
      democrats—no joking! 

    
      "From the very beginning," says Zarudny, "we heard two things;
      we were to strive to make the army capable of fighting, and to
      hasten peace on a democratic basis. Well, as far as peace is
      concerned, I do not know whether, during the six weeks I have
      been a member of the Provisional Government, the Provisional
      Government has done anything about it. I did not notice
      it. (Applause and a voice from the audience : "It did
      nothing", Izvestia remarks.) When I, as a member of the
      Provisional Government, inquired about it, I received no
      reply. . . ." 

    
      Thus speaks Zarudny, according to the report of the official
      Izvestia. And the Conference listen in silence,
      tolerate such things, do not stop the orator, do not interrupt
      the session, do not jump to their feet and chase out Kerensky
      and the government! How could they? These "revolutionary
      democrats" are for Kerensky to a man!   

     
      Very well, gentlemen, but then, wherein does the term
      "revolutionary democrat" differ from the terms "lackey" and
      "scoundrel"? 

    
      It is natural that these lackeys are capable of roaring with
      laughter when "their" Minister, noted for his rare naÃ¯vety or
      rare stupidity, tells them how Kerensky keeps removing and
      replacing ministers (in order to come to terms with the Kornilov
      gang behind the hack of the people and "in full privacy"). It is
      not surprising that the lackeys keep silent when "their"
      Minister, who seems to have taken general phrases about peace
      seriously without seeing their hypocrisy, admits that he did not
      even receive a reply to his question about real steps towards
      peace. Such is the fate of lackeys, to allow themselves to be
      fooled by the government. But what has this to do with
      revolution, what has it to do with democracy? 

    
      Would it be surprising if revolutionary soldiers and workers
      were to get the idea that it would be good if the ceiling of the
      Alexandrinsky Theatre were to fall and crush all that gang of
      pitiful scoundrels who can sit there in silence when it is being
      demonstrated to them that Kerensky and Co. are fooling them with
      their talk about peace, who can roar with laughter when they are
      told as clearly as can be by their own ministers that
      ministerial leapfrog is a farce (concealing Kerensky's dealings
      with the Kornilovites). God save us from our friends, we can
      cope with our enemies ourselves! God save us from these
      claimants to revolutionary democratic leadership, we can cope
      with the Kerenskys, Cadets and Kornilovites ourselves! 

*   *   *

      And now I come to the errors of the Bolsheviks. To have confined
      themselves to ironic applause and exclamations at such a moment
      was an error. 

    
      The people are weary of vacillations and delays. Dissatisfaction
      is obviously growing. A new revolution is approaching. The
      reactionary democrats, the Lieberdans, Tseretelis and others,
      wish only to distract the attention of the people with
      their farce of a "conference", keep them busy 

      with it, cut the Bolsheviks off from the
      masses, and provide the Bolshevik delegates with the
      unworthy occupation of sitting and listening to the Zarudnys!
      And the Zarudnys are not the least sincere of them! 

    
      The Bolsheviks should have walked out of the meeting in protest
      and not allowed themselves to be caught by the conference trap
      set to divert the people's attention from serious questions. The
      Bolsheviks should have left two or three of their 136 delegates
      for "liaison work", that is, to report by telephone the moment
      the idiotic babbling came to an end and the voting began. They
      should not have allowed themselves to be kept busy with
      obvious nonsense for the obvious purpose of deceiving the people
      with the obvious aim of extinguishing the growing
      revolution by wasting time on trivial matters. 

    
      Ninety-nine per cent of the Bolshevik delegation ought to have
      gone to the factories and barracks; that was the proper place
      for delegates who had come from all ends of Russia and who,
      after Zarudny's speech, could see the full depth of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik rottenness. There, closer
      to the masses, at hundreds and thousands of meetings and talks,
      they ought to have discussed the lessons of this farcical
      conference whose obvious purpose was only to give a respite to
      the Kornilovite Kerensky and make it easier for him to try new
      variations of the "ministerial leapfrog" game. 

    
      The Bolsheviks, it turned out, had a wrong attitude to
      parliamentarism in moments of revolutionary (and not
      constitutional) crises, an incorrect attitude to the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 

    
      How it happened can be understood—history made a
      very sharp turn at the time of the Kornilov revolt. The
      Party failed to keep pace with the incredibly fast tempo of
      history at this turning-point. The Party allowed itself to be
      diverted, for the time being, into the trap of a despicable
      talking-shop. 
    
      They should have left one hundredth of their forces for that
      talking-shop and devoted ninety-nine hundredths to the masses. 
    
      If the turn taken by history called for a compromise with the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks (personally I believe
      it did) the Bolsheviks should have proposed it clearly, openly
      and speedily, so that they could immediately turn to
      account the possible and probable refusal of the
      Bonapartist Kerensky's friends to agree to a compromise with
      them. 
    
      The refusal was already indicated by articles in Dyelo
      Naroda and Rabochaya Gazeta on the eve of the
      Conference. The masses should have been told as officially,
      openly and clearly as possible, they should have been told
      without the loss of a minute, that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks had rejected our offer
      of a compromise—Down with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks! The Conference could have afforded "to laugh" at the
      naïveté of Zarudny to the accompaniment of
      this slogan in the factories and barracks! 
    
      The atmosphere of a certain enthusiasm for the Conference and
      the situation surrounding it seems to have been built up from
      various sides. Comrade Zinoviev made a mistake in writing about
      the Commune so ambiguously (ambiguously, to say the least) that
      it appeared that the Commune, although victorious in Petrograd,
      might be defeated as in France in 1871. This is
      absolutely untrue. If the Commune were victorious in Petrograd
      it would be victorious throughout Russia. It was a
      mistake on his part to write that the Bolsheviks did right in
      proposing a proportional composition for the Presidium of the
      Petrograd Soviet. The revolutionary proletariat would never do
      anything worth while in the Soviet as long as the
      Tseretelis were allowed proportional participation; to let them
      in meant depriving ourselves of the opportunity to
      work, it meant the ruin of Soviet work. Comrade Kamenev
      was wrong in delivering the first speech at the Conference in a
      purely "constitutional" spirit when he raised the foolish
      question of confidence or non-confidence in the government. If,
      at such a meeting, it was not possible  to tell the
      truth about the Kornilovite Kerensky that had
      already been told both in

      Rabochy
  Put

      and the Moscow Sotsial-Demokrat,why not refer to those
      papers and make it well known to the masses that the
      Conference did not want to listen to the truth about the
      Kornilovite Kerensky?
  
    
      It was a mistake on the part of the Petrograd workers'
      delegations to send speakers to such a conference after
      Zarudny had spoken and the situation had been made clear. Why
      cast pearls before Kerensky's friends? Why divert the attention
      of proletarian forces to a farcical conference? Why did those
      delegations not go quite peacefully and legally to the barracks
      and the more backward factories? That would have been a million
      times more useful, essential, serious and to the point than the
      journey to the Alexandrinsky Theatre and chats with co-operators
      who sympathise with Yedinstvo and Kerensky. 
    
      Ten soldiers or ten workers from a backward factory who have
      become politically enlightened are worth a thousand times
      more than a hundred delegates hand-picked from
      various delegations by the Lieberdans. Parliamentarism should be
      used, especially in revolutionary times, not to waste valuable
      time over representatives of what is rotten, but to use the
      example of what is rotten to teach the masses.

      Why should those same proletarian delegations not "use" the
      Conference to publish, say, two posters explaining that the
      Conference is a farce and to display them in barracks
      and factories? One of the posters could depict Zarudny in a
      fool's cap, dancing on the stage and singing the song "Kerensky
      sacked us, Kerensky took us back".
      Around him stand Tsereteli, Chernov, Skobelev and a co-operator
      arm-in-arm with Lieber and Dan, all rolling with
      laughter. Caption—They are Happy.

      Poster number two. Zarudny again in front of the same audience
      saying "I asked about peace for six weeks. I got no
      answer". The audience is silent, their faces express
      "statesmanlike importance". Tsereteli looks particularly
      important as he writes in his notebook "What a fool that Zarudny
      is! The imbecile should be carting dung instead of being a
      minister. He is an advocate of the coalition and undermines it
      worse than a hundred Bolsheviks! He was a minister but he never
      learned to speak like one, he should have said, 'I continuously
      followed the campaign for peace for six weeks and I am fully
      convinced of its final success precisely under the coalition
      government in accordance with the great idea of Stockholm, etc.,
      etc.' Then even Russkaya
      Volya  would have praised Zarudny as the knight of the
      Russian revolution." 
    
      Caption: "Revolutionary-democratic" conference of male prostitutes. 
 
 
    
      Written before the end of the Conference; change the first
      phrase to something like "In all essentials the so-called
      Democratic. . . ." 
    
Footnotes

[1] An
      abridged version of the article was first published in No. 19 of
      Rabochy Put of October 7 (September 24),1917, under the
      title "Heroes of Fraud". It did not contain the part of Lenin's
      article which criticised the mistakes of the Bolsheviks in
      respect of the Democratic Conference, and also those of Zinoviev
      and Kamenev. It may have been this Lenin had in mind when in
      Chapter VI of the article "The Crisis Has Matured", which was
      circulated among members of the Central Committee, the Petrograd
      and Moscow Committees and the Soviets, he wrote with indignation
      that the Central Organ was deleting his statements about "the
      glaring errors on the part of the Bolsheviks. . ."  . 

      The first, second and third editions of Lenin's Collected
      Works contained the text of the article as it had appeared
      in Rabochy Put, but in the fourth edition it was
      published in full, according to the manuscript; this translation
      follows the manuscript.  
    

[2] 
      An ironical nickname which stuck to the Mensheviks Lieber and
      Dan and their followers, after Demyan Bedny's feuilleton in Sotsial-Demokrat
      [No. 141 of August 25 (September 7), 1917] under that title. 
    

[3] 
      On June 3 (16), 1907, the tsar issued a manifesto dissolving the
      Second State Duma and amending the electoral law. The
      landowners, industrialists and merchants were given many more
      seats in the Duma, and the workers and peasants many less. This
      was a gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17, 1905, and
      the Fundamental Law of 1906, which made all Government decrees
      subject to Duma approval. The Third Duma, which was elected
      under the new law and met on November 1 (14), 1907, was
      out-and-out reactionary.  
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
  From a Publicist's Diary







Publicist's Diary—Mistakes of Our Party




V. I. Lenin
From A Publicist's Diary
The Mistakes Of Our Party 


Written: September 22-24, 1917
First Published:Proletarskaya
RevolutsiaNo. 3 (26), 1924
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 52-58

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Friday, September 22, 1917.  
    

      The more one reflects on the meaning of the so-called
      Democratic Conference, and the more attentively one observes
      from outside— and it is said that the bystander sees
      most—the more firmly convinced one  becomes that our Party
      committed a mistake by participating in it. We should  have
      boycotted it. One may ask if there is any use in analysing such
      a  question since the past cannot be remedied. Such an objection
      to criticising  the tactics of yesterday, however, would be
      clearly unfounded. We have always  condemned, and as Marxists we
      must condemn, the tactics of those who live  "from hand to
      mouth". Momentary success is not enough for us. In general,
      plans calculated for a minute or a day are not enough for us. We
      must  constantly test ourselves by a study of the chain
      of political events  in their entirety, in their causal
      connection, in their results. By analysing  the errors of
      yesterday, we learn to avoid errors today and tomorrow.  

    

      A new revolution is obviously maturing in the country, a
      revolution of other classes (other than those that
      carried out the  revolution against tsarism). At that time it
      was a revolution of the  proletariat, the peasantry and the
      bourgeoisie in alliance with Anglo-French  finance capital
      against tsarism.  

    

      The revolution now maturing is one of the proletariat and the
      majority of the peasants, more specifically, of the poor
      peasants, against the  bourgeoisie, against its ally,
      Anglo-French finance capital and against its  government
      apparatus headed by the Bonapartist
Kerensky.   

 
    

      At the moment we shall not dwell on the facts testifying to  the
      rise of a new revolution, since, judging by the articles in
      Rabochy Put, our Central Organ, the Party has already
      made clear its views on this  point. The new revolutionary
      upsurge seems to be a phenomenon commonly  recognised by the
      Party. Data on this process of maturing, of course, still  have
      to be summarised, but they must form the subject of other
      articles.  

    

      At the present moment it is more important to call the  closest
      attention to the class differences between the old revolution
      and the  new, to weigh up the political situation and our tasks
      from the point of view  of this basic fact, class relations. At
      the time of the first revolution the  vanguard was formed by the
      workers and soldiers, i.e., by the proletariat and  the advanced
      sections of the peasantry.  

    

      This vanguard carried along not only many of the worst
      vacillating elements of the petty bourgeoisie (remember the
      indecision of the  Mensheviks and Trudoviks on the question of a
      republic), but also the  monarchist party of the Cadets, the
      liberal bourgeoisie, thereby making it a  republican party. Why
      was such a change possible?  

    

      Because economic domination is everything to the bourgeoisie,
      and the form of political domination is of very little
      importance; the bourgeoisie can rule just as well under a
      republic, its domination is even more certain under a republic,
      in the sense that under a republican political order, no changes
      in the composition of the government or in the composition and
      the grouping of the ruling parties affect the bourgeoisie.

    

      Of course, the bourgeoisie stood for and will stand for a
      monarchy, because the cruder armed protection of capital by
      monarchist  institutions is more obvious and "closer" to all the
      capitalists and  landowners. However, under a strong pressure
      "from below", the bourgeoisie has  always and everywhere
      "reconciled" itself to a republic, as long as it could  maintain
      its economic domination.  

    

      The relation of the proletariat and the poor peasantry, i.e.,
      the majority of the people, in respect of the
      bourgeoisie and Allied  (and world) imperialism is such that it
      is impossible for them to  "carry " the
      bourgeoisie with them. Moreover, the upper strata  of
      the petty bourgeoisie and the more well-to-do strata of
      the democratic petty bourgeoisie are  patently against
      a new revolution. This fact is so obvious that there is no  need
      to dwell on it here. The Lieberdans, Tseretelis and Chernovs
      illustrate  this most clearly.  
    

      The class relations have changed. This is the crux of the
      matter.  
    

      Different classes now stand "on the one and the other side of
      the barricade".  
    

      That is the main thing.  
    

      That, and that alone, is the scientific reason
      for speaking of a new revolution which—arguing
      purely theoretically,  taking the question in the
      abstract—could be accomplished legally if, for  instance,
      the Constituent Assembly, convoked by the bourgeoisie, produced
      a  majority opposed to the bourgeoisie, if the majority belonged
      to the parties  of the workers and poor peasants.  
    

      The objective relations of the classes, their role (economic
      and political) outside and inside representative institutions of
      the given  type; the rise or decline of the revolution; the
      relation of  extra-parliamentary to parliamentary means of
      struggle—these are the chief,  the basic objective facts
      which must be considered if the tactics of boycott  or
      participation are to be deduced in a Marxist way and not
      arbitrarily,  according to our "sympathies".  
    

      The experience of our revolution clearly demonstrates how to
      approach the boycott question in a Marxist way.  
    

      Why did the boycott of the Bulygin Duma[1] prove correct tactics?  
    

      Because it was in accordance with the objective alignment of
      social forces in their development. It provided the maturing
      revolution with a  slogan for the overthrow of an old order
      which, to distract the people from  the revolution, was
      convoking a clumsily fabricated compromise institution  (the
      Bulygin Duma) which did not show promise of any earnest
      "anchoring" in  parliamentarism. The extra-parliamentary means
      of struggle of the proletariat  and the peasantry were
      stronger. These are the elements that went into shaping  the
      correct tactics of boycotting the Bulygin Duma, tactics which
      took account  of the objective situation.   
    

      Why did the tactics of boycotting the Third Duma prove
      incorrect?  
    

      Because they were based only on the "catchiness" of the  boycott
      slogan and on the revulsion felt towards the brutal reaction of
      the  June Third "pigsty".[2] The objective situation, however, was
      such that on the one hand the revolution  was in a state of
      collapse and declining fast. For the upsurge of the  revolution
      a parliamentary base (even inside a "pigsty") was of tremendous
      political importance, since extra-parliamentary means of
      propaganda, agitation  and organisation were almost nonexistent
      or extremely weak. On the other  hand, the most openly
      reactionary nature of the Third Duma did  not prevent it from
      being an organ reflecting real class relations, namely,  the Stolypin
      combination of the monarchy and the bourgeoisie. This new
      relation of classes  was something the country had to get rid
      of.  
    

      These very elements shaped the tactics of participation in  the
      Third Duma that took proper account of the objective situation.  
    

      It is sufficient to give thought to these lessons gained from
      experience and the conditions required by a Marxist approach to
      the question  of boycott or participation, to realise that
      participation in the Democratic  Conference, the Democratic
      Council or the Pre-parliament would be wrong  tactics.  
    

      On the one hand, a new revolution is maturing. The war is on
      the upgrade. The extra-parliamentary means of propaganda,
      agitation and  organisation are tremendous. The "parliamentary"
      tribune in the given  Pre-parliament is insignificant. On the
      other hand, this Pre-parliament  neither reflects nor serves a
      new relation of classes; for instance, the  peasantry is here
      more poorly represented than in the already existing
      organs (Soviets of Peasants' Deputies). The Pre-parliament is in
      substance a  Bonapartist fraud, not only because the
      filthy gang of the Lieberdans,  Tseretelis and Chernovs,
      together with Kerensky and Co. have given this
      Tsereteli-Bulygin Duma a fake, hand-picked composition,
      but also more  profoundly because the only aim of the
      Pre-parliament is to trick the masses,  to deceive the workers
      and peasants, to distract them from the new upsurge of the
      revolution, to dazzle the eyes of the oppressed classes by a
      new dress for the old, long tried-out, bedraggled,
      threadbare  "coalition" with the bourgeoisie (i.e., the
      bourgeoisie's transformation of  Tsereteli and Co. into jesters
      helping to subordinate the people to  imperialism and the
      imperialist war).  
    

      "We are weak now," said the tsar in August 1905 to his feudal
      landowners. "Our power is wavering. The tide of the workers' and
      peasants'  revolution is rising. We must trick the 'plain man',
      we must dangle something  before his eyes. . . ."  
    

      "We are weak now," says the present "tsar", the Bonapartist
      Kerensky, to the Cadets, the non-party Tit Tityches,[3] Plekhanovs,
      Breshkovskayas and Co. "Our power is tottering. A wave of
      workers' and peasants' revolution against the bourgeoisie is
      rising. We must hoodwink the democrats by dying in new colours
      that jester's costume which the Socialist-Revolutionary and
      Menshevik 'leaders of revolutionary democracy', our
      dear friends the Tseretelis and Chernovs, have been wearing to
      fool the people since May 6, 1917.[4] We can easily dangle a
      'Pre-parliament' before their eyes."
    

      "We are strong now," said the tsar to his feudal landowners  in
      June 1907. "The wave of workers' and peasants' revolution is
      receding, but  we cannot maintain ourselves as of old; deception
      alone will not suffice. We  must have a new policy in the
      village, we must have a new economic and  political bloc with
      the Guchkovs and Milyukovs, with the bourgeoisie."  
    

      It is in this way that the three situations, August 1905,
      September 1917, and June 1907, may be presented to illustrate
      most vividly the  objective basis for the boycott tactics and
      its connection with class  relations. The oppressed classes are
      always being deceived by the oppressors,  but the meaning of
      this deception differs at different moments in history.  Tactics
      cannot be based on the bare fact that the oppressors deceive the
      people; tactics must be shaped after analysing class relations
      in their  entirety and the development of both
      extra-parliamentary and parliamentary  struggle.  
    

      Participation in the Pre-parliament is incorrect
      tactics that does not correspond to the objective relations of
      classes, to the  objective conditions of the moment.  
    

      We should have boycotted the Democratic Conference; we all
      erred by not doing so, but mistakes are no crime. We shall
      correct the mistake  only if we have a sincere desire to support
      the revolutionary struggle of the  masses, only if we give
      earnest thought to the objective foundations of our  tactics.  
    

      We must boycott the Pre-parliament. We must leave it and go  to
      the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, to
      the trade  unions, to the masses in general. We must call on
      them to struggle. We  must give them a correct
      and clear slogan: disperse the Bonapartist  gang of Kerensky and
      his fake Pre-parliament, with this  Tsereteli-Bulygin
      Duma. The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, even  after
      the Kornilov revolt, refused to accept our compromise of
      peacefully  transferring the power to the Soviets (in which we
      then had no  majority); they have again sunk
      into the morass of filthy and mean bargaining  with the
      Cadets. Down with the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries!
      Struggle against them ruthlessly. Expel them ruthlessly from all
      revolutionary  organisations. No negotiations, no communication
      with those friends of the  Kishkins, the friends of the
      Kornilovite landowners and capitalists.  
    

      Saturday, September 23.  
    

      Trotsky was for the boycott. Bravo, Comrade Trotsky!  
    

      Boycottism was defeated in the Bolshevik group at the  Democratic Conference.  
    

      Long live the boycott!  
    

      We cannot and must not under any circumstances reconcile
      ourselves to participation. A group at one of the conferences is
      not the  highest organ of the party and even the decisions of
      the highest organs are  subject to revision on the basis of
      experience.  
    

      We must at all costs strive to have the boycott question  solved
      both at a plenary meeting of the Executive Committee and at an
      extraordinary Party congress. The boycott question must now be
      made the  platform for elections to the Congress and for
      all elections inside the  Party. We must draw the
      masses into the discussion of this question.
      Class-conscious workers must take the matter into their own
      hands, organise  the discussion, and exert pressure on "those at
      the top".  
    

      There is not the slightest doubt that at the "top" of our  Party
      there are noticeable vacillations that may become
      ruinous,  because the struggle is developing; under
      certain conditions, at a certain  moment, vacillations may
      ruin the cause. We must put all our forces  into the
      struggle, we must uphold the correct line of the party of the
      revolutionary proletariat before it is too late.  
    

      Not all is well with the "parliamentary" leaders of our  Party;
      greater attention must be paid to them, there must be greater
      workers'  supervision over them; the competency of parliamentary
      groups must be more  clearly defined.  
    

      Our Party's mistake is obvious. The fighting party of the
      advanced class need not fear mistakes. What it should fear is
      persistence in a  mistake, refusal to admit and correct a
      mistake out of a false sense of shame.  
    

      Sunday, September 24.  
    

      The Congress of Soviets has been postponed till October 20.  The
      tempo of Russian life is such that this almost means postponing
      it to the  Greek Calends. The farce staged by the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and  Mensheviks after April 20-21 is
      being repeated for the second time.  

    
Footnotes

[1] Bulygin
      Duma—a consultative "representative institution",
      which the tsarist government promised to convene in 1905. The
      draft law on the  institution of a consultative Duma and the
      election law were worked out by a  commission chaired by the
      Minister of the Interior Bulygin, and published on  August 6
      (19), 1905. The Bolsheviks boycotted the Duma which the
      Government  failed to convoke: it was swept away by the general
      political strike in  October.  
    

[2]
      On June 3 (16), 1907, the tsar issued a  manifesto dissolving
      the Second State Duma and amending the electoral law. The
      landowners, industrialists and merchants were given many more
      seats in the  Duma, and the workers and peasants many less. This
      was a gross violation of  the Manifesto of October 17, 1905, and
      the Fundamental Law of 1906, which made  all Government decrees
      subject to Duma approval. The Third Duma, which was  elected
      under the new law and met on November 1 (14), 1907, was
      out-and-out  reactionary.
    

[3] Tit
      Titych—a merchant from Ostrovsky's comedy
      Shouldering  Another's Troubles, personifying the petty
      tyranny of the rich.   
    

[4] May
      6 : announcement of the first  coalition Provisional
      Government; August 31: the Petrograd Soviet of Workers'  and
      Soldiers' Deputies passed a Bolshevik resolution calling for the
      establishment of a Soviet Government; September 12: the date set
      by the  Central Executive Committee of the Soviets of Workers'
      and Soldiers' Deputies  and the Executive Committee of the
      All-Russia Soviet of Peasants' Deputies,  both dominated by
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, for the  convocation
      of a Democratic Conference. The Democratic Conference took place
      in Petrograd September 14-22 (September 27-October 5), 1917. For
      details click here.



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    The Tasks of the Revolution







The Tasks of the Revolution




V. I. Lenin
The Tasks of the Revolution


Written: October, 1917
      
First Published: 1917 in Rabochy
      Put Nos. 20 and 21, October 9 and 10 (September 26 and 27),
      1917

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 59-68

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters
      
      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Russia is a country of the petty bourgeoisie, by far the greater
      part of the population belonging to this class. Its vacillations
      between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat are inevitable, and
      only when it joins the proletariat is the victory of the
      revolution, of the cause of peace, freedom, and land for the
      working people assured easily, peacefully, quickly, and
      smoothly. 

    
      The course of our revolution shows us these vacillations in
      practice. Let us then not harbour any illusions about the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties; let us stick
      firmly to the path of our proletarian class. The poverty of the
      poor peasants, the horrors of the war, the horrors of
      hunger—all these are showing the masses more and more
      clearly the correctness of the proletarian path, the need to
      support the proletarian revolution. 

    
      The "peaceful" hopes of the petty bourgeoisie that there might
      be a "coalition" with the bourgeoisie and agreements with them,
      that it will be possible to wait "calmly" for the "speedy"
      convocation of the Constituent Assembly, etc., have been
      mercilessly, cruelly, implacably destroyed by the course of the
      revolution. The Kornilov revolt was the last cruel lesson, a
      lesson on a grand scale, supplementing thousands upon thousands
      of small lessons in which workers and peasants were deceived by
      local capitalists and landowners, in which soldiers were
      deceived by the officers etc., etc. 

    
      Discontent, indignation and wrath are growing in the army, among
      the peasantry and among the workers. The "coalition" of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks with the bourgeoisie,
      promising everything and fulfilling nothing, is irritating the
      masses, is opening their eyes, is pushing them towards
      insurrection. 

    
      There is a growing Left opposition among the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries (Spiridonova and others) and among the
      Mensheviks (Martov and others), and has already reached forty
      per cent of the Council and Congress of those parties. And down
      below, among the proletariat and the peasantry,
      particularly the poorest sections, the majority of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks belong to the
      Lefts.

      The Kornilov revolt is instructive and has proved a good lesson. 
    
      It is impossible to know whether the Soviets will be able to go
      farther than the leaders of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks, and thus ensure a peaceful development of the
      revolution, or whether they will continue to mark time, thus
      making a proletarian uprising inevitable. 

    
      We cannot know this. 
    
      Our business is to help get everything possible done to make
      sure the "last" chance for a peaceful development of the
      revolution, to help by the presentation of our programme, by
      making clear its national character, its absolute accord with
      the interests and demands of a vast majority of the population. 

    
      The following lines are an essay in the presentation of such a programme. 
    
      Let us take it more to those down below, to the masses, to the
      office employees, to the workers, to the peasants, not only to
      our supporters, but particularly to those who follow the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, to the non-party elements, to the
      ignorant. Let us lift them up so that they can pass an
      independent judgment, make their own decisions, send their
      own delegations to the Conference, to the Soviets, to the
      government and our work will not have been in vain, no
      matter what the outcome of the Conference. This will then
      prove useful for the Conference, for the elections to the
      Constituent Assembly, and for all other political activity in
      general. 

    
      Experience teaches us that the Bolshevik programme and tactics
      are correct. So little time passed, so much happened from April
      20 to the Kornilov revolt.  

 
    
      The experience of the masses, the experience of
      oppressed classes taught them very, very much in that
      time; the leaders of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks have completely cut adrift from the masses. This will
      most certainly be revealed in the discussion of our concrete
      programme insofar as we are able to bring it to the notice of
      the masses. 

    
Agreements With the Capitalists are Disastrous 

      1. To leave in power the representatives of the bourgeoisie, even
        a small number of them, to leave in power such notorious
        Kornilovites as Generals Alexeyev, Klembovsky, Bagration,
        Gagarin, and others, or such as have proved their complete
        powerlessness in face of the bourgeoisie, and their ability of
        acting Bonaparte-fashion like Kerensky, is, on the one hand,
        merely opening the door wide to famine and the inevitable
        economic catastrophe which the capitalists are purposely
        accelerating and intensifying; on the other hand, it will lead
        to a military catastrophe, since the army hates the General
        Staff and cannot enthusiastically participate in the
        imperialist war. Besides, there is no doubt that Kornilovite
        generals and officers remaining in power will deliberately
        open the front to the Germans, as they have done in
        Galicia and Riga. This can be prevented only by the formation
        of a new government on a new basis, as expounded below. To
        continue any kind of agreements with the bourgeoisie after all
        that we have gone through since April 20 would be, on the part
        of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, not only an
        error but a direct betrayal of the people and of the
        revolution. 

    
 
      2. All power in the country must pass exclusively to the
        representatives of the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and
        Peasants' Deputies on the basis of a definite programme and
        under the condition of the government being fully responsible
        to the Soviets. New elections to the Soviets must be held
        immediately, both to record the experience of the people
        during the recent weeks of the revolution, which have been
        particularly eventful, and to eliminate crying injustices
        (lack of proportional representation, unequal elections, etc.)
        which in some cases still remain. 

    
      All power locally, wherever there are not yet any democratically
      elected institutions, and also in the army, must be taken over
      exclusively by the local Soviets and by commissars and other
      institutions elected by them, but only those that have been
      properly elected.

    
      Workers and revolutionary troops, i.e., those
      who have in practice shown their ability to suppress the
      Kornilovites, must everywhere be armed, and this must be done
      with the full support of the state. 
    
Peace to the Peoples 

      3. The Soviet Government must straight away offer to
        all the belligerent peoples (i.e., simultaneously
        both to their governments and to the worker and peasant
        masses) to conclude an immediate general peace on democratic
        terms, and also to conclude an immediate armistice (even if
        only for three months). 

    
      The main condition for a democratic peace is the renunciation of
      annexations (seizures)—not in the incorrect sense that all
      powers get back what they have lost, but in the only correct
      sense that every nationality without any exception,
      both in Europe and in the colonies, shall obtain its freedom and
      the possibility to decide for itself whether it is to form a
      separate state or whether it is to enter into the
      composition of some other state. 

    
      In offering the peace terms, the Soviet Government must itself
      immediately take steps towards their fulfillment, i.e., it must
      publish and repudiate the secret treaties by which we have been
      bound up to the present time, those which were concluded by the
      tsar and which give Russian capitalists the promise of the
      pillaging of Turkey, Austria, etc. Then we must immediately
      satisfy the demands of the Ukrainians and the Finns, ensure
      them, as well as all other non-Russian nationalities in Russia,
      full freedom, including freedom of secession, applying the same
      to all Armenia, undertaking to evacuate that country as
      well as the Turkish lands occupied by us, etc. 

    
      Such peace terms will not meet with the approval of the
      capitalists, but they will meet with such tremendous sympathy on
      the part of all the peoples and will cause such a great
      world-wide outburst of enthusiasm and of general indignation
      against the continuation of the predatory war that it is
      extremely probable that we shall at once obtain a truce and a
      consent to open peace negotiations. For the workers' revolution
      against the war is irresistibly growing everywhere, and it can
      be spurred on, not by phrases about peace (with which the
      workers and peasants have been deceived by all the
      imperialist governments including our own Kerensky government),
      but by a break with the capitalists and by the offer of peace. 

    
      If the least probable thing happens, i.e., if not a single
      belligerent state accepts even a truce, then as far as we are
      concerned the war becomes truly forced upon us, it becomes a
      truly just war of defence. If this is understood by the
      proletariat and the poor peasantry Russia will become many times
      stronger even in the military sense, especially after a complete
      break with the capitalists who are robbing the people;
      furthermore, under such conditions it would, as far as we are
      concerned, be a war in league with the oppressed classes of all
      countries, a war in league with the oppressed peoples of the
      whole world, not in word, but in deed. 

    
      The people must be particularly cautioned against the
      capitalists' assertion which sometimes influences the petty
      bourgeoisie and others who are frightened, namely, that the
      British and other capitalists are capable of doing serious
      damage to the Russian revolution if we break the present
      predatory alliance with them. Such an assertion is false through
      and through, for "Allied financial aid" enriches the bankers and
      "supports" the Russian workers and peasants in exactly the same
      way as a rope supports a man who has been hanged. There is
      plenty of bread, coal, oil and iron in Russia; for these
      products to be properly distributed it is only necessary for us
      to rid ourselves of the landowners and capitalists who are
      robbing the people. As to the possibility of the Russian people
      being threatened with war by their present Allies, it is
      obviously absurd to assume that the French and Italians could
      unite their armies with those of the Germans and move them
      against Russia who offers a just peace. As to Britain, America,
      and Japan, even if they were to declare war against Russia
      (which for them is extremely difficult, both because of the
      extreme unpopularity of such a war among the masses and because
      of the divergence of material interests of the capitalists of
      those countries over the partitioning of Asia, especially over
      the plunder of China), they could not cause Russia one-hundredth
      part of the damage and misery which the war with Germany,
      Austria, and Turkey is causing her. 

    
Land to Those Who Till it 

      4. The Soviet Government must immediately declare the abolition
        of private landed estates without compensation and place all
        these estates under the management of the peasant committees
        pending the solution of the problem by the Constituent
        Assembly. These peasant committees are also to take over all
        the landowners' stock and implements, with the proviso that
        they be placed primarily at the disposal of the poor peasants
        for their use free of charge. 

    
      Such measures, which have long been demanded by an immense
      majority of the peasantry, both in the resolutions of congresses
      and in hundreds of mandates from local peasants  (as may be
      seen, for instance, from a summary of 242 mandates published by
      Izvestia
      Soveta Krestyanskikh Deputatov, are absolutely and
      urgently necessary. There must be no further procrastination
      like that from which the peasantry suffered so much at the time
      of the "coalition" government. 

    
      Any government that hesitates to introduce these measures should
      be regarded as a government hostile to the people that
      should be overthrown and crushed by an uprising of the workers
      and peasants. On the other hand, only a government that realises
      these measures will be a government of all the people.  

    
Struggle Against Famine and Economic Ruin 

      5. The Soviet Government must immediately introduce workers'
        control of production and distribution on a nation-wide
        scale. Experience since May 6 has shown that in the absence of
        such control all the promises of reforms and attempts to
        introduce them are powerless, and famine, accompanied by
        unprecedented catastrophe is becoming a greater menace to the
        whole country week by week. 

    
      It is necessary to nationalise the banks and the insurance
      business immediately, and also the most important branches of
      industry (oil, coal, metallurgy, sugar, etc.), and at the same
      time, to abolish commercial secrets and to establish unrelaxing
      supervision by the workers and peasants over the negligible
      minority of capitalists who wax rich on government contracts and
      evade accounting and just taxation of their profits and
      property. 

    
      Such measures, which do not deprive either the middle peasants,
      the Cossacks or the small handicraftsmen of a single kopek, are
      urgently needed for the struggle against famine and are
      absolutely just because they distribute the burdens of the war
      equitably. Only after capitalist plunder has been curbed and the
      deliberate sabotage of production has been stopped will it be
      possible to work for an improvement in labour productivity,
      introduce universal labour conscription and the proper exchange
      of grain for manufactured goods, and return to the Treasury
      thousands of millions in paper money now being hoarded by the
      rich. 

    
      Without such measures, the abolition of the landed estates
      without compensation is also impossible, for the major part of
      the estates is mortgaged to the banks, so that the interests of
      the landowners and capitalists are inseparably linked up. 

    
      The latest resolution of the Economic Department of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee of Soviets of Workers'
      and Soldiers' Deputies (Rabochaya Gazeta No. 152)
      recognises not only the "harm " caused by the
      government's measures (like the raising of grain prices for the
      enrichment of the landowners and kulaks), not only "the fact of
      the complete inactivity on the part of the central
      organs set up by the government for the regulation of economic
      life", but even the "contravention of the laws" by this
      government. This admission on the part of the ruling parties,
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, proves once more
      the criminal nature of the policy of conciliation with the
      bourgeoisie. 

    
Struggle Against the Counter-Revolution of the Landowners and Capitalists 

      6. The Kornilov and Kaledin revolt was supported by the entire
        class of the landowners and capitalists, with the party of the
        Cadets ("people's freedom" party) at their head. This has
        already been fully proved by the facts published in
        Izvestia of the Central Executive Committee. 

    
      However, nothing has been done either to suppress this
      counter-revolution completely or even to investigate it, and
      nothing serious can be done without the transfer of power to the
      Soviets. No commission can conduct a full investigation, or
      arrest the guilty, etc., unless it holds state power. Only a
      Soviet government can do this, and must do it. Only a Soviet
      government can make Russia secure against the otherwise
      inevitable repetition of "Kornilov" attempts by arresting the
      Kornilovite generals and the ringleaders of the bourgeois
      counter-revolution (Guchkov, Milyukov, Ryabushinsky, Maklakov
      and Co.), by disbanding the counter-revolutionary associations
      (the State Duma, the officers' unions, etc.), by placing their
      members under the surveillance of the local Soviets and by
      disbanding counter-revolutionary armed units. 

    
      This government alone can set up a commission to make a full and
      public investigation of the Kornilov case and all the other
      cases, even those started by the bourgeoisie; and the party of
      the Bolsheviks, in its turn, would appeal to the workers to give
      full co-operation and to submit only to such a commission. 

    
      Only a Soviet government could successfully combat such a
      flagrant injustice as the capitalists' seizure of the largest
      printing presses and most of the papers with the aid of millions
      squeezed out of the people. It is necessary to suppress the
      bourgeois counter-revolutionary papers (Rech,
      Russkoye
      Slovo, presses, to declare private advertisements in
      the papers a state monopoly, to transfer them to the paper
      published by the Soviets, the paper that tells the peasants the
      truth. Only in this way can and must the bourgeoisie be deprived
      of its powerful weapon of lying and slandering, deceiving the
      people with impunity, misleading the peasantry, and preparing a
      counter-revolution. 

    
Peaceful Development of the Revolution  
    

      7. A possibility very seldom to be met with in the history of
        revolutions now faces the democracy of Russia, the Soviets and
        the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties—the
        possibility of convening the Constituent Assembly at the
        appointed date without further delays, of making the country
        secure against a military and economic catastrophe, and of
        ensuring the peaceful development of the revolution. 

    
      If the Soviets now take full state power exclusively into their
      own hands for the purpose of carrying out the programme set
      forth above, they will not only obtain the support of
      nine-tenths of the population of Russia, the working class and
      an overwhelming majority of the peasantry; they will also be
      assured of the greatest revolutionary enthusiasm on the part of
      the army and the majority of the people, an enthusiasm without
      which victory over famine and war is impossible. 

    
      There could be no question of any resistance to the Soviets if
      the Soviets themselves did not waver. No class will dare start
      an uprising against the Soviets, and the landowners and
      capitalists, taught a lesson by the experience of the Kornilov
      revolt, will give up their power peacefully and yield to the
      ultimatum of the Soviets. To overcome the capitalists'
      resistance to the programme of the Soviets, supervision over the
      exploiters by workers and peasants and such measures of
      punishing the recalcitrants as confiscation of their entire
      property coupled with a short term of arrest will be
      sufficient. 

    
      By seizing full power, the Soviets could still today—and
      this is probably their last chance—ensure the peaceful
      development of the revolution, peaceful elections of deputies by
      the people, and a peaceful struggle of parties inside the
      Soviets; they could test the programmes of the various parties
      in practice and power could pass peacefully from one party to
      another. 

    
      The entire course of development of the revolution, from the
      movement of April 20 to the Kornilov revolt, shows that there is
      bound to be the bitterest civil war between the bourgeoisie and
      the proletariat if this opportunity is missed. Inevitable
      catastrophe will bring this war nearer. It must end, as all data
      and considerations accessible to human reason go to prove, in
      the full victory of the working class, in that class, supported
      by the poor peasantry, carrying out the above programme; it may,
      however, prove very difficult and bloody, and may cost the lives
      of tens of thousands of landowners, capitalists, and officers
      who sympathise with them. The proletariat will not hesitate to
      make every sacrifice to save the revolution, which is possible
      only by implementing the programme set forth above. On the other
      hand, the proletariat would support the Soviets in every way if
      they were to make use of their last chance to secure a peaceful
      development of the revolution. 

    



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to I. T. Smilga







Letter To I. T. Smilga







V. I. Lenin
Letter To I. T. Smilga

      Chairman Of The Regional Committee
 
      Of The Army,
 
      Navy And Workers Of Finland


Written: September 27 (October 10). 1917
      
First Published: Pravda
      No. 255, November 7, 1925.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 69-73, from the manuscript.

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Comrade Smilga,
    

      I am taking advantage of a favourable opportunity to talk with
      you in greater detail.
    
The general political situation causes me great
    anxiety. The Petrograd Soviet and the Bolsheviks have declared war
    on the government. But the government has an army, and is
    preparing systematically. (Kerensky at General
    Headquarters is obviously entering into an understanding— a
    business-like understanding with the Kornilovites to use
    troops to put down the Bolsheviks.)

    
      And what are we doing? We are only passing resolutions. We are
      losing time. We set "dates"(October 20, the Congress of
      Soviets—is it not ridiculous to put it off so long? Is it
      not ridiculous to rely on that?). The Bolsheviks are not
      conducting regular work to prepare their own military
      forces for the overthrow of Kerensky.

    
      Events have fully proved the correctness of the proposal I made
      at the time of the Democratic Conference, namely, that the Party
      must put the armed uprising on the order of the
      day.[See The
      Bolsheviks Must Assume Power]

Events compel us to do this. History has made the
military question now the fundamental political
question. I am afraid that the Bolsheviks forget this, being
busy with "day-to-day events," petty current questions, and
"hoping" that "the wave will sweep Kerensky
away". Such hope is naïve; it is the same as relying on
chance, and may prove criminal on the part of the party of the
revolutionary proletariat.
    
      It is my opinion that inside the Party we must agitate for an
earnest attitude towards the armed uprising, for which reason
this letter should be typed and delivered to the Petrograd and
Moscow comrades.

    

      2
    

      Now about your role. It seems to me we can have
      completely at our disposal only the troops in Finland
      and the Baltic fleet and only they can play a serious military
      role. I think you must make most of your high position, shift
      all the petty routine work to assistants and secretaries and not
      waste time on "resolutions"; give all your attention to the
      military preparation of the troops in Finland plus the fleet for
      the impending overthrow of Kerensky. Create a secret
      committee of absolutely trustworthy military men,
      discuss matters thoroughly with them, collect (and
      personally verify) the most precise data on the
      composition and the location of troops near and in Petrograd,
      the transfer of the troops from Finland to Petrograd, the
      movement of the fleet, etc.

    
      If we fail to do this, we may turn out to be consummate idiots,
      the owners of beautiful resolutions and of Soviets, but no
      power! I think it is possible for you to select really
      reliable and competent military men, to make a trip to Ino40 and
      other most important points, to weigh and study the matter
      earnestly, not relying on the boastful general phrases
      all too common with us.

    
      It is obvious that we can under no circumstances allow
      the troops to be moved from Finland. Better do anything, better
      decide on an uprising, on the seizure of power, later to be
      transferred to the Congress of Soviets. I read in the papers
      today that in two weeks the danger of a landing will be
      nil. Obviously, you have very little time left for preparation.

    

      3
    


      To continue. We must utilise our "power" in Finland to conduct
      systematic propaganda among the Cossacks now stationed in
      Finland. From Vyborg, for instance, Kerensky and Co. purposely
      removed some of them, fearing "Bolshevisation", and stationed
      them in Uusikirkko and Perkjärvi, between Vyborg and
      Terijoki, in Bolshevik-proof isolation. We must study all the
      information about the location of the Cossacks, and must
      organise the dispatch of propaganda groups to them from
      among the best forces of the sailors and soldiers in
      Finland. This is imperative. Do the same thing about literature.

    

      4
    

      To continue. Of course, both sailors and soldiers go home on
      furloughs. Out of these men we must form groups of propagandists
      to travel over the provinces systematically and to carry on both
      general propaganda and propaganda in favour of the Constituent
      Assembly in the villages. Your situation is exceptionally good
      because you are in a position to begin immediately to
      form that bloc with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries which
      alone can give us stable power in Russia and a majority in the
      Constituent Assembly. While things are being settled, organise
      such a bloc immediately in your place, organise the
      publication of leaflets (find out what you can do about them
      technically as well as in the matter of transporting them into
      Russia). Then each propaganda group for work in the rural areas
      should consist of not less than two persons—one from the
      Bolsheviks and one from the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. The
      Socialist-Revolutionary "trade mark"is still popular among
      village folk and you must make the most of your good fortune
      (you have some Left Socialist-Revolutionaries) to effect a bloc
      of the Bolsheviks and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
      under this "trade mark" in the countryside, a bloc of peasants
      and workers and not of peasants and capitalists.

    
      5
    
      It seems to me that in order to prepare people's minds properly
      we must immediately circulate the following slogan: transfer
      power now to the Petrograd Soviet which will transfer
      it to the Congress of Soviets. Why should we tolerate three more
      weeks of war and Kerensky's "Kornilovite preparations"?

    
Propaganda in favour of this slogan by the Bolsheviks
      and Left Socialist-Revolutionaries in Finland can do nothing but
      good.

    
      6
    
      Since you are vested with "power" in Finland, you have to do one
      more very important, though in itself modest job—organise
      the illegal transport of literature from
      Sweden. Without this all talk of an "International" is an empty
      phrase. This can be done, first, by creating our own
      organisation of soldiers at the frontier; secondly, if
      this is impossible, by organising regular trips of at least
      one reliable man to a certain place where I began to
      organise the transport with the aid of the person in whose
      house I lived for one day before moving to Helsingfors
      (Rovio knows him).[1] Perhaps we must help with some
      money. Get this done by all means!

    
      7
    
      I think we should meet to talk all these things over. You could
      come here; it would take you less than a day; if you come only
      to see me, have Rovio phone Huttunen and ask him whether Rovio's
      "sister-in-law"(meaning you) may see Huttunen's "sister"(meaning
      myself). I may have to leave suddenly.

    
      Do not fail to acknowledge the receipt of this letter (burn it)
      through the comrade who will bring it to Rovio and who will
      soon go back.

      In case I stay here longer, we must organise postal
      connections. You could help by sending envelopes
      through railway workers to the Vyborg Soviet (inside
      envelope: "for Huttunen").

    
      8
    

      Send me by the same comrade identification papers (as formal as
      possible, either typewritten, or in very clear
      handwriting on the stationery of the Regional Committee,
      stamped and with the signature of the chairman), in the name of
      Konstantin Petrovich Ivanov, to the effect that the chairman of
      the Regional Committee vouches for comrade so-and-so, and
      requests all Soviets, the Vyborg
      Soviet of Soldiers' Deputies as well as others, to give him
      full confidence, aid and support.

    
      I need it in case of some emergency, since a "conflict" and a
      "meeting" are equally possible.

    
      9
    
      Have you a copy of the Moscow collection of articles On the
      Revision of the Programme?] Try to find one among the
      comrades in Helsingfors and send it to me by the same comrade.

    
      10
    
      Bear in mind that Rovio is a fine fellow, but lazy. He
      must be looked after and reminded of things twice a
      day. Otherwise he won't do them.

    
      Greetings, 
      K. Ivanov

Footnotes

[1] 
      The reference is to Deputy of the Finnish Diet K. Vijk, in whose
    coutnry-house at Mälm station Lenin stayed for a day when on
    his way to Helsingros.


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    The Crisis Has Matured








The Crisis Has Matured







V. I. Lenin
The Crisis Has Matured

Written: October,
    1917
First Published: Sections I-III and V published
    on October 20(7), 1917 in the newspaper Rabochy Put No 20; section
    VI first published in 1924 according to the manuscript.[1]
Source:Lenin’s Collected Works,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pp. 74-85
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George Hanna,
    Edited by George Hanna
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles Farrell
    and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000

 
The end of September undoubtedly marked a great
    turning-point in the history of the Russian revolution and, to all
    appearances, of the world revolution as well.
The world working-class revolution began with the action of individuals,
    whose boundless courage represented everything honest that remained of that
    decayed official "socialism" which is in reality social-chauvinism.
    Liebknecht
    in Germany, Adler in
    Austria, MacLean in
    Britain—these are the best-known names of the isolated heroes who have
    taken upon themselves the arduous role of forerunners of the world
    revolution.
The second stage in the historical preparation for this revolution was a
    widespread mass discontent, expressing itself in the split of the official
    parties, in illegal publications and in street demonstrations. The protest
    against the war became stronger, and the number of victims of government
    persecution increased. The prisons of countries famed for their observance
    of law and even for their freedom—Germany, France, Italy and
    Britain—became filled with tens and hundreds of internationalists,
    opponents of the war and advocates of a working-class revolution.
The third stage has now begun. This stage may be called the eve of
    revolution. Mass arrests of party leaders in free Italy, and particularly
    the beginning of mutinies in the German army,[2] are indisputable symptoms that a great
    turning-point is at hand, that we are on the eve of a world wide
    revolution.
Even before this there were, no doubt, individual cases of mutiny among
    the troops in Germany, but they were so small, so weak and isolated that it
    was possible to hush them up—and that was the chief way of checking
    the mass contagion of seditious action. Finally, there developed
    such a movement in the navy that it was impossible to hush it up,
    despite all the severity of the German regime of military servitude,
    severity elaborated with amazing minuteness of detail and observed with
    incredible pedantry.




Doubt is out of the question. We are on the threshold of a world
    proletarian revolution. And since of all the proletarian internationalists
    in all countries only we Russian Bolsheviks enjoy a measure of
    freedom—we have a legal party and a score or so of papers, we have the
    Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies of both capitals on our side,
    and we have the support of a majority of the people in a time of
    revolution—to us the saying, "To whom much has been given, of him much
    shall be required" in all justice can and must be applied.
II
The crucial point of the revolution in Russia has undoubtedly
    arrived.
In a peasant country, and under a revolutionary, republican government
    which enjoys the support of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
    parties that only yesterday dominated petty-bourgeois democracy, a
    peasant revolt is developing.
Incredible as this is, it is a fact.
We Bolsheviks are not surprised by this fact. We have always said that
    the government of the notorious "coalition" with the bourgeoisie is a
    government that betrays democracy and the revolution, that it is a
    government of imperialist slaughter, a government that
    protects the capitalists and landowners from the
    people.
Owing to the deception practised by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    the Mensheviks, there still exists in Russia, under a republic and in a
    time of revolution, a government of capitalists and landowners side by side
    with the Soviets. This is the bitter and sinister reality. Is it then
    surprising, in view of the incredible hardship inflicted on the people by
    prolonging the imperialist war and by its consequences, that a peasant
    revolt has begun and is spreading in Russia?
Is it then surprising that the enemies of the Bolsheviks, the leaders of
    the official Socialist-Revolutionary Party, the very party that
    supported the "coalition" all along, the party that until the last few days
    or weeks had the majority of the people on its side, the party that
    continues to harry and abuse the "new" Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have
    realised that the policy of coalition is a betrayal of the interests of the
    peasants—is it surprising that these leaders of the official
    Socialist-Revolutionary Party wrote the following in an editorial in their
    official organ, Dyelo Naroda of September 29:
"So far practically nothing has been done to put an end to
    the relations of bondage that still prevail in the villages of central
    Russia. . . . The bill for the regulation of land relations in the
    countryside, which was introduced in the Provisional Government long ago,
    and which has even passed through such a purgatory as the Judicial
    Conference, has got hopelessly stuck in some office. . . . Are we not right
    in asserting that our republican government is still a long way from having
    rid itself of the old habits of the tsarist administration, and that the
    dead hand of Stolypin is still making itself strongly felt in the methods
    of the revolutionary ministers?"
This is written by the official Socialist-Revolutionaries! Just think:
    the supporters of the coalition are forced to admit that in a
    peasant country, after seven months of revolution, "practically nothing has
    been done to put an end to the bondage" of the peasants, to their
    enslavement by the land owners! These Socialist-Revolutionaries are
    forced to give the name of Stolypins to their colleague,
    Kerensky, and his gang of ministers.
Could we get more eloquent testimony than this from the camp of our
    opponents, not only to the effect that the coalition has collapsed and that
    the official Socialist-Revolutionaries who tolerate Kerensky have become an
    anti-popular, anti-peasant and
    counter-revolutionary party, but also that the whole Russian
    revolution has reached a turning-point?
A peasant revolt in a peasant country against the government of the
    Socialist-Revolutionary Kerensky, the Mensheviks Nikitin and Gvozdyov, and
    other ministers who represent capital and the interests of the landowners!
    The crushing of this revolt by military measures by a republican
    government!
In the face of such facts, can one remain a conscientious champion of
    the proletariat and yet deny that a crisis has matured, that the revolution
    is passing through an extremely critical moment, that the government's
    victory over the peasant revolt would now sound the death knell of the
    revolution, would be the final triumph of the Kornilov revolt ?
III
It is obvious that if in a peasant country, after seven months of a
    democratic republic, matters could come to a peasant revolt, it irrefutably
    proves that the revolution is suffering nation-wide collapse, that it is
    experiencing a crisis of unprecedented severity, and that the forces of
    counter-revolution have gone the limit.
That is obvious. In the face of such a fact as a peasant revolt all
    other political symptoms, even were they to contradict the fact that a
    nation-wide crisis is maturing, would have no significance whatsoever.
But on the contrary, all the symptoms do indicate that a nation-wide
    crisis has matured.
Next to the agrarian question, the most important question in Russia's
    state affairs is the national question, particularly for the
    petty-bourgeois masses of the population. And at the "Democratic"
    Conference, which was fixed by Mr. Tsereteli and Co., we find that the
    "national" curia takes second place for radicalism, yielding only to the
    trade unions, and exceeding the curia of the Soviets of Workers'
    and Soldiers' Deputies in the percentage of votes cast against the
    coalition (40 out of 55). The Kerensky government—a government
    suppressing the peasant revolt—is withdrawing the revolutionary troops
    from Finland in order to strengthen the reactionary Finnish bourgeoisie. In
    the Ukraine, the conflicts of the Ukrainians in general, and of the
    Ukrainian troops in particular, with the government are becoming more and
    more frequent.
Furthermore, let us take the army, which in war-time plays an
    exceptionally big role in all state affairs. We find that the army in
    Finland and the fleet in the Baltic have completely parted ways
    with the government. We have the testimony of the officer Dubasov, a
    non-Bolshevik, who speaks in the name of the whole front and declares in a
    manner more revolutionary than that of any Bolsheviks that the soldiers
    will not fight any longer.[3] We have governmental reports stating that the
    soldiers are in a state of "agitation" and that it is impossible to
    guarantee the maintenance of "order" (i.e., participation of these troops
    in the suppression of the peasant revolt). We have, finally, the voting in
    Moscow, where fourteen thousand out of seventeen thousand soldiers voted
    for the Bolsheviks.
This vote in the elections to the district councils in Moscow is in
    general one of the most striking symptoms of the profound change which has
    taken place in the mood of the whole nation. It is generally known that
    Moscow is more petty-bourgeois than Petrograd. It is a fact frequently
    corroborated and indisputable that the Moscow proletariat has an
    incomparably greater number of connections with the countryside, that it
    has greater sympathy for the peasant and is closer to the sentiments of the
    peasant.
In Moscow the vote cast for the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
    Mensheviks nevertheless dropped from 70 per cent in June to 18 per cent.
    There can be no doubt that the petty bourgeoisie and the people have turned
    away from the coalition. The Cadets have increased their strength from 17
    to 30 per cent, but they remain a minority, a hopeless minority, despite
    the fact that they have obviously been joined
    by the "Right" Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the "Right" Mensheviks. Russkiye
    Vedomosti states that the absolute number of votes cast
    for the Cadets fell from 67,000 to 62,000. Only the votes
    cast for the Bolsheviks increased—from 34,000 to 82,000. They received
    47 per cent of the total vote. There can be no shadow of doubt that we,
    together with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, now have a majority in
    the Soviets, in the army, and in the country.
Among the symptoms that have not only a symptomatic, but also a very
    real significance is the fact that the armies of railway and postal
    employees, who are of immense importance from the general economic,
    political and military point of view, continue to be in sharp conflict with
    the government,[4] even the Menshevik defencists are dissatisfied with
    "their" Minister, Nikitin, and the official Socialist-Revolutionaries call
    Kerensky and Co. "Stolypins". Is it not clear that if such "support" of the
    government by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries has any value at
    all it can be only a negative value?
IV
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
V
Yes, the leaders of the Central Executive Committee are pursuing the
    correct tactics of defending the bourgeoisie and the landowners. And there
    is not the slightest doubt that if the Bolsheviks allowed themselves to be
    caught in the trap of constitutional illusions, "faith" in the Congress of
    Soviets and in the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, "waiting" for
    the Congress of Soviets, and so forth—these Bolsheviks would most
    certainly be miserable traitors to the proletarian cause.
They would be traitors to the cause, for by their conduct they would be
    betraying the German revolutionary workers who have started a revolt in the
    navy. To "wait" for the Congress of Soviets and so forth under such
    circumstances would be a betrayal of internationalism, a betrayal
    of the cause of the world socialist revolution.
For internationalism consists of deeds and not phrases, not
    expressions of solidarity, not resolutions.
The Bolsheviks would be traitors to the peasants, for to
    tolerate the suppression of the peasant revolt by a government which
    even Dyelo Naroda compares with the Stolypin government would be
    to ruin the whole revolution, to ruin it for good. An outcry is
    raised about anarchy and about the increasing indifference of the people,
    but what else can the people be but indifferent to the elections, when the
    peasants have been driven to revolt while the so-called
    "revolutionary democrats" are patiently tolerating its suppression by
    military force!
The Bolsheviks would be traitors to democracy and to freedom, for to
    tolerate the suppression of the peasant revolt at such a moment would
    mean allowing the elections to the Constituent Assembly to be
    fixed in exactly the same way as the Democratic Conference and the
    "Pre-parliament" were fixed, only even worse and more crudely.
The crisis has matured. The whole future of the Russian revolution is at
    stake. The honour of the Bolshevik Party is in question. The whole future
    of the international workers' revolution for socialism is at stake.
The crisis has matured....
September 29, 1917.

Everything to this point may be published, but what follows is to be
    distributed among the members of the Central Committee,
    the Petrograd Committee, the Moscow Committee, and
    the Soviets.
VI
What, then, is to be done? We must aussprechen was ist, "state
    the facts", admit the truth that there is a tendency, or an opinion, in our
    Central Committee and among the leaders of our Party which favours
    waiting for the Congress of Soviets, and is opposed to
    taking power immediately, is opposed to an immediate insurrection.
    That tendency, or opinion, must be overcome.[5]
Otherwise, the Bolsheviks will cover themselves with eternal
    shame and destroy themselves as a party.
For to miss such a moment and to "wait" for the Congress of Soviets
    would be utter idiocy, or sheer treachery.
It would be sheer treachery to the German workers. Surely we should not
    wait until their revolution begins. In that case even the Lieberdans would
    be in favour of "supporting" it. But it cannot begin as long as
    Kerensky, Kishkin and Co. are in power.
It would be sheer treachery to the peasants. To allow the peasant revolt
    to be suppressed when we control the Soviets of both capitals
    would be to lose, and justly lose, every ounce of the
    peasants' confidence. In the eyes of the peasants we would be putting
    ourselves on a level with the Lieberdans and other scoundrels.
To "wait" for the Congress of Soviets would be utter idiocy, for it
    would mean losing weeks at a time when weeks and even days decide
    everything. It would mean faint-heartedly renouncing
    power, for on November 1-2 it will have become impossible to take power
    (both politically and technically, since the Cossacks would be mobilised
    for the day of the insurrection so foolishly "appointed"[6]).
To "wait" for the Congress of Soviets is idiocy, for the Congress will
    give nothing, and can give nothing!
"Moral" importance? Strange indeed, to talk of the "importance" of
    resolutions and conversations with the Lieberdans when we know that the
    Soviets support the peasants and that the peasant revolt is
    being suppressed ! We would be reducing the Soviets to
    the status of wretched debating parlours. First defeat Kerensky, then call
    the Congress.
The Bolsheviks are now guaranteed the success of the
    insurrection: (1) we can[7] (if we do not "wait" for the Soviet Congress)
    launch a surprise attack from three points—from Petrograd,
    from Moscow and from the Baltic fleet; (2) we have slogans that guarantee
    us support—down with the government that is suppressing the revolt of
    the peasants against the landowners! (3) we have a majority in the
    country ; (4) the disorganisation among the Mensheviks and the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries is complete; (5) we are technically in a position
    to take power in Moscow (where the start might even be made, so as to catch
    the enemy unawares); (6) we have thousands of armed workers and
    soldiers in Petrograd who could at once seize the Winter Palace,
    the General Staff building, the telephone exchange and the large printing
    presses. Nothing will be able to drive us out, while agitational work in
    the army will be such as to make it impossible to combat
    this government of peace, of land for the peasants, and so forth.
If we were to attack at once, suddenly, from three points, Petrograd,
    Moscow and the Baltic fleet, the chances are a hundred to one that we would
    succeed with smaller sacrifices than on July 3-5, because the troops
    will not advance against a government of peace. Even though Kerensky
    already has "loyal" cavalry, etc., in Petrograd, if we were to
    attack from two sides, he would be compelled to surrender since
    we enjoy the sympathy of the army. If with such chances as we have
    at present we do not take power, then all talk of transferring the power to
    the Soviets becomes a lie.
To refrain from taking power now, to "wait", to indulge in talk in the
    Central Executive Committee, to confine ourselves to "fighting for the
    organ" (of the Soviet), "fighting for the Congress", is to doom the
    revolution to failure.
In view of the fact that the Central Committee has even left
    unanswered the persistent demands I have been making for such a policy
    ever since the beginning of the Democratic Conference, in view of the fact
    that the Central Organ is deleting from my articles all references
    to such glaring errors on the part of the Bolsheviks as the shameful
    decision to participate in the Pre-parliament, the admission of Mensheviks
    to the Presidium of the Soviet, etc., etc.—I am compelled to regard
    this as a "subtle" hint at the unwillingness of the Central Committee even
    to consider this question, a subtle hint that I should keep my mouth shut,
    and as a proposal for me to retire.
I am compelled to tender my resignation from the Central
    Committee, which I hereby do, reserving for myself freedom to campaign
    among the rank and file of the Party and at the Party
    Congress.
For it is my profound conviction that if we "wait" for the Congress of
    Soviets and let the present moment pass, we shall ruin the
    revolution.
N. Lenin
September 29.
P.S. There are a number of facts which serve to prove that even the
    Cossack troops will not go against a government of peace! And how many are
    there? Where are they? And will not the entire army dispatch units for
    our support?

Footnotes
[1] Written in Vyborg. It consisted of six chapters,
    the last not being intended for publication but for circulation among
    members of the Central Committee, the Petrograd and Moscow Committees and
    the Soviets. Only the manuscript of the last two chapters has come down to
    us. The article was first published in four chapters in Rabochy
    Put No. 30 of October 20 (7), 1917; a comparison of the newspaper text
    and the manuscript shows that one of the chapters was omitted and Chapter V
    was headed as Chapter IV. The article was widely carried by Bolshevik
    periodicals.
[2] The reference is to the revolutionary action by
    German sailors in August 1917, who were led by a revolutionary sailors'
    organisation numbering 4,000 members (late July 1917). It was led by sea
    men Max Reichpietsch and Albin Köbis of the Friedrich der
    Grosse. The organisation decided to fight for a democratic peace and
    prepare for an uprising. Manifestations broke out in the navy in early
    August. Sailors of the warship Prinzeregent Luitpold, which was at
    Wilhelmshaven, took absence without leave to fight for the release of their
    comrades who had earlier been arrested for staging a strike; on August 16,
    the firemen of the Westphalia refused to work; at the same time
    the crew of the cruiser Nürnberg, which was out at sea,
    staged an uprising. The sailors' movement spread to the ships of several
    squadrons at Wilhelmshaven . These manifestations were put down with great
    savagery. Reichpietsch and Köbis were shot and other active
    participants were sentenced to long terms of hard labour.
[3] The reference is to what an officer, Dubasov, said
    at a meeting of the Petrograd Soviet on September 21 (October 4), 1917. He
    had just returned from the front and declared: "Whatever you may say over
    here, the soldiers will not fight".  [p. 80]
[4] The reference is to the nation-wide strike of
    railwaymen for higher wages. It started on the night of September 23
    (October 6), 1917, and threw the Provisional Government into a panic. The
    bourgeois press attacked the striking railwaymen.
    The strike was discussed by the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on
    September 24 (October 7), 1917. In an appeal, "Let's Help the Railwaymen",
    which was published in Rabochy Put (The Workers' Path ),
    the Central Committee exposed the counter-revolutionary policy of the
    Provisional Government and called on the proletariat to express full
    sympathy for the railwaymen, protect them from the provocative attacks of
    the counter-revolutionaries and do everything to prevent their strike from
    being isolated and defeated. The strike ended on the night of September 26
    (October 9), 1917, when the Provisional Government satisfied some of the
    railwaymen's demands.
[5] The reference is to the attitude of Kamenev,
    Zinoviev, and Stalin and their followers. Kamenev and Zinoviev opposed
    Lenin's plan for an armed uprising, declaring that the working class of
    Russia was incapable of carrying out a socialist revolution. They slid down
    to the Menshevik position of demanding a bourgeois republic.
[6] To "convene" the Congress of Soviets for October 20
    in order to decide upon "taking power"—how does that differ from
    foolishly "appointing" an insurrection? It is possible to take power now,
    whereas on October 20-29 you will not be given a chance to.
[7] What has the Party done to study the
    disposition of the troops, etc? What has it done to conduct the
    insurrection as an art? Mere talk in the Central Executive Committee, and
    so on!

Collected Works Volume
    26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive

 







==========

## 
    Can the Bolsheviks Retain State
    Power?







Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?








      Vladimir Lenin
    
Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?[1]



Written: October 1, 1917
      
First Published: October 14, 1917 in
      the magazine Prosveshcheniye No. 1-2. Published
      according to the magazine text.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 87-136

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

    

 

      Foreword To The Second Edition 
    

      The present pamphlet, as is evident from the text, was written
      at the end of September and was finished on October 1, 1917. 
    

      The October 25 Revolution has transferred the question raised in
      this pamphlet from the sphere of theory to the sphere of
      practice. 
    

      This question must now be answered by deeds, not words. The
      theoretical arguments advanced against the Bolsheviks taking
      power were feeble in the extreme. These arguments have been shot
      to pieces. 
    

      The task now is for the advanced class—the
      proletariat—
      to prove in practice the viability of the workers' and peasants'
      government. All class-conscious workers, all the active and
      honest peasants, all working and exploited people, will do
      everything they can to solve the immense historic question in
      practice. 
    

      To work, everybody to work, the cause of the world socialist
      revolution must and will triumph. 
    

      St. Petersburg, November 9, 1917. 
    

      N. Lenin
    

[This forward was written in the pamphlet by
N. Lenin, Can the Bolsheviks Retain state Power?,
"Soldiers' and Peasants' Library" Series,
St. Petersburg. Published according to the text in the
pamphlet.]



On what are all trends
      agreed, from Rech to
      Novaya
  Zhizn inclusively, from the Kornilovite Cadets to the
      semi-Bolsheviks, all, except the Bolsheviks? 
    

      They all agree that the Bolsheviks will either never dare take
      over full state power alone, or, if they do dare, and do take
      power, they will not be able to retain it even for the shortest
      while. 
    

      If anybody asserts that the question of the Bolsheviks alone
      taking over full state power is a totally unfeasible political
      question, that only a swelled-headed "fanatic" of the worst kind
      can regard it as feasible, we refute this assertion by quoting
      the exact statements of the most responsible and most
      influential political parties and trends of various "hues". 
    

      But let me begin with a word or two about the first of the
      questions mentioned—will the Bolsheviks dare take over full
      state power alone? I have already had occasion, at the
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets, to answer this question in the
      affirmative in no uncertain manner by a remark that I shouted
      from my seat during one of Tsereteli's [2] 

      ministerial
      speeches. And I have not met in the press, or heard, any
      statements by Bolsheviks to the effect that we ought not to take
      power alone. I still maintain that a political party—and
      the party of the advanced class in particular—would have no
      right to exist, would be unworthy of the name of party, would be
      a nonentity in any sense, if it refused to take power when
      opportunity offers. 
    

      We shall now quote statements by the Cadets,
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and semi-Bolsheviks (I would prefer to
      say quarter-Bolsheviks) on the question that interests us. 
    

      The leading article in Rech of September 16: 
    

      "Discord and confusion reigned in the Alexandrinsky Theatre, and
      the socialist press reflects the same picture. Only the views of
      the Bolsheviks are definite and straightforward At the
      Conference, they are the views of the minority. In the Soviets,
      they represent a constantly growing trend. But In spite of all
      their verbal pugnacity, their boastful phrases and display of
      self-confidence, the Bolsheviks, except for a few fanatics, are
      brave only in words. They would not attempt to take 'full power'
      on their own accord. Disorganisers and disrupters par
      excellence, they are really cowards who in their heart of
      hearts are fully aware of both their own intrinsic ignorance and
      the ephemeral nature of their present successes. They know as
      well as we all do that the first day of their ultimate triumph
      would also be the first day of their precipitous
      fall. Irresponsible by their very nature, anarchists in method
      and practice, they should be regarded only as a trend of
      political thought, or rather, as one of its aberrations. The
      best way to get rid of Bolshevism for many a year, to banish it,
      would be to place the country's fate in the hands of its
      leaders. And if it were not for the awareness that experiments
      of this kind are impermissible and fatal, one might in
      desperation decide on even this heroic measure. Happily, we
      repeat, these dismal heroes of the day are not by any means
      actually out to seize full power. Not under any circumstances
      are they capable of constructive work. Thus, all their definite
      and straight-forward views are confined to the political
      rostrum, to soap-box oratory. For practical purposes their
      position cannot be taken into consideration from any point of
      view. In one respect, however, it has some practical
      consequence: it unites all other shades of 'socialist thought'
      opposed to it. . . ." 
    

      This is the way the Cadets reason. Here, however, is the view of
      the biggest, "ruling and governing", party in Russia, the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, also expressed in an unsigned, i.e.,
      editorial, leading article in their official organ Dyelo
      Naroda of September 21: 
    

      ..."If the bourgeoisie refuse, pending the convocation of the
      Constituent Assembly, to work with the democracy on the basis of
      the platform that was endorsed by the Conference, then the
      coalition must arise from within the Conference
      itself. This would be a serious sacrifice on the part of
      the supporters of the coalition, but even those campaigning
      for the idea of a 'pure line' of power will have to agree to
      it. We are afraid, however, that agreement may not be
      reached here. In that case a third and final combination
      remains, namely: the government must be organised by that half
      of the Conference which on principle advocated the idea of a
      homogeneous government.
    

      "Let us put it definitely: the
      Bolsheviks will be obliged to form a Cabinet. With the
      greatest energy, they imbued the revolutionary democrats with
      hatred of the coalition, promising them all sorts of benefits as
      soon as 'compromise' was abandoned, and attributing to the
      latter all the country's misfortunes. 
    

      "If they were aware of what they were doing by their agitation,
      if they were not deceiving the people, it is their duty
      to redeem the promissory notes they have been handing out right
      and left.
    

      "The question is clear.
    

      "Let them not make futile
      attempts to hide behind hastily concocted theory that it is
      impossible for them to take power.
    

      "The democracy will not
      accept these theories.
    

      "At the same time, the advocates of
      coalition must guarantee them full support. These are the three
      combinations, the three ways, open to us—there are no
      others!" (The italics are those of Dyelo Naroda.) 
    

      This is the way the Socialist-Revolutionaries reason. And here,
      finally, is the "position" (if attempts to sit between two
      stools can be called a position) of the Novaya Zhizn
      "quarter-Bolsheviks", taken from the editorial in Novaya
      Zhizn of September 23. 
    

      "If a coalition with Konovalov and Kishkin is formed again, it
      will mean nothing but a new capitulation by the democracy and
      the abrogation of the Conference resolution on the formation of
      a responsible government on the platform of August 14. . . .
    

      "A
      homogeneous ministry of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
      will be able to feel its responsibility as little as the
      responsible socialist ministers felt it in the coalition
      cabinet. . . . This government would not only be incapable of
      rallying the 'live forces' of the revolution around itself, but
      would not even be able to count on any active support from its
      vanguard—the proletariat.
    

      "But the formation of another
      type of homogeneous cabinet, a government of the 'proletariat
      and poor peasants', would be, not a better, but an even worse
      way out of the situation, in fact it would not be a way out at
      all, but sheer bankruptcy. True, nobody is advancing such a
      slogan except in casual, timid and later systematically
      'explained away' comments in Rabochy Put." 
    

      (This glaring untruth is "boldly" written by responsible
      journalists who have forgotten even the Dyelo Naroda
      editorial of September 21.) 
    

      "Formally, the Bolsheviks have now revived the slogan 'All Power
      to the Soviets'. It was withdrawn after the July days, when the
      Soviets, represented by the Central Executive Committee,
      definitely adopted an active anti-Bolshevik policy. Now,
      however, not only can the 'Soviet line' be regarded as
      straightened out, but there is every ground to assume that at
      the proposed Congress of Soviets the Bolsheviks will have a
      majority. Under such circumstances the slogan 'All Power to the
      Soviets', resurrected by the Bolsheviks, is a 'tactical line'
      for achieving precisely the dictatorship of the proletariat and
      the 'poor peasants' True, the Soviets also imply the Soviets of
      Peasants' Deputies; the Bolshevik slogan therefore implies a
      power resting on the overwhelmingly greater part of the entire
      democracy of Russia. In that case, however, the slogan 'All
      Power to the Soviets' loses all independent significance, for it
      makes the Soviets almost identical in composition to the
      Pre-parliament set up by the Conference. . . ." 
    

      (Novaya Zhizn's assertion is a brazen lie, equivalent
      to declaring that spurious and fraudulent democracy is "almost
      identical" to democracy: the Pre-parliament is a sham
      which passes off the will of the minority of the people,
      particularly of Kuskova, Berkenheim, Chaikovsky and Co., as the
      will of the majority. This is the first point. The second point
      is that at the Conference even the Peasants' Soviets that had
      been packed by the Avksentyevs and Chaikovskys gave such a high
      percentage opposed to the coalition that taken together with the
      Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, they would have
      brought about the absolute collapse of the
      coalition. And the third point is that "Power to the
      Soviets" means that the power of the Peasants' Soviets would
      embrace mainly the rural districts, and in the rural districts
      the predominance of the poor peasants is assured.) 
    

      "If it is one and the same thing, then the Bolshevik slogan
      should be immediately withdrawn. If, however, 'Power to the
      Soviets' is only a disguise for the dictatorship of the
      proletariat, then such a power would mean precisely the failure
      and collapse of the revolution.
    

      "Does it need proof that the
      proletariat, isolated not only from the other classes in the
      country, but also from the real live forces of the democracy,
      will not be able either technically to lay hold of the state
      apparatus and set it in motion in an exceptionally complicated
      situation, or politically to resist all the pressure by hostile
      forces that will sweep away not only the proletarian
      dictatorship, but the entire revolution into the bargain?
    

      "The
      only power that will answer the requirements of the present
      situation is a really honest coalition within the democracy." 
    
* * * 

      We apologise to the reader for quoting these lengthy extracts,
      but they are absolutely necessary. It is necessary to present a
      precise picture of the positions taken by the different parties
      hostile to the Bolsheviks. It is necessary to prove in a
      definite manner the extremely important fact-that all
      these parties have admitted that the question of the Bolsheviks
      taking full state power alone is not only feasible, but also
      urgent. 
    

      Let us now proceed to examine the arguments which convince
      "everybody", from the Cadets to the Novaya Zhizn
      people, that the Bolsheviks will not be able to retain power. 
    

      The respectable Rech advances no arguments
      whatsoever. It merely pours out upon the Bolsheviks a flood of
      the choicest and most irate abuse. The extract we quoted shows,
      among other things, how utterly wrong it would be to say, "Watch
      out, comrades, for what the enemy advises must certainly be
      bad", thinking that Rech is "provoking" the Bolsheviks
      to take power. If, instead of weighing up the general and
      concrete considerations in a practical way, we allow ourselves
      to be "persuaded" by the plea that the bourgeoisie are
      "provoking" us to take power, we shall be fooled by the
      bourgeoisie, for the latter will of course always maliciously
      prophesy millions of disasters that will result from the
      Bolsheviks taking power and will always maliciously shout, "It
      would be better to get rid of the Bolsheviks at one blow and
      'for many a year' by allowing them to take power and then
      crushing them." These cries are also "provocation", if you will,
      but from a different angle. The Cadets and the bourgeoisie do
      not by any means "advise", and have never "advised", us to take
      power; they are only trying to frighten us with the
      allegedly insoluble problems of government. 
    

      No. We must not allow ourselves to be frightened by the screams
      of the frightened bourgeoisie. We must bear firmly in mind that
      we have never set ourselves "insoluble" social problems, and as
      for the perfectly soluble problem of taking immediate
      steps towards socialism, which is the only way out of the
      exceedingly difficult situation, that will be solved
      only by the dictatorship of the proletariat and poor
      peasants. Victory, and lasting victory, is now more than ever,
      more than anywhere else, assured for the proletariat in Russia
      if it takes power. 
    

      We shall in a purely practical manner discuss the
      concrete circumstances that make a certain moment
      unfavourable; but we shall not for a moment allow ourselves to
      be scared by the savage howls of the bourgeoisie; and we shall
      not forget that the question of the Bolsheviks taking full power
      is becoming really urgent. Our Party will now be
      threatened with an immeasurably greater danger if we forget this
      than if we were to admit that taking power is "premature". In
      this respect, there can be nothing "premature" now:
      there is every chance in a million, except one or two perhaps,
      in favour of this.
    

      Concerning the irate abuse poured out by
      Rech, we can and must, say:
    


In savage cries of irritation

We hear the voice of approbation,

Not in dulcet sounds of
praise.[3]



      That the bourgeoisie hate us so passionately is one of the most
      striking proofs that we are showing the people the
      right ways and means of overthrowing the rule of the
      bourgeoisie. 
    
*  *  *

      This time, by way of rare exception, Dyelo Naroda did
      not deign to honour us with its abuse nor did it advance a ghost
      of an argument. It merely tried, by indirect hints, to
      frighten us with the prospect that "the Bolsheviks will
      be obliged to form a cabinet". I can quite believe that while
      trying to frighten us, the Socialist-Revolutionaries are
      themselves sincerely seared to death by the phantom of the
      frightened liberal. I can equally believe that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries do succeed in certain exceptionally
      high and exceptionally rotten institutions, such as the Central
      Executive Committee and similar "contact" (i.e., contact with
      the Cadets, in plain language, hobnobbing with the Cadets)
      commissions, in scaring some Bolsheviks because, first, the
      atmosphere in all those Central Executives, pre-parliaments,
      etc., is abominable, putrid to the point of nausea, and harmful
      for any man to breathe for any length of time; and
      secondly, sincerity is contagious, and a sincerely frightened
      philistine is capable of converting even an individual
      revolutionary into a philistine for a time. 
    

      But however much we may, "humanly" speaking, understand the
      sincere fright of a Socialist-Revolutionary who has had the
      misfortune to be a minister in the company of the Cadets, or who
      is eligible as a minister in the eyes of the Cadets, we would be
      committing a political error that might only too easily border
      on treachery to the proletariat if we allowed ourselves to be
      scared. Let us have your practical arguments, gentlemen!
      Cherish no hope that we shall allow ourselves to be scared by
      your fright! 
    
*  *  *

      This time we find practical arguments only in Novaya
      Zhizn. On this occasion the paper comes out in the role of
      counsel for the bourgeoisie, a role that suits it far better
      than that of counsel for the defence of the Bolsheviks, which so
      obviously "shocks" this lady with many good points.[4]


      The counsel has advanced six pleas: 
    

      (1) the proletariat is "isolated from the other classes in the
         country"; 
    

      (2) it is "isolated from the real live forces of the democracy"; 
    

      (3) it "will not be able technically to lay hold of the state
         apparatus"; 
    

      (4) it "will not be able to set this apparatus in motion"; 
    

      (5) "the situation is exceptionally complicated"; 
    

      (6) it "will be incapable of resisting all the pressure by
         hostile forces that will sweep away not only the proletarian
         dictatorship, but the entire revolution into the bargain". 
    

Novaya Zhizn formulates the first plea in a
      ridiculously clumsy fashion, for in capitalist and
      semi-capitalist society we know of only three classes: the
      bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie (which consists mainly of the
      peasantry), and the proletariat. What sense is there in talking
      about the proletariat being isolated from the other classes when
      the point at issue is the proletariat's struggle against the
      bourgeoisie, revolution against the bourgeoisie? 
    

      Evidently, Novaya Zhizn wanted to say that the
      proletariat is isolated from the peasants, for it could not
      possibly have meant the landowners. It could not, however, say
      clearly and definitely that the proletariat is now isolated
      from the peasants, for the utter incorrectness of this assertion
      would be too obvious. 
    

      It is difficult to imagine that in a capitalist country the
      proletariat should be so little isolated from the petty
      bourgeoisie—and, mark you, in a revolution against the
      bourgeoisie—as the proletariat now is in Russia. The
      latest returns of the voting by "curias" for and
      against coalition with the bourgeoisie in Tsereteli's
      "Bulygin Duma", i.e., in the notorious "Democratic" Conference,
      constitute one of the objective and incontrovertible proofs of
      this. If we take the Soviets' curias we get: 






For coalition

Against


Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies
      . . .  . . . . . . . .Soviets  of Peasant Deputies
      . . . . .  .

83102

19270






All Soviets. . . .  .

185


      262

      So, the majority as a whole is on the side of the proletarian
      slogan: against coalition with the bourgeoisie. We have
      seen above that even the Cadets are obliged to admit the growth
      of Bolshevik influence in the Soviets. And here we have the
      Conference convened by yesterday's leaders in the
      Soviets, Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, who have an
      assured majority in the central institutions! Obviously, the
      actual degree to which the Bolsheviks predominate in
      the Soviets is here understated. 
    

      Both on the question of coalition with the bourgeoisie and on
      the question of immediately transferring the landed estates to
      peasant committees, the Bolsheviks already have a majority in
      the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, a
      majority of the people, a majority of the petty
      bourgeoisie. Rabochy Put No. 19, of September 24 quotes
      from No. 25 of the organ of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      Znamya Truda[5]

      a report on a conference of local
      Soviets of Peasants' Deputies held in Petrograd on September
      18. At this conference the Executive Committees of four
      Peasants' Soviets (Kostroma, Moscow, Samara and Taurida
      gubernias) voted for an unrestricted coalition. The Executive
      Committees of three gubernias and two armies
      (Vladimir, Ryazan and the Black Sea gubernias) voted in favour
      of a coalition without the Cadets. The Executive Committees of
      twenty-three gubernias and four armies voted against a
      coalition. 
    

So, the majority of the peasants are against a
      coalition!


      So much for the "isolation of the proletariat". 
    

      We should note, by the way, that the supporters of a coalition
      were three outlying gubernias, Samara, Taurida and the Black
      Sea, where there is a relatively very large number of rich
      peasants and big landowners who employ hired labour, and also
      four industrial gubernias (Vladimir, Ryazan, Kostroma and
      Moscow) in which the peasant bourgeoisie are also stronger than
      in the majority of the gubernias in Russia. It would be
      interesting to collect more detailed figures on this question
      and to ascertain whether information is available concerning the
      poor peasants in the gubernias where there are larger
      numbers of "rich" peasants.
    

      It is interesting,
      moreover, that the "non-Russian groups" revealed a considerable
      predominance of opponents of a coalition, namely, 40 votes
      against 15. The policy of annexation and open violence pursued
      by the Bonapartist Kerensky and Co. towards the non-sovereign
      nations of Russia has borne fruit. Wide sections of the people
      of the oppressed nations (i.e., including the mass of the petty
      bourgeoisie) trust the proletariat of Russia more than they do
      the bourgeoisie, for here history has brought to the fore the
      struggle for liberation of the oppressed nations against the
      oppressing nations. The bourgeoisie has despicably betrayed the
      cause of freedom of the oppressed nations; the proletariat is
      faithful to the cause of freedom. 
    

      At the present time the national and agrarian questions are
      fundamental questions for the petty-bourgeois sections of the
      population of Russia. This is indisputable. And on both these
      questions the proletariat is "not
      isolated"—farther from it than ever. It has the majority of
      the people behind it. It alone is capable of pursuing
      such a determined, genuinely."revolutionary-democratic" policy
      on both questions which would immediately ensure the proletarian
      state power not only the support of the majority of the
      population, but also a real outburst of revolutionary enthusiasm
      among the people. This is because, for the first time, the
      people would not see the ruthless oppression of peasants by
      landowners and of Ukrainians by Great Russians on the part of
      the government, as was the case under tsarism, nor the effort to
      continue the same policy camouflaged in pompous phrases under
      the republic, nor nagging, insult, chicanery, procrastination,
      underhand dealing and evasions (all that with which Kerensky
      rewards the peasants and the oppressed nations), but would
      receive warm sympathy proved by deeds, immediate and
      revolutionary measures against the landowners, immediate
      restitution of full freedom for Finland, the Ukraine,
      Byelorussia, for the Moslems, and so on. 
    

      The Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik gentlemen know this
      perfectly well, and are therefore dragging in the semi-Cadet
      bosses of the co-operative societies to help them pursue their
      reactionary-democratic policy against the
      people. That is why they will never dare canvass popular
      opinion, take a popular referendum, or at least a vote of all
      the local Soviets, of all the local organisations, concerning
      definite points of practical policy, for example, whether all
      the landed estates should at once be handed over to peasant
      committees, whether certain demands of the Finns or the
      Ukrainians should be conceded, etc. 
    

      Take the question of peace, the crucial issue of today. The
      proletariat "is isolated from the other classes". . . . On this
      issue the proletariat truly represents the whole
      nation, all live and honest people in all classes, the
      vast majority of the petty bourgeoisie; because only the
      proletariat, on achieving power, will immediately offer
      a just peace to all the belligerent nations, because only the
      proletariat will dare take genuinely revolutionary
      measures (publication of the secret treaties, and so forth) to
      achieve the speediest and most just peace possible. 
    

      The proletariat is not isolated. The gentlemen of Novaya
      Zhizn who are shouting about the proletariat being isolated
      are only betraying their subjective fear of the bourgeoisie. The
      objective state of affairs in Russia is undoubtedly such that
      the proletariat, precisely at the present time, is not
      "isolated" from the majority of the petty bourgeoisie. Precisely
      now, after the sad experience with the "coalition", the
      proletariat enjoys the sympathy of the majority of the
      people. This condition for the retention of power by
      the Bolsheviks does exist.
    
*  *  *

      The second plea is that the proletariat "is isolated from the
      real live forces of the democracy". What this means is
      incomprehensible. It is probably "Greek", as the French say in
      such cases. 
    

      The writers of Novaya Zhizn would make good
      ministers. They would be quite suitable as ministers in a Cadet
      cabinet because all these ministers need is the ability to spout
      plausible, polished, but utterly meaningless phrases with which
      to cover up the dirtiest work and which are therefore sure of
      winning the applause of the imperialists and
      social-imperialists. The Novaya Zhizn writers are sure
      to earn the applause of the Cadets, Breshkovskaya, Plekhanov and
      Co. for asserting that the proletariat is isolated from the real
      live forces of the democracy, because indirectly they
      imply—or will be understood to imply—that the Cadets,
      Breshkovskaya, Plekhanov, Kerensky and Co. are the "live forces
      of democracy". 
    

      This is not true. They are dead forces. The history of the
      coalition has proved this. 
    

      Overawed by the bourgeoisie and by their bourgeois intellectual
      environment, the Novaya Zhizn people regard as "live"
      the Right wing of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks
      like Volya Naroda[6], Yedinstvo, and others
      who in essentials do not differ from the Cadets. We, however,
      regard as live only those who are connected with the people and
      not with the kulaks, only those whom the lessons of the
      coalition have repelled. The "active live forces" of the
      petty-bourgeois democracy are represented by the Left wing of
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. That this wing has
      gained strength, particularly since the July counter-revolution,
      is one of the surest objective signs that the proletariat is
      not isolated. 
    

      This has been made even more strikingly evident by the very
      recent swing to the left of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Centrists, as is proved by Chernov's statement on September 24
      that his group cannot support the new coalition with Kishkin and
      Co. This swing to the left of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Centre, which up to now had constituted the overwhelming
      majority of the members of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party,
      the leading and dominant party from the point of view of the
      number of votes it obtained in the urban and particularly in the
      rural districts, proves that the statements we quoted from
      Dyelo Naroda that the democracy must, under certain
      circumstances, "guarantee full support" for a purely Bolshevik
      government are at any rate not mere empty phrases. 
    

      Facts like the refusal of the Socialist-Revolutionary Centre to
      support the new coalition with Kishkin, or the predominance of
      the opponents of the coalition among the
      Menshevik-defencists in the provinces (Jordania in the
      Caucasus, etc.), are objective proof that a certain section of
      the people which has up to now followed the Mensheviks
      and Socialist-Revolutionaries will support a purely
      Bolshevik government. 
    

      It is precisely from the live forces of the democracy
      that the proletariat of Russia is now not isolated. 
    
*  *  *

      The third plea, that the proletariat "will not be able
      technically to lay hold of the state apparatus" is, perhaps, the
      most common and most frequent. It deserves most attention for
      this reason, and also because it indicates one of the most
      serious and difficult tasks that will confront
      the victorious proletariat. There is no doubt that these tasks
      will be very difficult, but if we, who call ourselves
      socialists, indicate this difficulty only to shirk
      these tasks, in practice the distinction between us and the
      lackeys of the bourgeoisie will be reduced to nought. The
      difficulty of the tasks of the proletarian revolution should
      prompt the proletariat's supporters to make a closer and more
      definite study of the means of carrying out these tasks. 
    

      The state apparatus is primarily the standing army, the police
      and the bureaucracy. By saying that the proletariat will not he
      able technically to lay hold of this apparatus, the writers of
      Novaya Zhizn reveal their utter ignorance and their
      reluctance to take into account either facts or the arguments
      long ago cited in Bolshevik literature. 
    

      All the Novaya Zhizn writers regard themselves, if not
      as Marxists, then at least as being familiar with Marxism, as
      educated socialists. But Marx, basing himself on the experience
      of the Paris Commune, taught that the proletariat cannot simply
      lay hold of the ready-made state machine and use it for its own
      purposes, that the proletariat must smash this machine and
      substitute a new one for it (I deal with this in greater detail
      in a pamphlet, the first part of which is now finished and will
      soon appear under the title

      The State and
      Revolution. A Marxist Theory of the State and the
      Tasks of the Proletariat in the Revolution[*]). This new
      type of state machinery was created by the Paris Commune, and
      the Russian Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants'
      Deputies are a "state apparatus" of the same type. I have
      indicated this many times since April 4, 1917; it is dealt with
      in the resolutions of Bolshevik conferences and also in
      Bolshevik literature. Novaya Zhizn could, of course,
      have expressed its utter disagreement with Marx and with the
      Bolsheviks, but for a paper that has so often, and so haughtily,
      scolded the Bolsheviks for their allegedly frivolous attitude to
      difficult problems to evade this question completely is
      tantamount to issuing itself a certificate of mental poverty. 
    

      The proletariat cannot "lay hold of" the "state
      apparatus" and "set it in motion". But it can smash
      everything that is oppressive, routine, incorrigibly bourgeois
      in the old state apparatus and substitute its own, new
      apparatus. The Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants'
      Deputies. are exactly this apparatus. 
    

      That Novaya Zhizn has completely forgotten about this
      "state apparatus" can be called nothing but monstrous. Behaving
      in this way in their theoretical reasoning, the Novaya
      Zhizn people are, in essence, doing in the sphere of
      political theory what the Cadets are doing in political
      practice. Because, if the proletariat and the revolutionary
      democrats do not in fact need a new state
      apparatus, then the Soviets lose their raison
      d'être, lose their right to existence, and the
      Kornilovite Cadets are right in trying to reduce the
      Soviets to nought! 
    

      This monstrous theoretical blunder and political blindness on
      the part of Novaya Zhizn is all the more monstrous
      because even the internationalist Mensheviks (with whom
      Novaya Zhizn formed a bloc during the last City Council 
 
      * See present edition, Vol. 25.—Ed. elections in
        Petrograd) have on this question shown some proximity to the
        Bolsheviks. So, in the declaration of the Soviet majority made
        by Comrade Martov at the Democratic Conference, we read: 
    

      "The Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, set
      up in the first days of the revolution by a mighty burst of
      creative enthusiasm that stems from the people themselves,
      constitute the new fabric of the revolutionary state that has
      replaced the outworn state fabric of the old regime. . . ." 
    

      This is a little too flowery; that is to say, rhetoric here
      covers up lack of clear political thinking. The Soviets have
      not yet replaced the old "fabric", and this old
      "fabric" is not the state fabric of the old regime, but
      the state fabric of both tsarism and of the
      bourgeois republic. But at any rate, Martov here stands head and
      shoulders above Novaya Zhizn. 
    

      The Soviets are a new state apparatus which, in the first place,
      provides an armed force of workers and peasants; and this force
      is not divorced from the people, as was the old standing army,
      but is very closely bound up with the people. From the military
      point of view this force is incomparably more powerful than
      previous forces; from the revolutionary point of view, it cannot
      be replaced by anything else. Secondly, this apparatus provides
      a bond with the people, with the majority of the people, so
      intimate, so indissoluble, so easily verifiable and renewable,
      that nothing even remotely like it existed in the previous state
      apparatus. Thirdly, this apparatus, by virtue of the fact that
      its personnel is elected and subject to recall at the people's
      will without any bureaucratic formalities, is far more
      democratic than any previous apparatus. Fourthly, it provides a
      close contact with the most varied professions, thereby
      facilitating the adoption of the most varied and most radical
      reforms without red tape. Fifthly, it provides an organisational
      form for the vanguard, i.e., for the most class-conscious, most
      energetic and most progressive section of the oppressed classes,
      the workers and peasants, and so constitutes an apparatus by
      means of which the vanguard of the oppressed classes
      can elevate, train, educate, and lead the entire vast
      mass of these classes, which has up to now stood completely
      outside of political life and history. Sixthly, it makes it
      possible to combine the advantages of the 
      parliamentary system with those of immediate and direct
      democracy, i.e., to vest in the people's elected representatives
      both legislative and executive functions. Compared with
      the bourgeois parliamentary system, this is an advance in
      democracy's development which is of world-wide, historic
      significance. 
    

      In 1905, our Soviets existed only in embryo, so to speak, as
      they lived altogether only a few weeks. Clearly, under the
      conditions of that time, their comprehensive development was out
      of the question. It is still out of the question in the 1917
      Revolution, for a few months is an extremely short period
      and—this is most important—the Socialist-Revolutionary
      and Menshevik leaders have prostituted the Soviets,
      have reduced their role to that of a talking shop, of an
      accomplice in the compromising policy of the leaders. The
      Soviets have been rotting and decaying alive under the
      leadership of the Liebers, Dans, Tseretelis and Chernovs. The
      Soviets will be able to develop properly, to display their
      potentialities and capabilities to the full only by taking over
      full state power; for otherwise they have nothing
      to do, otherwise they are either simply embryos (and to
      remain an embryo too long is fatal), or playthings. "Dual power"
      means paralysis for the Soviets. 
    

      If the creative enthusiasm of the revolutionary classes had not
      given rise to the Soviets, the proletarian revolution in Russia
      would have been a hopeless cause, for the proletariat could
      certainly not retain power with the old state apparatus, and it
      is impossible to create a new apparatus immediately. The sad
      history of the prostitution of the Soviets by the Tseretelis and
      Chernovs, the history of the "coalition", is also the history of
      the liberation of the Soviets from petty-bourgeois illusions, of
      their passage through the "purgatory" of the practical
      experience of the utter abomination and filth of all
      and sundry bourgeois coalitions. Let us hope that this
      "purgatory" has steeled rather than weakened the Soviets. 
    
*  *  *

      The chief difficulty facing the proletarian revolution is the
      establishment on a country-wide scale of the most precise and
      most conscientious accounting and control, of workers'
      control of the production and distribution of goods. 
    

      When the writers of Novaya Zhizn argued that in
      advancing the slogan "workers' control" we were slipping into
      syndicalism, this argument was an example of the stupid school
      boy method of applying "Marxism" without studying it, just
      learning it by rote in the Struve manner. Syndicalism
      either repudiates the revolutionary dictatorship of the
      proletariat, or else relegates it, as it does political power in
      general, to a back seat. We, however, put it in the
      forefront. If we simply say in unison with the Novaya
      Zhizn writers: not workers' control but
      state control, it is simply a bourgeois-reformist phrase, it is,
      in essence, a purely Cadet formula, because the Cadets have no
      objection to the workers participating in "state"
      control. The Kornilovite Cadets know perfectly well that such
      participation offers the bourgeoisie the best way of fooling the
      workers, the most subtle way of politically bribing all
      the Gvozdyovs, Nikitins, Prokopoviches, Tseretelis and the rest
      of that gang. 
    

      When we say: "workers' control", always juxtaposing
      this slogan to dictatorship of the proletariat, always putting
      it immediately after the latter, we thereby explain
      what kind of state we mean. The state is the organ of
      class domination. Of which class? If of the
      bourgeoisie, then it is the Cadet-Kornilov-"Kerensky" state
      which has been "Kornilovising" and "Kerenskyising" the working
      people of Russia for more than six months. If it is of the
      proletariat, if we are speaking of a proletarian state, that
      is, of the proletarian dictatorship, then workers' control
      can become the country-wide, all-embracing,
      omnipresent, most precise and most conscientious
      accounting of the production and distribution of
      goods. 
    

      This is the chief difficulty, the chief task that faces the
      proletarian, i.e., socialist, revolution. Without the Soviets,
      this task would be impracticable, at least in Russia. The
      Soviets indicate to the proletariat the organisational
      work which can solve this historically important
      problem. 
    

      This brings us to another aspect of the question of the state
      apparatus. In addition to the chiefly "oppressive"
      apparatus—the standing army, the police and the
      bureaucracy—the modern state possesses an apparatus which
      has extremely close connections with the banks and syndicates,
      an apparatus which performs an enormous amount of accounting and
      registration work, if it may be expressed this way. This
      apparatus must not, and should not, be smashed. It must be
      wrested from the control of the capitalists; the capitalists and
      the wires they pull must be cut off, lopped
      off, chopped away from this apparatus; it must be
      subordinated to the proletarian Soviets; it must be
      expanded, made more comprehensive, and nation-wide. And this
      can be done by utilising the achievements already made
      by large-scale capitalism (in the same way as the proletarian
      revolution can, in general, reach its goal only by utilising
      these achievements). 
    

      Capitalism has created an accounting apparatus in the
      shape of the banks, syndicates, postal service, consumers'
      societies, and office employees' unions. Without big banks
      socialism would be impossible. 
    

      The big banks are the "state apparatus" which we
      need to bring about socialism, and which we take
      ready-made from capitalism; our task here is merely to lop
      off what capitalistically mutilates this excellent
      apparatus, to make it even bigger, even more
      democratic, even more comprehensive. Quantity will be
      transformed into quality. A single State Bank, the biggest of
      the big, with branches in every rural district, in every
      factory, will constitute as much as nine-tenths of the
      socialist apparatus. This will be country wide
      book-keeping, country-wide accounting of the
      production and distribution of goods, this will be, so to speak,
      some thing in the nature of the skeleton of socialist
      society. 
    

      We can "lay hold of" and "set in motion" this "state apparatus"
      (which is not fully a state apparatus under capitalism, but
      which will be so with us, under socialism) at one stroke, by a
      single decree, because the actual work of book-keeping, control,
      registering, accounting and counting is performed by
      employees, the majority of whom themselves lead a
      proletarian or semi-proletarian existence. 
    

      By a single decree of the proletarian government these employees
      can and must be transferred to the status of state employees, in
      the same way as the watchdogs of capitalism like Briand and
      other bourgeois ministers, by a single decree, transfer
      railwaymen on strike to the status of state employees. We shall
      need many more state employees of this kind, and more
      can be obtained, because capitalism has simplified the
      work of accounting and control, has reduced it to a
      comparatively simple system of book-keeping, which any
      literate person can do. 
    

      The conversion of the bank, syndicate, commercial, etc., etc.,
      rank-and-file employees into state employees is quite feasible
      both technically (thanks to the preliminary work performed for
      us by capitalism, including finance capitalism) and politically,
      provided the Soviets exercise control and supervision. 
    

      As for the higher officials, of whom there are very few, but who
      gravitate towards the capitalists, they will have to be dealt
      with in the same way as the capitalists, i.e., "severely". Like
      the capitalists, they will offer resistance. This
      resistance will have to be broken, and if the
      immortally naïve Peshekhonov, as early as June 1917, lisped
      like the infant that he was in state affairs, that "the
      resistance of the capitalists has been broken", this childish
      phrase, this childish boast, this childish 
      swagger, will be converted by the proletariat into
      reality. 
    

      We can do this, for it is merely a question of breaking the
      resistance of an insignificant minority of the population,
      literally a handful of people, over each of whom the employees'
      unions, the trade unions, the consumers' societies and the
      Soviets will institute such supervision that every Tit
      Titych will be surrounded as the French were at
      Sedan.[7] We know these Tit Tityches by name: we only have to
      consult the lists of directors, board members, large
      shareholders, etc. There are several hundred, at most several
      thousand of them in the whole of Russia, and the
      proletarian state, with the apparatus of the Soviets, of the
      employees' unions, etc., will be able to appoint ten or even a
      hundred supervisers to each of them, so that instead of
      "breaking resistance" it may even be possible, by means of
      workers' control (over the capitalists), to make all
      resistance impossible. 
    

      The important thing will not be even the confiscation of the
      capitalists' property, but country-wide, all-embracing workers'
      control over the capitalists and their possible
      supporters. Confiscation alone leads nowhere, as it does not
      contain the element of organisation, of accounting for proper
      distribution. Instead of confiscation, we could easily impose a
      fair tax (even on the Shingaryov[8] scale, for instance),
      taking care, of course, to preclude the possibility of anyone
      evading assessment, concealing the truth, evading the law. And
      this possibility can be eliminated only by the workers'
      control of the workers' state. 
    

Compulsory syndication, i.e., compulsory amalgamation
      in associations under state control—this is what capitalism
      has prepared the way for, this is what has been carried out in
      Germany by the Junkers' state, this is what can be easily
      carried out in Russia by the Soviets, by the proletarian
      dictatorship, and this is what will provide us with a state
      apparatus that will be universal, up-to-date, and
      non-bureaucratic. 
    
*  *  *

      The fourth plea of the counsels for the bourgeoisie is that the
      proletariat will not be able "to set the state apparatus in
      motion". There is nothing new in this plea compared with the
      preceding one. We could not, of course, either lay hold of or
      set in motion the old apparatus. The new apparatus, the Soviets,
      has already been set in motion by "a mighty burst of
      creative enthusiasm that stems from the people themselves". We
      only have to free it from the shackles put on it by the
      domination of the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik
      leaders. This apparatus is already in motion; we only
      have to free it from the monstrous, petty-bourgeois impediments
      preventing it from going full speed ahead. 
    

      Two circumstances must be considered here to supplement what has
      already been said. In the first place, the new means of control
      have been created not by us, but by capitalism in its
      military-imperialist stage; and in the second place, it is
      important to introduce more democracy into the
      administration of a proletarian state. 
    

      The grain monopoly and bread rationing were introduced not by
      us, but by the capitalist state in war-time. It had 
 
      * For further details of the meaning of compulsory syndication
        see my pamphlet: The Impending
        Catastrophe and How to
        Combat It. (See present edition, Vol. 25,
        pp. 342-45.—Ed.) already introduced universal
        labour conscription within the framework of capitalism, which
        is war-time penal servitude for the workers. But here too, as
        in all its history-making activities, the proletariat takes
        its weapons from capitalism and does not "invent" or "create
        them out of nothing". 
    

      The grain monopoly, bread rationing and labour conscription in
      the hands of the proletarian state, in the hands of sovereign
      Soviets, will be the most powerful means of accounting and
      control, means which, applied to the capitalists, and to the
      rich in general, applied to them by the workers,
      will provide a force unprecedented in history for "setting the
      state apparatus in motion", for overcoming the resistance of the
      capitalists, for subordinating them to the proletarian
      state. These means of control and of compelling people to
      work will be more potent than the laws of the Convention
      and its guillotine. The guillotine only terrorised, only broke
      active resistance. For us, this is not
      enough. 
    

      For us, this is not enough. We must not only "terrorise" the
      capitalists, i.e., make them feel the omnipotence of the
      proletarian state and give up all idea of actively resisting
      it. We must also break passive resistance, which is
      undoubtedly more dangerous and harmful. We must not only break
      resistance of every kind. We must also compel the
      capitalists to work within the framework of the new state
      organisation. It is not enough to "remove" the capitalists; we
      must (after removing the undesirable and incorrigible
      "resisters") employ them in the service of the new
      state. This applies both to the capitalists and to the
      upper section of the bourgeois intellectuals, office employees,
      etc. 
    

      And we have the means to do this. The means and instruments for
      this have been placed in our hands by the capitalist state in
      the war. These means are the grain monopoly, bread rationing and
      labour conscription. "He who does not work, neither shall he
      eat"—this is the fundamental, the first and most important
      rule the Soviets of Workers' Deputies can and will introduce
      when they become the ruling power. 
    

      Every worker has a work-book. This book does not degrade him,
      although at present it is undoubtedly a document of
      capitalist wage-slavery, certifying that the workman belongs to
      some parasite. 
    

      The Soviets will introduce work-books for the rich and
      then gradually for the whole population (in a peasant country
      work-books will probably not be needed for a long time for the
      overwhelming majority of the peasants). The work-book will cease
      to be the badge of the "common herd", a document of the "lower"
      orders, a certificate of wage-slavery. It will become a document
      certifying that in the new society there are no longer any
      "workmen", nor, on the other hand, are there any longer men
      who do not work. 
    

      The rich will be obliged to get a work-book from the workers' or
      office employees' union with which their occupation is most
      closely connected, and every week, or other definite fixed
      period, they will have to get from that union a certificate to
      the effect that they are performing their work conscientiously;
      without this they will not be able to receive bread ration cards
      or provisions in general. The proletarian state will say: we
      need good organisers of banking and the amalgamation of
      enterprises (in this matter the capitalists have more
      experience, and it is easier to work with experienced people),
      and we need far, far more engineers, agronomists, technicians
      and scientifically trained specialists of every kind than were
      needed before. We shall give all these specialists work to which
      they are accustomed and which they can cope with; in all
      probability we shall introduce complete wage equality only
      gradually and shall pay these specialists higher salaries during
      the transition period. We shall place them, however, under
      comprehensive workers' control and we shall achieve the complete
      and absolute operation of the rule "He who does not work,
      neither shall he eat." We shall not invent the organisational
      form of the work, but take it ready-made from capitalism—we
      shall take over the banks, syndicates, the best factories,
      experimental stations, academies, and so forth; all that we
      shall have to do is to borrow the best models furnished by the
      advanced countries. 
    

      Of course, we shall not in the least descend to a utopia, we are
      not deserting the soil of most sober, practical reason when we
      say that the entire capitalist class will offer the most
      stubborn resistance, but this resistance will be broken by the
      organisation of the entire population in Soviets. Those
      capitalists who are exceptionally stubborn and recalcitrant
      will, of course, have to be punished by the confiscation of
      their whole property and by imprisonment. On the other hand,
      however, the victory of the proletariat will bring about an
      increase in the number of cases of the kind that I read
      about in today's Izvestia for example: 
    

      "On September 26, two engineers came to the Central Council of
      Factory Committees to report that a group of engineers had
      decided to form a union of socialist engineers. The Union
      believes that the present time is actually the beginning of the
      social revolution and places itself at the disposal of the
      working people, desiring, in defence of the workers' interests,
      to work in complete unity with the workers' organisations. The
      representatives of the Central Council of Factory Committees
      answered that the Council will gladly set up in its organisation
      an Engineers' Section which will embody in its programme the
      main theses of the First Conference of Factory Committees on
      workers' control over production. A joint meeting of delegates
      of the Central Council of Factory Committees and of the
      initiative group of socialist engineers will be held within the
      next few days." (Izvestia, September 27, 1917.) 
    
*  *  *

      The proletariat, we are told, will not be able to set the state
      apparatus in motion. 
    

      Since the 1905 revolution, Russia has been governed by 130,000
      landowners, who have perpetrated endless violence against
      150,000,000 people, heaped unconstrained abuse upon them, and
      condemned the vast majority to inhuman toil and
      semi-starvation. 
    

      Yet we are told that the 240,000 members of the Bolshevik Party
      will not be able to govern Russia, govern her in the interests
      of the poor and against the rich. These 240,000 are already
      backed by no less than a million votes of the adult population,
      for this is precisely the proportion between the number of Party
      members and the number of votes cast for the Party that has been
      established by the experience of Europe and the experience of
      Russia as shown, for example, by the elections to the Petrograd
      City Council last August. We therefore already have a "state
      apparatus" of one million people devoted to the
      socialist state for the sake of high ideals and not for the sake
      of a fat sum received on the 20th of every month. 
    

      In addition to that we have a "magic way" to enlarge our state
      apparatus tenfold at once, at one stroke, a way which
      no 
      capitalist state ever possessed or could possess. This magic way
      is to draw the working people, to draw the poor, into the daily
      work of state administration. 
    

      To explain how easy it will be to employ this magic way and how
      faultlessly it will operate, let us take the simplest and most
      striking example possible. 
    

      The state is to forcibly evict a certain family from a flat and
      move another in. This often happens in the capitalist state, and
      it will also happen in our proletarian or socialist state. 
    

      The capitalist state evicts a working-class family which has
      lost its breadwinner and cannot pay the rent. The bailiff
      appears with police, or militia, a whole squad of them. To
      effect an eviction in a working-class district a whole
      detachment of Cossacks is required. Why? Because the bailiff and
      the militiaman refuse to go without a very strong military
      guard. They know that the scene of an eviction arouses such fury
      among the neighbours, among thousands and thousands of people
      who have been driven to the verge of desperation, arouses such
      hatred towards the capitalists and the capitalist state, that
      the bailiff and the squad of militiamen run the risk of being
      torn to pieces at any minute. Large military forces are
      required, several regiments must be brought into a big city, and
      the troops must come from some distant, outlying region so that
      the soldiers will not be familiar with the life of the urban
      poor, so that the soldiers will not be "infected" with
      socialism. 
    

      The proletarian state has to forcibly move a very poor family
      into a rich man's flat. Let us suppose that our squad of
      workers' militia is fifteen strong; two sailors, two soldiers,
      two class-conscious workers (of whom, let us suppose, only one
      is a member of our Party, or a sympathiser), one intellectual,
      and eight from the poor working people, of whom at least five
      must be women, domestic servants, unskilled labourers, and so
      forth. The squad arrives at the rich man's flat, inspects it and
      finds that it consists of five rooms occupied by two men and two
      women—"You must squeeze up a bit into two rooms this
      winter, citizens, and prepare two rooms for two families now
      living in cellars. Until the time, with the aid of engineers
      (you are an engineer, aren't you?), we have built good dwellings
      for everybody, you will have to squeeze up a little. Your
      telephone will serve ten families. This will save a hundred
      hours of work wasted on shopping, and so forth. Now in your
      family there are two unemployed persons who can perform light
      work: a citizeness fifty-five years of age and a citizen
      fourteen years of age. They will be on duty for three hours a
      day supervising the proper distribution of provisions for ten
      families and keeping the necessary account of this. The student
      citizen in our squad will now write out this state order in two
      copies and you will be kind enough to give us a signed
      declaration that you will faithfully carry it out." 
    

      This, in my opinion, can illustrate how the distinction between
      the old bourgeois and the new socialist state apparatus and
      state administration could be illustrated. 
    

      We are not utopians. We know that an unskilled labourer or a
      cook cannot immediately get on with the job of state
      administration. In this we agree with the Cadets, with
      Breshkovskaya, and with Tsereteli. We differ, however, from
      these citizens in that we demand an immediate break with the
      prejudiced view that only the rich, or officials chosen from
      rich families, are capable of administering the state,
      of performing the ordinary, everyday work of administration. We
      demand that training in the work of state
      administration be conducted by class-conscious workers and
      soldiers and that this training be begun at once, i.e., that a
      beginning be made at once in training all the working
      people, all the poor, for this work. 
    

      We know that the Cadets are also willing to teach the people
      democracy. Cadet ladies are willing to deliver lectures to
      domestic servants on equal rights for women in accordance with
      the best English and French sources. And also, at the very next
      concert-meeting, before an audience of thousands, an exchange of
      kisses will be arranged on the platform: the Cadet lady lecturer
      will kiss Breshkovskaya, Breshkovskaya will kiss ex-Minister
      Tsereteli, and the grateful people will therefore receive an
      object-lesson in republican equality, liberty and
      fraternity. . . . 
    

      Yes, we agree that the Cadets, Breshkovskaya and Tsereteli are
      in their own way devoted to democracy and are propagating it
      among the people. But what is to be done if our conception of
      democracy is somewhat different from theirs? 
    

      In our opinion, to ease the incredible burdens and miseries of
      the war and also to heal the terrible wounds the war has
      inflicted on the people, revolutionary democracy is
      needed, revolutionary measures of the kind described in
      the example of the distribution of housing accommodation in the
      interests of the poor. Exactly the same procedure must
      be adopted in both town and country for the distribution of
      provisions, clothing, footwear, etc., in respect of the land in
      the rural districts, and so forth. For the administration of the
      state in this spirit we can at once set in motion a
      state apparatus consisting of ten if not twenty million
      people, an apparatus such as no capitalist state has ever
      known. We alone can create such an apparatus, for we are sure of
      the fullest and devoted sympathy of the vast majority of the
      population. We alone can create such an apparatus, because we
      have class-conscious workers disciplined by long capitalist
      "schooling" (it was not for nothing that we went to learn in the
      school of capitalism), workers who are capable of
      forming a workers' militia and of gradually expanding
      it (beginning to expand it at once) into a militia embracing
      the whole people. The class-conscious workers must lead,
      but for the work of administration they can enlist the vast mass
      of the working and oppressed people. 
    

      It goes without saying that this new apparatus is bound to make
      mistakes in taking its first steps. But did not the peasants
      make mistakes when they emerged from serfdom and began to manage
      their own affairs? Is there any way other than practice by which
      the people can learn to govern themselves and to avoid mistakes?
      Is there any way other than by proceeding immediately to genuine
      self-government by the people? The chief thing now is to abandon
      the prejudiced bourgeois-intellectualist view that only special
      officials, who by their very social position are entirely
      dependent upon capital, can administer the state. The chief
      thing is to put an end to the state of affairs in which
      bourgeois officials and "socialist" ministers are trying to
      govern in the old way, but are incapable of doing so and, after
      seven months, are faced with a peasant revolt in a peasant
      country! The chief thing is to imbue the oppressed and the
      working people with confidence in their own strength, to prove
      to them in practice that they can and must themselves ensure the
      proper, most strictly regulated and organised
      distribution of bread, all kinds of food, milk, clothing,
      housing, etc., in the interests of the poor. Unless
      this is done, Russia cannot be saved from collapse and
      ruin. The conscientious, bold, universal move to hand over
      administrative work to proletarians and semi-proletarians, will,
      however, rouse such unprecedented revolutionary enthusiasm among
      the people, will so multiply the people's forces in combating
      distress, that much that seemed impossible to our narrow, old,
      bureaucratic forces will become possible for the millions, who
      will begin to work for themselves and not for the
      capitalists, the gentry, the bureaucrats, and not out of fear of
      punishment. 
    
*  *  *

      Pertinent to the question of the state apparatus is also the
      question of centralism raised with unusual vehemence and
      ineptitude by Comrade Bazarov in Novaya Zhizn No. 138,
      of September 27, in an article entitled: "The Bolsheviks and the
      Problem of Power". 
    

      Comrade Bazarov reasons as follows: "The Soviets are not an
      apparatus suitable for all spheres of state life", for, he says,
      seven months' experience has shown, and "scores and hundreds of
      documents in the possession of the Economic Department of the
      St. Petersburg Executive Committee" have confirmed, that the
      Soviets, although actually enjoying "full power" in many places,
      "have not been able to achieve anything like satisfactory
      results in combating economic ruin". What is needed is an
      apparatus "divided up according to branches of production, with
      strict centralisation within each branch, and subordinated to
      one, country-wide centre". "It is a matter", if you please, "not
      of replacing the old apparatus, but merely of reforming it
      . . . no matter how much the Bolsheviks may jeer at people with
      a plan. . . ." 
    

      All these arguments of Comrade Bazarov's are positively amazing
      for their helplessness, they echo the arguments of the
      bourgeoisie and reflect their class point of view. 
    

      In fact, to say that the Soviets have anywhere in Russia ever
      enjoyed "full power" is simply ridiculous (if it is not a
      repetition of the selfish class lie of the capitalists). Full 
      power means power over all the land, over all the banks, over
      all the factories; a man who is at all familiar with the facts
      of history and science on the connection between politics and
      economics could not have "forgotten" this "trifling"
      circumstance. 
    

      The bourgeoisie's device is to withhold power from the
      Soviets, sabotage every important step they take, while
      at the same time retaining government in their own hands,
      retaining power over the land, the banks, etc., and then
      throwing the blame for the ruin upon the Soviets! This is
      exactly what the whole sad experience of the coalition amounts
      to. 
    

      The Soviets have never had full power, and the measures they
      have taken could not result in anything but palliatives that
      added to the confusion. 
    

      The effort to prove the necessity for centralism to the
      Bolsheviks who are centralists by conviction, by their programme
      and by the entire tactics of their Party, is really like forcing
      an open door. The writers of Novaya Zhizn are wasting
      their time only because they have totally failed to understand
      the meaning and significance of our jeers at their
      "country-wide" point of view. And the Novaya Zhizn
      people have failed to understand this because they merely pay
      lip-service to the doctrine of the class struggle, but
      do not accept it seriously. Repeating the words about the class
      struggle they have learned by rote, they are constantly slipping
      into the "above-class point of view", amusing in theory and
      reactionary in practice, and are calling this fawning upon the
      bourgeoisie a "country-wide" plan. 
    

      The state, dear people, is a class concept. The state is an
      organ or instrument of violence exercised by one class against
      another. So long as it is an instrument of violence exercised by
      the bourgeoisie against the proletariat, the proletariat can
      have only one slogan: destruction of this state. But
      when the state will be a proletarian state, when it will be an
      instrument of violence exercised by the proletariat against the
      bourgeoisie, we shall be fully and unreservedly in favour of a
      strong state power and of centralism. 
    

      To put it in more popular language, we do not jeer at "plans",
      but at Bazarov and Co.'s failure to understand that by
      repudiating "workers' control", by repudiating the "dictatorship
      of the proletariat" they are for the dictatorship of
      the bourgeoisie. There is no middle course; a middle course is
      the futile dream of the petty-bourgeois democrat. 
    

      Not a single central body, not a single Bolshevik has ever
      argued against centralisation of the Soviets, against
      their amalgamation. None of us objects to having factory
      committees in each branch of production, or to their
      centralisation. Bazarov is wide of the mark. 
    

      We laugh, have laughed, and will laugh not at "centralism", and
      not at "plans", but at reformism, because, after the
      experience of the coalition, your reformism is utterly
      ridiculous. And to say "not replace the apparatus but reform it"
      means to be a reformist, means to become not a revolutionary but
      a reformist democrat. Reformism means nothing more than
      concessions on the part of the ruling class, but not
      its overthrow; it makes concessions, but power remains in
      its hands. 
    

      This is precisely what has been tried during six months of the
      coalition. 
    

      This is what we laugh at. Having failed to obtain a thorough
      grasp of the doctrine of the class struggle, Bazarov allows
      himself to be caught by the bourgeoisie who sing in chorus "Just
      so, just so, we are by no means opposed to reform, we are in
      favour of the workers participating in country-wide control, we
      fully agree with that", and good Bazarov objectively
      sings the descant for the capitalists. 
    

      This has always been and always will be the case with people who
      in the thick of intense class struggle want to take up a
      "middle" position. And it is because-the writers of Novaya
      Zhizn are incapable of understanding the class struggle
      that their policy is such a ridiculous and eternal oscillation
      between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat. 
    

      Get busy on "plans", dear citizens, that is not politics, that
      is not the class struggle; here you may be of use to the
      people. You have many economists on your paper. Unite with those
      engineers and others who are willing to work on problems of
      regulating production and distribution; devote the centre page
      of your big "apparatus" (your paper) to a practical study of
      precise facts on the production and distribution of goods in
      Russia, on banks, syndicates, etc., etc.—that is how you
      will be of use to the people; that is how your sitting between
      two stools will not be particularly harmful; such work on
      "plans" will earn not the ridicule, but the gratitude of the
      workers. 
    

      When the proletariat is victorious it will do the following, it
      will set economists, engineers, agronomists, and so forth, to
      work under the control of the workers' organisations on
      drawing up a "plan", on verifying it, on devising labour-saving
      methods of centralisation, on devising the simplest, cheapest,
      most convenient and universal measures and methods of
      control. For this we shall pay the economists, statisticians and
      technicians good money . . . but we shall not give them anything
      to eat if they do not perform this work conscientiously and
      entirely in the interests of the working people. 
    

      We are in favour of centralism and of a "plan", but of the
      centralism and plan of the proletarian state, of
      proletarian regulation of production and distribution in the
      interests of the poor, the working people, the exploited,
      against the exploiters. We can agree to only one meaning of the
      term "country-wide", namely, that which breaks the resistance of
      the capitalists, which gives all power to the majority of the
      people, i.e., the proletarians and semi-proletarians, the
      workers and the poor peasants. 
    
*  *  *

      The fifth plea is that the Bolsheviks will not be able to retain
      power because "the situation is exceptionally
      complicated". . . . 
    

      O wise men! They, perhaps, would be willing to reconcile
      themselves to revolution if only the "situation" were not
      "exceptionally complicated". 
    

      Such revolutions never occur, and sighs for such a revolution
      amount to nothing more than the reactionary wails of a bourgeois
      intellectual. Even if a revolution has started in a situation
      that seemed to be not very complicated, the development of the
      revolution itself always creates an
      exceptionally complicated situation. A revolution, a
      real, profound, a "people's" revolution, to use Marx's
      expression,[9] is the incredibly complicated and painful
      process of the death of the old and birth of the new social
      order, of the mode of life of tens of millions of
      people. Revolution is a most intense, furious, desperate class
      struggle and  civil war. Not a single great revolution in
      history has taken place without civil war. And only a "man in a
      muffler"[10] can think that civil war is conceivable without an
      "exceptionally complicated situation". 
    

      If the situation were not exceptionally complicated there would
      be no revolution. If you are afraid of wolves don't go into the
      forest. 
    

      There is nothing to discuss in the fifth plea, because there is
      no economic, political, or any other meaning what ever in it. It
      contains only the yearning of people who are distressed and
      frightened by the revolution. To characterise this yearning I
      shall take the liberty of mentioning two little things from my
      personal experience. 
    

      I had a conversation with a wealthy engineer shortly before the
      July days. This engineer had once been a revolutionary, had been
      in the Social-Democratic movement and even a member of the
      Bolshevik Party. Now he was full of fear and rage at the
      turbulent and indomitable workers. "If they 
      were at least like the German workers," he said (he is an
      educated man and has been abroad), "of course, I understand that
      the social revolution is, in general, inevitable, but here, when
      the workers' level has been so reduced by the war . . . it is
      not a revolution, it is an abyss." 
    

      He was willing to accept the social revolution if history were
      to lead to it in the peaceful, calm, smooth and precise manner
      of a German express train pulling into a station. A sedate
      conductor would open the carriage door and announce: "Social
      Revolution Station! Alle aussteigen! (All change!)" In
      that case he would have no objection to changing his position of
      engineer under the Tit Tityches to that of engineer under the
      workers' organisations. 
    

      That man has seen strikes. He knows what a storm of passion the
      most ordinary strike arouses even in the most peaceful
      times. He, of course, understands how many million times more
      furious this storm must be when the class struggle has aroused
      all the working people of a vast country, when war and
      exploitation have driven almost to desperation millions of
      people who for centuries have been tormented by the landowners,
      for decades have been robbed and downtrodden by the capitalists
      and the tsar's officials. He understands all this
      "theoretically", he only pays lip-service to this, he
      is simply terrified by the "exceptionally complicated
      situation". 
    

      After the July days, thanks to the extremely solicitous
      attention with which the Kerensky government honoured me, I was
      obliged to go underground. Of course, it was the workers who
      sheltered people like us. In a small working-class house in a
      remote working-class suburb of Petrograd, dinner is being
      served. The hostess puts bread on the table. The host says:
      "Look what fine bread. 'They' dare not give us bad bread
      now. And we had almost given up even thinking that we'd ever get
      good bread in Petrograd again." 
    

      I was amazed at this class appraisal of the July days. My
      thoughts had been revolving around the political significance of
      those events, weighing the role they played in the general
      course of events, analysing the situation that caused this
      zigzag in history and the situation it would create, and how we
      ought to change our slogans and alter our Party apparatus to
      adapt it to the changed situation. As for bread, I, who had not
      known want, did not give it a thought. I took bread for granted,
      as a by-product of the writer's work, as it were. The mind
      approaches the foundation of everything, the class struggle for
      bread, through political analysis that follows an extremely
      complicated and devious path. 
    

      This member of the oppressed class, however, even though one of
      the well-paid and quite intelligent workers, takes the bull by
      the horns with that astonishing simplicity and
      straightforwardness, with that firm determination and amazing
      clarity of outlook from which we intellectuals are as remote as
      the stars in the sky. The whole world is divided into two camps:
      "us", the working people, and "them", the exploiters. Not a
      shadow of embarrassment over what had taken place; it was just
      one of the battles in the long struggle between labour and
      capital. When you fell trees, chips fly. 
    

      "What a painful thing is this 'exceptionally complicated
      situation' created by the revolution," that's how the bourgeois
      intellectual thinks and feels. 
    

      "We squeezed 'them' a bit; 'they' won't dare to lord it over us
      as they did before. We'll squeeze again—and chuck them out
      altogether," that's how the worker thinks and feels. 
*  *  *

      The sixth and last plea: the proletariat "will be incapable of
      resisting all the pressure by hostile forces that will sweep
      away not only the proletarian dictatorship, but the entire
      revolution into the bargain". 
    

      Don't try to scare us, gentlemen, you won't succeed. We saw
      these hostile forces and their pressure in Kornilovism (from
      which the Kerensky regime in no way differs). Everybody saw, and
      the people remember, how the proletariat and the poor peasants
      swept away the Kornilov gang, and how pitiful and helpless
      proved to be the position of the supporters of the bourgeoisie
      and of the few exception ally well-to-do local small landowners
      who were exceptionally "hostile" to the revolution. Dyelo
      Naroda of September 30 urges the workers to "be patient and
      put up with" Kerensky (i.e., Kornilov) and the fake Tsereteli
      Bulygin Duma until the convocation of the Constituent Assembly
      (convened under the protection of "military measures" against
      insurgent peasants!) and, with great gusto, it repeats precisely
      Novaya Zhizn's sixth plea and shouts until it is
      hoarse: "The Kerensky government will under no circumstances
      submit" (to the rule of the Soviets, the rule of the workers and
      peasants, which Dyelo Naroda, not wishing to lag behind
      the pogrom-mongers and anti-Semites, monarchists and Cadets,
      calls the rule of "Trotsky and Lenin": these are the lengths to
      which the Socialist-Revolutionaries go!). 
    

      But neither Novaya Zhizn nor Dyelo Naroda can
      scare the class-conscious workers. "The Kerensky government,"
      you say, "will under no circumstances submit", i.e., it will
      repeat the Kornilov revolt, to put it more simply, bluntly and
      clearly. And the gentlemen of Dyelo Naroda dare to say
      that this will be "civil war", that this is a "horrible
      prospect"! 
    

      No, gentlemen, you will not fool the workers. It will not be
      civil war but a hopeless revolt of a handful of Kornilovites. If
      they want to "refuse to submit" to the people and at all costs
      provoke a repetition on a wide scale of what happened to the
      Kornilov men in Vyborg—if that is what the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries want, if that is what the 
      member of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party Kerensky wants, he
      may drive the people to desperation. But you will not scare the
      workers and soldiers with this, gentlemen. 
    

      What boundless insolence. They faked up a new Bulygin Duma; by
      means of fraud they recruited a crowd of reactionary
      co-operators and village kulaks to help them, added to these the
      capitalists and landowners (the so-called property owning
      classes) and with the aid of this gang of Kornilovites they want
      to thwart the will of the people, the will of the
      workers and peasants. 
    

      They have brought affairs in a peasant country to such a pass
      that peasant revolt is spreading everywhere like a river in
      flood! Think of it! In a democratic republic in which 80 per
      cent of the population are peasants, the peasants have been
      driven to revolt. . . . This same Dyelo Naroda,
      Chernov's newspaper, the organ of the "Socialist-Revolutionary"
      Party, which on September 30 has the effrontery to advise the
      workers and peasants to "be patient", was obliged to admit in a
      leading article on September 29: 
    

      "So far practically nothing has been done to put an end
      to those relations of bondage that still prevail in the
      villages of central Russia." 
    

      This same Dyelo Naroda, in the same leading article of
      September 29, says that "the dead hand of Stolypin is still
      making itself strongly felt" in the methods employed by the
      "revolutionary ministers"; in other words, putting it more
      clearly and simply, it brands Kerensky, Nikitin, Kishkin and
      Co. as Stolypins. 
    

      The "Stolypins" Kerensky and Co. have driven the peasants to
      revolt, are now taking "military measures" against the peasants,
      are trying to soothe the people with the convocation of the
      Constituent Assembly (although Kerensky and Tsereteli have
      already deceived the people once by solemnly
      proclaiming on July 8 that the Constituent Assembly would be
      convened on the appointed date, September 17; they then
      broke their promise and postponed the Constituent
      Assembly even against the advice of the Menshevik Dan,
      postponed the Constituent Assembly not to the end of October as
      the Menshevik Central Executive Committee of that time wished,
      but to the end of November). The "Stolypins" Kerensky and
      Co. are trying to soothe the people with the imminent
      convocation of the Constituent Assembly, as if the people can
      believe those who have already lied in this matter, as if the
      people can believe that the Constituent Assembly will be
      properly convened by a government which has taken
      military measures in remote villages, that is to say,
      is openly conniving at the arbitrary arrest of class-conscious
      peasants and the rigging of the elections. 
    

      The government has driven the peasants to revolt and now has the
      effrontery to say to them: "You must 'be patient', you must
      wait, trust the government which is pacifying insurgent
      peasants by 'military measures'!" 
    

      To bring matters to such a pitch that hundreds of thousands of
      Russian soldiers perish in the offensive after June 19, the war
      is being protracted, German sailors have mutinied and are
      throwing their officers overboard, to bring matters to such a
      pitch, all the time uttering phrases about peace but not
      offering a just peace to all the belligerents, and yet to
      have the effrontery to tell the workers and peasants, to tell
      the dying soldiers, "you must be patient", trust the government
      of the "Stolypin man" Kerensky, trust the Kornilov generals for
      another month, perhaps in that month they will send several tens
      of thousands more soldiers to the slaughter. . . . "You must be
      patient". . . . 
    

      Isn't that shameless? 
    

      But you won't fool the soldiers, gentlemen of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, Kerensky's fellow party members. 
    

      The workers and soldiers will not endure the Kerensky government
      for a single day, for an extra hour, for they know that
      the Soviet Government will immediately offer
      all the belligerents a just peace and therefore will in all
      probability achieve an immediate armistice and a speedy
      peace. 
    

      Not for a single day, not for an extra hour will the soldiers of
      our peasant army allow the Kerensky government—the
      government which is employing military measures to
      suppress the peasant revolt—to remain in power against the
      will of the Soviets. 
    

      No, gentlemen of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, Kerensky's
      fellow party members, you won't fool the workers and peasants
      any more. 
*  *  *

      On the question of the pressure by hostile forces which the
      mortally frightened Novaya Zhizn assures us will sweep
      away the proletarian dictatorship, still another monstrous
      logical and political mistake is made, which only people who
      have allowed themselves to be frightened out of their wits can
      fail to see. 
    

      "Pressure by hostile forces will sweep away the proletarian
      dictatorship," you say. Very well. But you are all economists
      and educated people, dear fellow-citizens. You al] know that to
      contrast democracy to the bourgeoisie is senseless and a sign of
      ignorance; it is the same as contrasting pounds to yards, for
      there is a democratic bourgeoisie and undemocratic groups of the
      petty bourgeoisie (capable of raising a Vendée). 
    

      "Hostile forces" is merely an empty phrase. The class term is
      bourgeoisie (backed by the landowners). 
    

      The bourgeoisie and the landowners, the proletariat, and the
      petty bourgeoisie, the small proprietors, primarily the
      peasants—these are the three main "forces" into which
      Russia, like every capitalist country, is
      divided. These are the three main "forces" that have long been
      revealed in every capitalist country (including Russia) not only
      by scientific economic analysis, but also by the political
      experience of the modern history of all countries,
      by the experience of all European revolutions since the
      eighteenth century, by the experience of the two Russian
      revolutions of 1905 and 1917. 
    

      So, you threaten the proletariat with the prospect that its rule
      will be swept away by the pressure of the bourgeoisie? That, and
      that alone, is what your threat amounts to, it has no other
      meaning. 
    

      Very well. If, for example, the bourgeoisie can sweep away the
      rule of the workers and poor peasants, then the only alternative
      is a "coalition", i.e., an alliance, or agreement, between the
      petty bourgeoisie and the bourgeoisie. Nothing else can be
      contemplated! 
    

      But coalition has been tried for about six months and it has led
      to bankruptcy, and you yourselves, my dear but dense citizens of
      Novaya Zhizn, have renounced coalition. 
    

      So what do we get? 
    

      You have become so muddled, citizens of Novaya Zhizn,
      you have allowed yourselves to be so scared, that you cannot
      think straight in the extremely simple matter of counting
      even up to three, let alone up to five. 
    

      Either all power to the bourgeoisie—the slogan you have
      long ceased to advocate, and which the bourgeoisie themselves
      dare not even hint at, for they know that the people overthrew
      this power with one hitch of the shoulder at the time of the
      April 20-21 events, and would overthrow it now with thrice that
      determination and ruthlessness; or power to the petty
      bourgeoisie, i.e., a coalition (alliance, agreement) between
      them and the bourgeoisie, for the petty bourgeoisie do not wish
      to and cannot take power alone and independently, as
      has been proved by the experience of all revolutions, and as is
      proved by economics, which explains that in a capitalist country
      it is possible to stand for capital and it is possible to stand
      for labour, but it is impossible to stand for long in
      between. In Russia this coalition has for six months tried
      scores of ways and failed. 
    

      Or, finally, all power to the proletarians and the poor peasants
      against the bourgeoisie in order to break their resistance. This
      has not yet been tried, and you, gentlemen of Novaya
      Zhizn, are dissuading the people from this, you
      are trying to frighten them with your own fear of the
      bourgeoisie. 
    

      No fourth way can be invented. 
    

      If Novaya Zhizn, therefore, is afraid of the
      proletarian dictatorship and rejects it because, as it claims,
      the proletarian power may be defeated by the bourgeoisie, it is
      tantamount to its surreptitiously reverting to the
      position of compromise with the capitalists! It is as
      clear as daylight, that whoever is afraid of resistance, whoever
      does not believe that it is possible to break this resistance,
      whoever warns the people: "beware of the resistance of the
      capitalists, you will not be able to cope with it", is
      thereby again calling for compromise with the
      capitalists. 
    

Novaya Zhizn is hopelessly and pitifully muddled, as
      are all the petty-bourgeois democrats who now realise that the
      coalition is bankrupt, dare not defend it openly and, at the
      same time, protected by the bourgeoisie, fear the transfer of
      all power to the proletarians and poor peasants. 
    
*  *  *

      To fear the resistance of the capitalists and yet to call
      oneself a revolutionary, to wish to be regarded as a
      socialist—isn't that disgraceful? How low must
      international socialism, corrupted by opportunism, have fallen
      ideologically if such voices could be raised? 
    

      We have already seen the strength of the capitalists'
      resistance; the entire people have seen it, for the capitalists
      are more class-conscious than the other classes and at once
      realised the significance of the Soviets, at once exerted
      all their efforts to the utmost, resorted to
      everything, went to all lengths, resorted to the most incredible
      lies and slander, to military plots in order to frustrate
      the Soviets, to reduce them to nought, to prostitute them
      (with the aid of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries),
      to transform them into talking-shops, to wear down the peasants
      and workers by months and months of empty talk and playing at
      revolution. 
    

We have not yet seen, however, the strength of
      resistance of the proletarians and poor peasants, for this
      strength will become fully apparent only when power is in the
      hands of the proletariat, when tens of millions of people who
      have been crushed by want and capitalist slavery see from
      experience and feel that state power has passed into
      the hands of the oppressed classes, that the state is helping
      the poor to fight the landowners and capitalists, is
      breaking their resistance. Only then shall we
      see what untapped forces of resistance to the capitalists are
      latent among the people; only then will what Engels called
      "latent socialism"[11] manifest itself. Only then, for every
      ten thousand overt and concealed enemies of
      working-class rule, manifesting themselves actively or by
      passive resistance, there will arise a million new
      fighters who had been politically dormant, writhing in the
      torments of poverty and despair, having ceased to believe that
      they were human, that they had the right to live, that they too
      could be served by the entire might of the modern centralised
      state, that contingents of the proletarian militia could, with
      the fullest confidence, also call upon them to take a
      direct, immediate, daily part in state administration. 
    

      The capitalists and landowners, with the kind help of Plekhanov,
      Breshkovskaya, Tsereteli, Chernov and Co., have done
      everything in their power to defile the democratic
      republic, to defile it by servility to wealth to such a
      degree that the people are being overcome by apathy,
      indifference; it is all the same to them, because the
      hungry man cannot see the difference between the republic and
      the monarchy; the freezing, barefooted, worn-out soldier
      sacrificing his life for alien interests is not inclined to love
      the republic. 
    

      But when every labourer, every unemployed worker, every cook,
      every ruined peasant sees, not from the newspapers, but with his
      own eyes, that the proletarian state is not cringing to wealth
      but is helping the poor, that this state does not hesitate to
      adopt revolutionary measures, that it confiscates surplus stocks
      of provisions from the parasites-and distributes them to the
      hungry, that it forcibly installs the homeless in the houses of
      the rich, that it compels the rich to pay for milk but does not
      give them a drop until the children of all poor
      families are sufficiently supplied, that the land is being
      transferred to the working people and the factories and banks
      are being placed under the control of the workers, and that
      immediate and severe punishment is meted out to the millionaires
      who conceal their wealth—when the poor see and feel this,
      no capitalist or kulak forces, no forces of world finance
      capital which manipulates thousands of millions, will vanquish
      the people's revolution; on the contrary, the socialist
      revolution will triumph all over the world for it is
      maturing in all countries. 
    

      Our revolution will be invincible if it is not afraid of itself,
      if it transfers all power to the proletariat, for behind us
      stand the immeasurably larger, more developed, more organised
      world forces of the proletariat which are temporarily held down
      by the war but not destroyed; on the contrary, the war has
      multiplied them. 
    
*  *  *

      How can one be afraid that the Bolshevik government, that is to
      say, the proletarian government, which is assured of the devoted
      support of the poor peasants, will be "swept away" by the
      capitalist gentlemen! What short 
      sightedness! What disgraceful fear of the people! What
      hypocrisy! Those who show this fear belong to that "high" (by
      capitalist standards, but actually rotten) "society"
      which utters the word "justice" without believing in it, from
      habit, as a trite phrase, attaching no meaning to it. 
    

      Here is an example. 
    

      Mr. Peshekhonov is a well-known semi-Cadet. A more moderate
      Trudovik, one of the same mind as the Breshkovskayas and
      Plekhanovs, will not be found. There has never been a minister
      more servile to the bourgeoisie. The world had never seen a more
      ardent advocate of "coalition", of compromise with the
      capitalists. 
    

      Here are the admissions this gentleman was forced to
      make in his speech at the "Democratic" (read: Bulygin)
      Conference as reported by the defencist Izvestia: 
    

      "There are two programmes. One is the programme of group claims,
      class and national claims. This programme is most frankly
      advocated by the Bolsheviks. It is not easy, however, for the
      other sections of the democracy to reject this programme. They
      are the claims of the working people, the claims of the cheated
      and oppressed nationalities. It is not so easy, therefore, for
      the democracy to break with the Bolsheviks, to reject these
      class demands, primarily because in essence these demands are
      just. But this programme, for which we fought before the
      revolution, for the sake of which we made the revolution, and
      which we would all unanimously support under other
      circumstances, constitutes a very grave danger under present
      conditions. The danger is all the greater now because these
      demands have to be presented at a time when it is impossible for
      the state to comply with them. We must first defend the
      whole—the state, to save it from doom, and there is only
      one way to do that, not the satisfaction of demands, however
      just and cogent they may be, but, on the contrary, restriction
      and sacrifice, which must be contributed from all
      quarters. (Izvestia, September 17.) 
    

      Mr. Peshekhonov fails to understand that as long as the
      capitalists are in power he is defending not the whole,
      but the selfish interests of Russian and "Allied" imperialist
      capital. Mr. Peshekhonov fails to understand that the war would
      cease to be an imperialist, predatory war of annexation only
      after a rupture with the capitalists, with their secret
      treaties, with their annexations (seizure of alien
      territory), with their banking and financial
      swindles. Mr.Peshekhonov fails to understand that only
      after this would the war become—if the enemy
      rejected the formal offer of a just peace—a defensive war,
      a just war. Mr. Peshekhonov fails to understand that the defence
      potential of a country that has thrown off the yoke of capital,
      that has given the peasants land and has placed the banks and
      factories under workers' control, would be many times
      greater than the defence potential of a capitalist country. 
    

      The main thing that Mr. Peshekhonov fails to
      understand is that he surrenders his entire position,
      the entire position of the entire petty-bourgeois democracy
      when he is forced to admit the justice of Bolshevism, to admit
      that its demands are the demands of the "working
      people", i.e., of the majority of the people. 
    

      This is where our strength lies. This is why our government will
      be invincible; because even our opponents are forced to admit
      that the Bolshevik programme is that of the "working people" and
      the "oppressed nationalities". 
    

      After all, Mr. Peshekhonov is the political friend of the
      Cadets, of the Yedinstvo and Dyelo Naroda people, of
      the Breshkovskayas and Plekhanovs, he is the representative of
      the kulaks and of the gentlemen whose wives and sisters would
      come tomorrow to gouge out with their umbrellas the eyes of
      wounded Bolsheviks if they were to be defeated by Kornilov's or
      (which is the same thing) Kerensky's troops. 
    

      A gentleman like that is forced to admit the "justice"
      of the Bolshevik demands. 
    

      For him "justice" is merely an empty phrase. For the mass of
      semi-proletarians, however, and for the majority of the urban
      and rural petty bourgeoisie who have been ruined, tortured and
      worn out by the war, it is not an empty phrase, but a most
      acute, most burning and immense question of death from
      starvation, of a crust of bread. That is why no policy
      can be based on a "coalition", on a "compromise" between the
      interests of the 
      starving and ruined and the interests of the exploiters. That is
      why the Bolshevik government is assured of the support
      of the overwhelming majority of these people. 
    

      Justice is an empty word, say the intellectuals and those
      rascals who are inclined to proclaim themselves Marxists on the
      lofty grounds that they have "contemplated the hind
      parts" of economic materialism. 
    

      Ideas become a power when they grip the people. And precisely at
      the present time the Bolsheviks, i.e., the representatives of
      revolutionary proletarian internationalism, have embodied in
      their policy the idea that is motivating countless working
      people all over the world. 
    

      Justice alone, the mere anger of the people against
      exploitation, would never have brought them on to the true path
      of socialism. But now that, thanks to capitalism, the material
      apparatus of the big banks, syndicates, railways, and so forth,
      has grown, now that the immense experience of the advanced
      countries has accumulated a stock of engineering marvels, the
      employment of which is being hindered by capitalism,
      now that the class-conscious workers have built up a party of a
      quarter of a million members to systematically lay hold of this
      apparatus and set it in motion with the support of all the
      working and exploited people—now that these conditions
      exist, no power on earth can prevent the Bolsheviks, if they
      do not allow themselves to be scared and if they succeed in
      taking power, from retaining it until the triumph of the world
      socialist revolution. 
    

      AFTERWORD 
    

      The foregoing lines were already written when the leading
      article in Novaya Zhizn of October 1 produced another
      gem of stupidity which is all the more dangerous because it
      professes sympathy with the Bolsheviks and offers most sagacious
      philistine admonitions "not to allow yourselves to be provoked"
      (not to allow ourselves to be caught in the trap of screams
      about provocation, the object of which is to frighten the
      Bolsheviks and cause them to refrain from taking
      power). 
    

      Here is this gem: 
    

      "The lessons of movements, like that of July 3-5, on the one
      hand, and of the Kornilov days, on the other, have shown quite
      clearly that the democracy, having at its command organs that
      exercise immense influence among the population, is invincible
      when it takes a defensive position in civil war, and that it
      suffers defeat, loses all the middle vacillating groups when it
      takes the initiative and launches an offensive ." 
    

      If the Bolsheviks were to yield in any form and in the slightest
      degree to the philistine stupidity of this argument they would
      ruin their Party and the revolution. 
    

      For the author of this argument, taking it upon himself to talk
      about civil war (just the subject for a lady with many good
      points), has distorted the lessons of history on this
      question in an incredibly comical manner. 
    

      This is how these lessons, the lessons of history on
      this question, were treated by the representative and
      founder of proletarian revolutionary tactics, Karl Marx: 
    

      "Now, insurrection is an art quite as much as war or any other
      art, and is subject to certain procedural rules 
      which, when neglected, will bring about the downfall of the
      party neglecting them. These rules, logical deductions from the
      nature of the parties and the circumstances you have to deal
      with in such a case, are so plain and simple that the brief
      experience of 1848 made the Germans fairly well acquainted with
      them. Firstly, never play with insurrection unless you are fully
      prepared to go the whole way "Insurrection is an equation with
      very indefinite magnitudes, the value of which may change every
      day; the forces opposed to you have all the advantage of
      organisation, discipline and habitual authority [Marx has in
      mind the most "difficult" case of insurrection: against the
      "firmly established" old authority, against the army not yet
      disintegrated by the influence of the revolution and the
      vacillation of the government]; unless you bring strong odds
      against them you are defeated and ruined. Secondly, once you
      have entered upon the insurrectionary career, act with the
      greatest determination, and on the offensive. The defensive is
      the death of every armed rising; it is lost before it measures
      itself with its enemies. Surprise your antagonists while their
      forces are scattered, prepare the way for new successes, however
      small, but prepare daily; keep up the moral superiority which
      the first successful rising has given to you; rally in this way
      those vacillating elements to your side which always follow the
      strongest impulse and which always look out for the safer side;
      force your enemies to retreat before they can collect their
      strength against you; in the words of Danton, the greatest
      master of revolutionary tactics yet known: de l'audace,
      de l'audace, encore de l'audace!"
      (Revolution and Counter-revolution in Germany, German
      edition, 1907, p. 118.) 
    

      We have changed all that, the "would-be Marxists" of Novaya
      Zhizn may say about themselves; instead of triple audacity
      they have two virtues: "We have two, sir: moderation and
      accuracy."[12] For "us", the experience of world history, the
      experience of the Great French Revolution, is 
 
      * Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by
        Lenin) have been introduced by Lenin unless otherwise
        indicated.—Ed. nothing. The important thing for
        "us" is the experience of the two movements in 1917, distorted
        by Molchalin spectacles. 
    

      Let us examine this experience without these charming
      spectacles. 
    

      You compare July 3-5 with "civil war", because you believed
      Alexinsky, Pereverzev and Co. It is typical of the gentlemen of
      Novaya Zhizn that they believe such people
      (and do absolutely nothing themselves to collect
      information about July 3-5, although they have the huge
      apparatus of a big daily newspaper at their disposal). 
    

      Let us assume for a moment, however, that July 3-5 was not the
      rudiment of civil war that was kept within the rudimentary stage
      by the Bolsheviks, but actual civil war. Let us assume this. 
    

      In that case, then, what does this lesson prove? 
    

      First, the Bolsheviks did not take the offensive, for
      it is indisputable that on the night of July 3-4, and even on
      July 4, they would have gained a great deal if they had taken
      the offensive. Their defensive position was their weakness, if
      we are to speak of civil war (as Novaya Zhizn does, and
      not of converting a spontaneous outburst into a demonstration of
      the type of April 20-21, as the facts show). 
    

      The "lesson" therefore proves that the wise men of Novaya
      Zhizn are wrong. 
    

      Secondly, if the Bolsheviks did not even set out to start an
      insurrection on July 3 or 4, if not a single Bolshevik
      body even raised such a question, the reason for it
      lies beyond the scope of our controversy with
      Novaya Zhizn. For we are arguing about the
      lessons of "civil war", i.e., of insurrection, and not
      about the point that obvious lack of a majority to support it
      restrains the revolutionary party from thinking of
      insurrection. 
    

      Since everybody knows that the Bolsheviks received a majority in
      the metropolitan Soviets and in the country (over 49 per cent of
      the Moscow votes) much later than July 1917, it again
      follows that the "lessons" are far, far from what Novaya
      Zhizn, that lady with many good points, would like them to
      be. 
    

      No, no, you had better not meddle with politics, citizens of
      Novaya Zhizn! 
    

      If the revolutionary party has no majority in the advanced
      contingents of the revolutionary classes and in the country,
      insurrection is out of the question. Moreover, insurrection
      requires: (1) growth of the revolution on a country-wide scale;
      (2) the complete moral and political bankruptcy of the old
      government, for example, the "coalition" government; (3) extreme
      vacillation in the camp of all middle groups, i.e., those who do
      not fully support the government, although they did fully
      support it yesterday. 
    

      Why did Novaya Zhizn, when speaking of the "lessons" of
      July 3-5, fail even to note this very important lesson? Because
      a political question was not dealt with by politicians but by a
      circle of intellectuals who had been terrified by the
      bourgeoisie. 
    

      To proceed. Thirdly, the facts show that it was after
      July 3-4 that the rot set in among the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      and Mensheviks, precisely because the Tseretelis had
      exposed themselves by their July policy,
      precisely because the mass of the people realised that
      the Bolsheviks were their own front-rank fighters and
      that the "social-bloc" advocates were traitors. Even
      before the Kornilov revolt this rot was fully revealed by
      the Petrograd elections on August 20, which resulted in a
      victory for the Bolsheviks and the rout of the "social-bloc"
      advocates (Dyelo Naroda recently tried to refute this
      by concealing the returns for all parties, but this was
      both self-deception and deception of its readers; according to
      the figures published in Dyen of August 24, covering
      only the city, the Cadets' share of the total vote increased
      from 22 to 23 per cent, but the absolute number of votes cast
      for the Cadets dropped 40 per cent; the Bolsheviks' share of the
      total vote increased from 20 to 33 per cent, while the absolute
      number of votes cast for the Bolsheviks dropped only 10 per
      cent; the share of all "middle groups" dropped from 58 to 44 per
      cent, but the absolute number of votes cast for them dropped 60
      per cent!). 
    

      That a rot had set in among the Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks after the July days and before the Kornilov days is
      also proved by the growth of the Left wings in both parties,
      reaching almost 40 per cent: this is "retribution" for the
      persecution of the Bolsheviks by the Kerenskys. 
    

      In spite of the "loss" of a few hundred members, the proletarian
      party gained enormously from July 3-4, for it was
      precisely during those stern days that the people
      realised and saw its devotion and the treachery of the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. So, the "lesson" is
      far, very far from being of the Novaya Zhizn sort, it
      is one entirely different, namely: don't desert the seething
      masses for the "Molchalins of democracy"; and if you launch an
      insurrection, go over to the offensive while the enemy forces
      are scattered, catch the enemy unawares. 
    

      Is that not so, gentlemen "would-be Marxists" of Novaya
      Zhizn? 
    

      Or does "Marxism" mean not basing tactics on an exact appraisal
      of the objective situation but senseless]y and
      uncritically lumping together "civil war" and "a Congress of
      Soviets and the convocation of the Constituent Assembly"? 
    

      But this is simply ridiculous, gentlemen, this is a sheer
      mockery of Marxism and of logic in general! 
    

      If there is nothing in the objective situation
      that warrants the intensification of the class struggle to the
      point of "civil war", why did you speak of "civil war" in
      connection with "a Congress of Soviets and the Constituent
      Assembly"? (For this is the title of the leading article in
      Novaya Zhizn here under discussion.) In that case you
      should clearly have told the reader and proved to him that there
      is no ground in the objective situation for civil war
      and that, therefore, peaceful, constitutionally-legal,
      juridically and parliamentarily "simple" things like a Congress
      of Soviets and a Constituent Assembly can and should be the
      cornerstone of tactics. In that case it is possible to
      hold the opinion that such a congress and such an assembly are
      really capable of making decisions. 
    

      If, however, the present objective conditions harbour the
      inevitability or even only the probability of civil war, if you
      did not "idly" speak about it, but did so clearly seeing,
      feeling, sensing the existence of a situation of civil war, how
      could you make a Congress of Soviets or a Constituent Assembly
      the cornerstone? This is a sheer mockery of the starving and
      tormented people! Do you think the starving will consent to
      "wait" two months? Or that the ruin, about the increase of which
      you yourselves write every day, will 
      consent to "wait" for the Congress of Soviets or for the
      Constituent Assembly? Or that the German offensive, in the
      absence of serious steps on our part towards peace (i.e., in the
      absence of a formal offer of a just peace to all belligerents),
      will consent to "wait" for the Congress of Soviets or for the
      Constituent Assembly? Or are you in possession of facts which
      permit you to conclude that the history of the Russian
      revolution, which from February 28 to September 30 had proceeded
      with extraordinary turbulence and unprecedented rapidity, will,
      from October 1 to November 29,[13] proceed at a super-tranquil,
      peaceful, legally balanced pace that will preclude upheavals,
      spurts, military defeats and economic crises? Or will the army
      at the front, concerning which the non-Bolshevik
      officer Dubasov said officially, in the name of the front, "it
      will not fight", quietly starve and freeze until the "appointed"
      date? Or will the peasant revolt cease to be a factor of civil
      war because you call it "anarchy" and "pogrom", or because
      Kerensky will send "military" forces against the
      peasants? Or is it possible, conceivable, that the
      government can work calmly, honestly, and without
      deception to convene the Constituent Assembly in a
      peasant country when that same government is
      suppressing the peasant revolt? 
    

      Don't laugh at the "confusion in the Smolny Institute",[14]
      gentlemen! There is no less confusion in your own ranks. You
      answer the formidable questions of civil war with confused
      phrases and pitiful constitutional illusions. That is why I say
      that if the Bolsheviks were to give in to these moods they would
      ruin both their Party and their
      revolution.
    

N. Lenin


      October 1, 1917. 
    
Footnotes

[1]
    Written at Vyborg in late September-October 1 (14), 1917. First
    published in the magazine Prosveshcheniye
    (Education) No. 1-2 for October
    1917. Prosveshcheniye, a monthly Bolshevik theoretical
    journal legally published in Petersburg from December 1911 to June
    1914. It had a peak circulation of 5,000. It was put out on
    Lenin's suggestion, and contained contributions from Vorovsky,
    Ulyanova-Yelizarova, Krupskaya, Olminsky and others. Gorky edited
    the belle lettres section. Lenin directed its policy from
    Paris and then from Cracow and Poronin; he edited some of the
    articles and kept up a regular correspondence with members of the
    editorial board. The magazine reported on the working-class
    struggle at the time of the new revolutionary upsurge; it
    popularised Bolshevik slogans in the electoral campaign for the
    Fourth Duma and opposed revisionism and centrism in the parties of
    the Second International. It had a great part to play in educating
    forward-looking workers in Russia in the Marxist international
    spirit. On the eve of the First World War, in June 1914 it was
    closed down by the tsarist government, and resumed publication in
    the autumn of 1917, but only one double issue was put out. 
    

[2]  This
      happened on June 4 (17), 1917, during a speech of the Menshevik
      Tsereteli, a Minister of the Provisional Government, who had
      said that there was no political party in Russia which was
      prepared to take full power in the country. On behalf of the
      Bolshevik Party, Lenin interrupted Tsereteli with the remark:
      "There is!" In his speech from the rostrum later, Lenin declared
      that the Bolshevik Party "is ready to take over full power at
      any moment".
    

[3]
      From Nekrasov's poem, "Blessed Is
      the Gentle Poet".  

    

[4]  Reference to a character from
      Gogol's Dead Souls. 

    

[5]
Znamya Truda (The Banner of
      Labour)—a daily, the organ of the Petrograd Committee
      of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party published from August 23
      (September 5), 1917. From November 1 (14), 1917 (No. 59), the
      organ of the Petrograd Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Party and the group of Left Socialist Revolutionaries of the
      Central Executive Committee of the Second All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets. From December 28, 1917 (January 10, 1918) (No. 105),
      the paper became the Central Organ of the Party of Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. Closed down in July 1918 during the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries' revolt. 
    

[6] Volya Naroda (People's
      Will)—a
      daily, the organ of the Right wing of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party. Published in Petrograd from April
      29, 1917; closed down in November 1917. Later published under
      other names. Closed down for good in February 1918. 

[7] Sedan—scene of the
      rout of the French
      Army by the Prussians on September 1-2, 1870, when more than
      100,000 French soldiers, together with their Emperor Napoleon
      III, were taken prisoner. 

[8] Shingaryov, A. I.
      (1869-1918)—Cadet
      from 1907, member of the Cadet Central Committee. Deputy to the
      Second, Third and Fourth Dumas. After the bourgeois-democratic
      revolution of February 1917 was Minister of Agriculture in the
      First and Minister of Finance in the Second Provisional
      Government. 

    

[9] See Marx's letter to
      L. Kugelmann of April 12,
      1871. (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence,
      Moscow, 1955, p. 318.)  

    

[10] Reference to Chekhov's The Man
      in a Muffler,
      portraying a timid soul who is afraid of every little
      innovation. 

    

[11]  See Engels's letter to F A. Sorge
      of February 22, 1888. 
    

[12] Reference to the words of
      Molchalin, a character from
      Griboyedov's comedy Wit Works Woe who became a symbol
      of sycophancy and toadyism. 

    

[13] Reference to the following:
      February 28
      (March 13)—
      date of the February revolution, September 30
      (October 13)—
      first tentative date set by the Provisional Government for the
      convocation of the Constituent Assembly; November 28
      (December 11), 1917—date of the
      convocation of the Constituent Assembly. 

[14] A quotation from 
      N. Sukhanov's article "Another
      Thunderbolt" carried by the newspaper Novava Zhisn
      (New Life). From August 1917, Smolny Institute was the
      headquarters of the, Bolshevik groups of the All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee, and the Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and
      Soldiers' Deputies. The Revolutionary Military Committee also
      had its premises there from October. 


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    To Workers, Peasants, and Soldiers!
  







To Workers, Peasants, and Soldiers!







V. I. Lenin
To Workers, Peasants, and Soldiers!
 
    


Written: October 12 (14-15), 1917
      
First Published: Pravda
      No. 93, April 23, 1924

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 137-139

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Comrades! The Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries, to which
      Kerensky belongs, appeals to you in its paper Dyelo
      Naroda (of September 30) “to be
      patient”.

      The paper asks us "to be patient" and urges that power be left
      in the hands of Kerensky’s government, that power should
      not pass to the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies. Let Kerensky rely on the landowners, capitalists and
      kulaks, let the Soviets that have carried through the revolution
      and vanquished the Kornilovite generals "be patient", we are
      told. Let them have patience until the Constituent Assembly,
      which will soon be convened.

    
      Comrades! Look around you, see what is happening in the
      countryside, see what is happening in the army, and you will
      realise that the peasants and the soldiers cannot tolerate it
      any longer. An uprising of the peasants from whom the
      land has hitherto been withheld by fraud is sweeping like a
      broad river over the whole of Russia. The peasants cannot
      tolerate it any longer. Kerensky sends troops to
      suppress the peasants and to defend the landowners. Kerensky has
      again come to an agreement with the Kornilovite generals and
      officers who stand for the landowners.

    
      Neither the workers in the cities nor the soldiers at the front
      can tolerate this military suppression of the just struggle of
      the peasants for the land.

    
      As to what is going on in the army at the front, Dubasov, a
      non-Party officer, has declared before all of Russia: "The
      soldiers will not fight any longer." The soldiers are tired out,
      the soldiers are barefooted the soldiers are starving, the
      soldiers do not want to fight for the interests of the
      capitalists, they do not want to "be patient" when they
      are treated only to beautiful words about peace, while for
      months there has been a delay (as Kerensky is delaying it) in
      the peace proposal, the proposal for a just peace
      without annexations, to be offered to all the belligerent
      peoples.

    
      Comrades! Know that Kerensky is again negotiating with the
      Kornilovite generals and officers to lead troops against the
      Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, to
      prevent the Soviets from obtaining power!
      Kerensky "will under no circumstances submit" to the
      Soviets, Dyelo Naroda openly admits.

    
      Go, then, to the barracks, go to the Cossack units, go to the
      working people and explain the truth to them.
    
      If power is in the hands of the Soviets, then not later than
      October 25 (if the Congress of Soviets opens on October 20)
      a just peace will be offered to all the belligerent
      peoples. There will be a workers’ and peasants’
      government in Russia; it will immediately, without
      losing a single day, offer a just peace to all the
      belligerent peoples. Then the people will learn who wants
      the unjust war. Then in the Constituent Assembly the people will
      decide.
    
      If power is in the hands of the Soviets, the landowners
      estates will immediately be declared the
      inalienable property of the whole people.

      This is what Kerensky and his government fight against, relying
      on the village exploiters, capitalists and landowners!
    
      This is for whom and for whose interests you are asked to "be
      patient".
    
      Are you willing to "be patient" in order that Kerensky may use
      armed force to suppress the peasants who have risen for land?
    
      Are you willing to "be patient" in order that the war may be
      dragged out longer, in order that theoffer of peace and
      the annulling of the former tsar’s secret treaties with the
      Russian and Anglo-French capitalists may be postponed?
    
      Comrades, remember that Kerensky deceived the people once when
      he promised to convene the Constituent Assembly! On July 8 he
      solemnly promised to convene it not later than September 17, and
      he has deceived the people. Comrades! Whoever believes
      in the Kerensky government is a traitor to his brothers, the
      peasants and soldiers!
    
      No, not for one more day are the people willing to
      suffer postponement. Not for a single day longer can we
      suffer the peasants to be suppressed by armed force, thousands
      upon thousands to perish in the war, when a just peace cart and
      must be offered at once.
    
Down with the government of Kerensky, who is conniving
      with the Kornilovite landowning generals to suppress the
      peasants, to fire on the peasants, to drag out the war!
    
All power to the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies!



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to the Central Committee the
    Moscow and Petrograd Committees and the
    Bolshevik Members of the Petrograd and Moscow
    Soviets







Letter to the Central Committee, The Moscow And Petrograd Committees and the Bolshevik Members of the Petrograd and Moscow Soviets







V. I. Lenin
Letter to the Central Committee,
      The Moscow And Petrograd
      Committees and the Bolshevik Members
      of the Petrograd and Moscow Soviets 


Written: October 1 (14), 1917
      
First Published: 1921 in N. Lenin,
      Works, Volume XIV, Part 2. Published according to a
      typewritten copy

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 140-141

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Dear Comrades,
    

      Events are prescribing our task so clearly for us that
      procrastination is becoming positively criminal.

      The peasant movement is developing. The government is
      intensifying its severe repressive measures. Sympathy for us is
      growing in the army (99 per cent of the soldiers' votes were
      cast for us in Moscow, the army in Finland and the fleet are
      against the government, and there is Dubasov's evidence about
      the front in general).

    

      In Germany the beginning of a revolution is obvious, especially
      since the sailors were shot. The elections in Moscow—47 per
      cent Bolsheviks—are a tremendous victory. Together with the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries we have an obvious
      majority in the country.

      The railway and postal employees are in conflict with the
      government. Instead of calling the Congress for October 20, the
      Lieberdans are already talking of calling it at the end of
      October, etc., etc.
    

      Under such circumstances to “wait” would be a crime.
    

      The Bolsheviks have no right to wait for the Congress of
      Soviets, they must take power at once. By so doing they
      will save the world revolution (for otherwise there is danger of
      a deal between the imperialists of all countries, who, after the
      shootings in Germany, will be more accommodating to each other
      and will unite against us), the Russian revolution
      (otherwise a wave of real anarchy may become stronger than
      we are) and the lives of hundreds of thousands of people at
      the front.
    

      Delay is criminal. To wait for the Congress of Soviets would be
      a childish game of formalities, a disgraceful game of
      formalities, and a betrayal of the revolution.
    

      If power cannot be achieved without insurrection, we must
      resort to insurrection at once. It may very well be
      that right now power can be achieved without insurrection, for
      example, if the Moscow Soviet were to take power at once,
      immediately, and proclaim itself (together with the Petrograd
      Soviet) the government. Victory in Moscow is guaranteed, and
      there is no need to fight. Petrograd can wait. The government
      cannot do anything to save itself; it will surrender.
    

      For, by seizing power and taking over the banks, the factories
      and Russkoye Slovo, the Moscow Soviet would secure a
      tremendous basis and tremendous strength, it would be able to
      campaign throughout Russia and raise the issue thus: we shall
      propose peace tomorrow if the Bonapartist Kerensky
      surrenders (and if he does not, we shall overthrow him). We
      shall hand over the land to the peasants at
      once, we shall make concessions to the railway and
      postal employees at once, and so on.
    

      It is not necessary to “begin” with Petrograd. If
      Moscow “begins” without any blood being shed, it will
      certainly be supported by (1) the army at the front by its
      sympathy, (2) the peasants everywhere and (3) the fleet and
      the. troops in Finland, which will proceed to
      Petrograd.


      Even if Kerensky has a corps or two of mounted troops near
      Petrograd, he will be obliged to surrender. The Petrograd Soviet
      can wait and campaign for the Moscow Soviet Government. The
      slogan is: Power to the Soviets, Land to the Peasants, Peace to
      the Nations, Bread to the Starving!
    

      Victory is certain, and the chances are ten to one that it will
      be a bloodless victory.
    

      To wait would be a crime to the revolution.
    

      Greetings, 
      N. Lenin
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Theses for a Report at the October 8
    Conference 







Theses for a Report at the October 8 Conference of the Petrograd Organisation, Also for a Resolution and Instructions to Those Elected to the Party Congress







V. I. Lenin
Theses for a Report
      at the October 8 Conference
      of the Petrograd Organisation,
      Also for a Resolution and Instructions to Those Elected to the
      Party Congress


Written: September 29 and October 4
      (October 12 and 17), 1917

      
First Published: 1921 in N. Lenin,
      Works, Volume XIV, Part 2. Published according to a
      typewritten copy

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 142-144

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
On the Question of the Party’s Participation
      In the Pre-Parliament
1. The participation of our Party in the Pre-parliament, in the
    Democratic Council, or in the Council of the Republic is an
    obvious error and a deviation from the proletarian revolutionary
    path.

    
2. The objective situation is such that a revolution against
    Kerensky’s Bonapartist government is undoubtedly fomenting in
    the country (peasant uprising, increasing dissatisfaction and
    conflicts with the government in the army and among non-Russian
    groups, conflict with railway and postal employees, the resounding
    defeat of the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary conciliators
    at the elections, etc.).
At a time when there is such an upsurge of the revolution, to
    go to a sham parliament decked out to deceive the people is to
    facilitate this deception, make the preparation for the revolution
    more difficult, and distract the attention of the people
    and the forces of the Party from the urgent task of the struggle
    for power and for the overthrow of the government.
3. The Party congress, therefore, must recall Party members
    from the Pre-parliament, declare a boycott of it, appeal to the
    people to prepare forces for dispersing this “Bulygin
    Duma’ of Tsereteli’s.

      On The Slogan “All Power To The Soviets”
    

      1. All the six months’ work of the Bolsheviks in the
         revolution, all the criticism levelled by them against the
         Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries for their
         “conciliationism’ and for their having turned the
         Soviets into talking-shops, demand on the part of the
         Bolsheviks a loyal adherence to this slogan in a
         straightforward Marxist way. Unfortunately, vacillations are
         to be noted at the top levels of our Party, a
         “fear’, as it were, of the struggle for power, a
         tendency to substitute resolutions, protests, and congresses
         for this struggle.  

      2. All the experience of both revolutions, that of 1905 and that of
      and that of 1917, and all the decisions of the Bolshevik Party,
      all its political declarations for many years, may be reduced to
      the concept that the Soviet of Workers; and Soldiers' Deputies
      is a reality only as an organ of insurrection, as an organ of
      revolutionary power. Apart from this, the Soviets are a
      meaningless plaything that can only produce apathy, indifference
      and disillusion among the masses, who are legitimately disgusted
      at the endless repetition of resolutions and protests.

    
      3. Particularly today, when a peasant uprising is sweeping
      the country and is being suppressed by Kerensky with the aid of picked
      troops, when even the military measures in the rural areas constitute
      an obvious threat that the elections to the Constituent Assembly will
      be rigged, when even in Germany there has been a mutiny in the fleet,
      a refusal on the part of the Bolsheviks to transform the Soviets into
      organs of insurrection would be a betrayal both of the peasants and of
      the cause of the world socialist revolution.

    
      4. The problem of the seizure of power by the Soviets is that of
      a successful uprising. That is why all the best forces of the
      Party must be sent to the factories and barracks to explain to
      the masses their task and, taking their mood correctly in
      account, choose the proper moment for overthrowing the Kerensky
      government.
To insist on connecting this task with the Congress of Soviets,
    to subordinate it to this Congress, means to be merely playing
    at insurrection by setting a definite date beforehand, by
    making it easier for the government to prepare troops, by
    confusing the masses with the illusion that a
    “resolution’ of the Congress of Soviets can solve a task
    which only the insurrectionary proletariat is capable of solving
    by force.
    
5. It is necessary to fight against constitutional illusions
    and hopes placed in the Congress of Soviets, to discard the
    preconceived idea that we absolutely must “wait’ for it,
    to concentrate all efforts on explaining to the masses the
    inevitability of an uprising, and on preparing it. With the
    Soviets of both capital cities in their hands the Bolsheviks would
    be reducing all their propaganda for the Power-to-the-Soviets
    slogan to empty phrases and, politically, would be covering
    themselves with shame as a party of the revolutionary proletariat
    if they refused to carry out this task, and if they became
    reconciled to the convocation of the Constituent Assembly (which
    means a faked Constituent Assembly) by the Kerensky government.
    
6. This is particularly true now, when the Moscow elections
    have given the Bolsheviks 49.5 per cent of the votes and when the
    Bolsheviks, with the support of the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries,which has long existed in reality, have
    an undoubted majority in the country.
    

      Note To The Resolution On Power To The Soviets
    

      Not everything in the Theses on Power to the Soviets should be
      published, but it is tantamount to the Party’s losing its
      connections with the vanguard of the proletariat, if we refuse
      to discuss within the Party and to make clear to the masses
      those most urgent and important problems that cannot be
      discussed in the open due to the absence of full freedom of the
      press, or that cannot be brought out openly before the enemy. 


    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to the Petrograd City
    Conference 







Letter To The Petrograd City Conference





V. I. Lenin
Letter To The Petrograd City Conference
    


Written: October 7 (20), 1917
      
First Published: 1924, according to a
      typewritten copy

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 145-148

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters
      
      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
To Be Read In Closed Session
Comrades,
    

      Permit me to call the attention of the Conference to the
      extreme seriousness of the political situation. I base my
      opinion oil the news in the Saturday morning papers alone. That
      news, however, compels rue to raise the question in this way.

    

      The absolute inaction of the British fleet in general, and also
      of British submarines during the occupation of Esel by the
      Germans, coupled with the government’s plan to move from
      Petrograd to Moscow—does not all this prove that the
      Russian and British imperialists, Kerensky and the Anglo-French
      capitalists, have conspired to surrender Petrograd to
      the Germans and thus stifle the Russian revolution?
    

      I think it does.
    

      Perhaps there was no direct conspiracy, but an agreement reached
      through some Kornilovites (Maklakov or other Cadets,
      “non-party” Russian millionaires, etc.), but this does
      not in any way change the nature of it.
    

      The conclusion is clear.
    

      We must admit that unless the Kerensky government is overthrown
      by the proletariat and the soldiers in the near future the
      revolution is ruined. The question of an uprising is on the
      order of the day.
    

      We must mobilise all forces to convince the workers and soldiers
      that it is absolutely imperative to wage a last, desperate and
      decisive fight for the overthrow of the Kerensky government.
    

      We must appeal to the Moscow comrades, persuade them to seize
      power in Moscow, declare the Kerensky government deposed, and
      declare the Soviet of Workers’ Deputies in Moscow the
      provisional government of Russia in order to offer immediate
      peace and save Russia from the conspiracy. Let the Moscow
      comrades raise the question of the uprising in Moscow
      immediately.
    

      We must use the opportunity offered by the Congress of the
      Soviets of Soldiers’ Deputies of the Northern Region,
      called for October 8 in Helsingfors, and mobilise all our forces
      to win the delegates over for the uprising (as they go back
      through Petrograd).
    

      We must put the request and proposal to the Central Committee of
      our Party that it hasten the withdrawal of the Bolsheviks from
      the Pre-parliament and devote all efforts to exposing to the
      masses Kerensky’s conspiracy with the imperialists of other
      countries and to preparing the uprising so that the right
      moment for it is chosen.
    

      P. S. The resolution of the soldiers’ section of
      the Petrograd Soviet against moving -the government from
      Petrograd shows that the soldiers are also becoming
      more convinced of Kerensky’s conspiracy. We must
      gather all forces to support this correct conviction
      and to carry on propaganda among the soldiers.
*    *    *
    

      I move that the following resolution be adopted:
    

      “The Conference, having discussed the present situation,
      which is generally admitted to be highly critical, establishes
      the following facts:
    

      “1. The aggressive operations of the German fleet,
      accompanied by the very strange inactivity of the British fleet
      and coupled with the Provisional Government’s plan to move
      from Petrograd to Moscow, arouse a very strong suspicion that
      the government of Kerensky (or, what is the same thing, the
      Russian imperialists behind him) have entered into a conspiracy
      with the Anglo-French imperialists to surrender Petrograd to the
      Germans and in this way to suppress the revolution.
    

      “2. These suspicions are greatly strengthened, and are
      being confirmed, as far as is possible in such cases, by the
      following:
    

      “First, the conviction has long been growing and-
      strengthening in the army that it was betrayed by the tsarist
      generals and is also being betrayed by the generals of Kornilov
      and Kerensky (particularly in the surrender of Riga);
    

      “Second, the Anglo-French bourgeois press does not conceal
      its fierce, even frenzied hatred for the Soviets and its
      readiness to drown them in any quantity of blood;
    

      “Third, Kerensky, the Cadets, Breshkovskaya, Plekhanov and
      similar politicians are conscious or unconscious tools in the
      hands of Anglo-French imperialism, as six months’ history
      of the Russian revolution has proved in full;
    

      “Fourth, the vague but persistent rumours of a separate
      peace between Britain and Germany  at the expense of
      Russia’ could not have arisen without cause;
    

      “Fifth, all the circumstances of the Kornilov conspiracy,
      as admitted even by Dyelo Naroda and Izvestia,
      papers that on the whole sympathise with Kerensky, have proved
      that Kerensky was to a very large extent mixed up in the
      Kornilov affair, that Kerensky was and is the most dangerous
      Kornilovite; Kerensky, in fact, has shielded such leaders of the
      Kornilov revolt as Rodzyanko, Klembovsky, Maklakov, and others.
    

      “The Conference, therefore, recognises that all the
      shouting by Kerensky and the bourgeois papers that support him
      about the defence of Petrograd is sheer deception and hypocrisy,
      and the soldiers’ section of the Petrograd Soviet was
      perfectly right when it sharply condemned the plan to move from
      Petrograd; furthermore, that Petrograd cannot be defended and
      the revolution saved unless the tired army is absolutely and
      urgently convinced of the sincerity of the government and is
      given bread, clothing and footwear at the cost of revolutionary
      measures against the capitalists, who hitherto have sabotaged
      the struggle against economic ruin (as admitted even by the
      Economic Department of the Menshevik-Socialist-Revolutionary
      Central Executive Committee).
    

      “The Conference therefore declares that only the overthrow
      of the Kerensky government with its packed Council of the
      Republic, and the substitution for it of a workers’ and
      peasants revolutionary government, can ensure:
    

      “(a) the transfer of the land to the peasants instead of
      suppressing the peasant uprising;
    

      “(b) the offer of an immediate and just peace so that our
      entire army will believe that truth exists;
    

      “(c) adoption of the most decisive revolutionary measures
      against the capitalists in order to provide the army with bread,
      clothing and footwear and in order to fight against economic
      ruin.
    

      “The Conference urgently requests the Central Committee to
      take all measures to lead the inevitable uprising of the
      workers, soldiers and peasants for the overthrow of the
      anti-popular, feudal Kerensky government.
    

      “The Conference decides on the immediate dispatch of
      delegations to Helsingfors, Vyborg, Kronstadt and Revel, to the
      military units south of Petrograd, and also to Moscow, to carry
      on propaganda in favour of adopting this resolution and in
      favour of a swift, general uprising and the overthrow of
      Kerensky as the steps necessary to open the road to peace, to
      save Petrograd and the revolution, and to give the land to the
      peasants and power to the Soviets.” 

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Revision of the Party
    Programme







Revision of the Party Programme








      Vladimir Lenin
    
Revision of the Party Programme


Written: October 6-8 (19-21),  1917  


      
First Published: October 1917 in the
      journal  ProsveshcheniyeNo.1-2; Published  according to
      the  Prosveshcheniyetext,  

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 149-178

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The extraordinary congress of the Party, the Russian
      Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks), called by the
      Central Committee for October 17, has on the agenda the revision
      of the Party programme. The Conference of April
      24-29, passed a resolution on the necessity for such a
      revision and indicated in eight points the direction which this
      revision should follow.[See present edition,
      Vol. 24, pp 280-81.] Then, later, pamphlets were
      published in Petrograd [Materials Relating
      to the Revision of the Party Programme, edited and with
      a preface by N. Lenin, Priboi Publishers, 1917.]
      and Moscow,[Materials Relating to the
      Revision of the Party Programme. Collection of articles by
      V. Milyutin V. Sokolnikov, A. Lomov, V. Smirnov. Published by
      the Regional Bureau of the Moscow Industrial District of the
      R.S.D.L.P., 1917.] which took up the question of
      revision, and on August 10 the Moscow journal Spartak
      No. 4 published an article by Comrade N. I. Bukharin devoted to
      the same subject. 

    

      Let us examine the points raised by the Moscow comrades. 
    

      I
    

      For the Bolsheviks, who all agree on the need to "evaluate
      imperialism and the epoch of imperialist wars in connection with
      the approaching socialist revolution" (Clause 1 of the
      resolution adopted by the Conference of April 24-29), the main
      question in the revision of the Party programme is that of
      formulating a new programme. Should we round out the old
      programme by adding a characterisation of imperialism (I
      advocated this opinion in the Petrograd pamphlet), or should we
      change the whole text of the old programme? (This opinion was
      expressed by the group which was formed at the April Conference,
      and is now being advocated by the Moscow comrades.) This is
      primarily the question confronting our Party. 
    

      We have two drafts. The one I proposed complements the old
      programme by adding a characterisation of imperialism [See present edition, Vol. 24, pp. 450-60 and
      469. —Ed.] the second, proposed by Comrade
      V. Sokolnikov, and based on the remarks of a committee of three
      (this committee was elected by the group formed at the April
      Conference), changes the entire general part of the programme. 

    

      I also had occasion to express my opinion (in the above
      mentioned pamphlet, p. 11[Ibid.,
      pp. 464-65. —Ed. i.e.,]) concerning the
      theoretical incorrectness of the plan of revision indicated by
      the group. Let us see now how this plan is carried out in
      Comrade Sokolnikov's draft. 

    

      Comrade Sokolnikov has divided the general part of our programme
      into ten sections, giving each a number (see pp. 11-18 of the
      Moscow pamphlet). We will adhere to his numerical scheme so as
      to enable the reader to find the relevant passages.

    

      The first section of the present programme consists of two
      clauses. The first declares that the labour movement has become
      international because of the development of exchange; the
      second, that the Russian Social-Democratic Party considers
      itself one of the contingents of the army of the world
      proletariat. (Further on in the second section the common
      ultimate 
      aim of all Social-Democrats is mentioned.) 
    

      Comrade Sokolnikov leaves the second clause intact, while he
      replaces the first by a new one, adding to the point about the
      development of exchange an allusion to the "export of capital"
      and the growth of the struggle of the proletariat into "a
      world-wide socialist revolution". 

    

      The immediate result is inconsistency, a mixture of
      subjects, a confusion of two types of
      programme structure. One of the two: either we must
      begin with the characterisation of imperialism as a
      whole—and in that case we must not single out only the
      "export of capital", or leave in, as Comrade Sokolnikov does,
      the analysis of "the process of development" of bourgeois
      society in the second section; or we must
      leave the type of programme structure unchanged, first explain
      why our movement has become international, what its common
      ultimate goal is, how the "process of development" of bourgeois
      society is leading to this goal. 

    

      To make the inconsistency and lack of logic in Comrade
      Sokolnikov's formulation of the programme more evident, we will
      quote in full the opening sentences of the old programme: 

    

      "The development of exchange has established such close ties
      between all the nations of the civilised world that the great
      movement of the proletariat towards emancipation was bound to
      become—and has long since become—international." 

    

      Here Comrade Sokolnikov is dissatisfied with two points—(1)
      speaking of the development of exchange, the programme describes
      an antiquated "period of development"; (2) after the word
      "civilised" he puts an exclamation mark and says that "the close
      ties between metropolis and colony" are "not taken cognisance
      of" in our programme. 

    

      "Can protectionism, tariff wars, imperialist wars sever the ties
      of the proletarian movement?" queries Comrade Sokolnikov? and he
      himself answers: "If we are to believe the text of our
      programme, they can, for they sever the ties established by
      exchange." 

    

      Rather strange criticism. Neither protectionism, nor tariff wars
      "sever" exchange; they only change it temporarily or interrupt
      it at one point, permitting its continuation at
      another. Exchange has not been eliminated by the present war, it
      has only been made difficult in some places and has shifted to
      other places, but it still remains an international
      tie. The most obvious proof is the course of exchange. This is
      the first point. And secondly, we read in Comrade Sokolnikov's
      draft: "The development of productive forces, which, on the
      basis of the exchange of goods and the export of capital, draws
      all peoples into one world economy", etc Imperialist war (in one
      place, for a time) also interrupts the export of capital, as
      well as exchange; therefore, Comrade Sokolnikov's "criticism"
      may be turned against him.


      Thirdly, the old programme showed why the labour movement
      "has long since become" international. It had
      unquestionably become international before the export of
      capital, which is the highest stage of capitalism. 

 
    

      To sum up: Comrade Sokolnikov inserted a bit of the
      definition of imperialism (the export of capital) in a place
      where it is obviously incongruous.


      Moreover, the words "the civilised world" do not appeal to
      Comrade Sokolnikov, for, in his opinion, they refer to something
      peaceful and harmonious, and leave the colonies out. 

    

      Quite the contrary. Speaking of the "civilised world", the
      programme points out the disharmony, the existence of
      uncivilised countries (this is a fact), while in
      Comrade Sokolnikov's draft things appear much more
      harmonious, for it speaks simply of "drawing all peoples
      into one world economy"! As if all peoples were equally drawn
      into this one world economy! As if there existed no relationship
      of bondage between the uncivilised and the "civilised"
      peoples precisely on the basis of "all peoples" being
      drawn "into one world economy". 

    

      Comrade Sokolnikov has really weakened the old
      programme on the two points he mentions. He has put
      less emphasis on internationalism. It is very important
      for us to point out that it emerged long ago, long
      before the era of finance capital. His wording gives the
      impression of a greater "harmony" in respect of the
      colonies. It is nevertheless unfortunately true that so far the
      labour movement has affected only the civilised
      countries, and to ignore this fact is not proper. 

    

      I would be ready to agree with Comrade Sokolnikov had he
      demanded a clearer exposition of the exploitation of
      the colonies. That is a really important component of
      the concept "imperialism". But in the first section of Comrade
      Sokolnikov's draft, there is no mention of it. He
      scatters the various component parts of the concept
      "imperialism" over several places to the detriment of
      consistency and clarity. 

    

      We shall soon see how Comrade Sokolnikov's entire draft suffers
      from this looseness and inconsistency. 

    

      II
    

      Let the reader observe the general arrangement and the sequence
      of topics in the various sections of the old programme (we
      follow Comrade Sokolnikov's numerical scheme):
 
    

      1. The labour movement has long since become international. We
        are one of its contingents. 
    

      2. The final goal of the movement is determined by the course of
        development of bourgeois society. The point of departure is
        that the means of production are privately owned and the
        proletariat is propertyless. 
    

      3. The growth of capitalism. The crowding out of the small
        producers. 
    

      4. The growth of exploitation (female labour, the reserve labour
        army, etc.). 
    

      5. Crises. 
    

      6. The progress of technology; the growth of inequality. 
    

      7. Growing struggle on the part of the proletariat. Material
        conditions for the replacement of capitalism by socialism. 
    

      8. The proletarian social revolution. 
    

      9. Its premise—the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
    

      10. The task of the Party—to lead the struggle of the
         proletariat for the social revolution. 
    

      I add another point: 
    

      11. Capitalism has developed to its highest stage (imperialism),
         and the era of the proletarian revolution has now set in. 
    

      Compare this with the arrangement of the subject
      matter—not the individual corrections to the text, but
      the subject matter itself—in Comrade Sokolnikov's draft,
      and also the points he adds on imperialism.


      1. The labour movement is international. We are one of its
        contingents. (Inserted—the export of capital, world
        economy, the growth of the struggle into the world revolution;
        i.e., a bit of the definition of imperialism is inserted.) 
    

      2. The final goal of the movement is determined by the course of
        development of bourgeois society. The point of departure is
        that the means of production are privately owned and the
        proletariat is propertyless. (In the middle is inserted:
        omnipotent banks and syndicates, monopoly combines on a world
        scale; i.e., another bit of the definition of imperialism is
        inserted.) 
    

      3. The growth of capitalism. The crowding out of the small
        producers. 
    

      4. The growth of exploitation (female labour, the reserve labour
        army, foreign workers, etc.). 
    

      5. Crises and wars. Still another bit of the definition of
        imperialism is inserted: "attempts to partition the globe";
        monopoly associations and the export of capital are repeated
        once more; the term "finance capital" is explained
        parenthetically as meaning "the product of a merger of
        industrial and banking capital". 
    

      6. The progress of technology; the growth of inequality. Yet
        another bit of the definition of imperialism is put in: high
        cost of living, militarism. Monopoly associations are
        mentioned again. 
    

      7. Growing struggle on the part of the proletariat. Material
        conditions for the replacement of capitalism by socialism. In
        the middle there is an interpolation, again reiterating:
        "monopoly capitalism", and pointing out how the banks and the
        syndicates have prepared the apparatus for social regulation,
        etc. 
    

      8. The proletarian social revolution. (A note that it will put an
        end to the rule of finance capital.) 
    

      9. Its premise—the dictatorship of the proletariat. 
    

      10. The task of the Party—to lead the struggle of the
         proletariat for the social revolution. (In the middle there
         is an interpolation that the latter is now on the order of
         the day.) 
    

      I believe that this comparative study clearly shows that Comrade
      Sokolnikov's draft suffers from the "mechanical" additions some
      comrades were so afraid of. Without any logical sequence,
      various bits of the definition of imperialism have been
      scattered throughout the draft in the form of a mosaic. There is
      no general and integral characterisation of imperialism. There
      are too many repetitions. The old canvas is preserved. Preserved
      also is the general plan of the old programme which points out
      that the "ultimate goal" of the movement is "determined" by the
      nature of contemporary bourgeois society and the course of
      its development. But it is just this "course of
      development" which is not brought out; and the effect is that
      odds and ends of the definition of imperialism have been
      inserted, mostly inappropriately.


      Let us take the second section. Here Comrade Sokolnikov left
      unchanged the beginning and the end; the beginning states that
      the means of production are in the hands of a minority; the end,
      that the majority of the population are proletarians or
      semi-proletarians. Right in the middle, Comrade
      Sokolnikov inserts a special phrase to the effect that "during
      the last quarter of a century the direct or indirect control of
      production organised on capitalist lines has passed into the
      hands of all-powerful" banks, trusts, etc. 
    

      This is mentioned earlier than the crowding out of
      the small by the big producersThe latter fact is first
      mentioned in the third section. But are not trusts the
      highest and latest manifestation of the very process of the
      crowding out of small-scale by large-scale production? Is it
      appropriate to speak first of trusts, and then of the ousting of
      the small producer? Is it not a violation of logical sequence?
      Where, then, did the trusts come from? Is this not an error in
      theory? How and why has control "passed" into their hands? All
      this cannot be understood before the process of the ousting of
      the small producer is made clear. 
    

      Let us take the third section that deals with the crowding out
      of small by large enterprises. Here too Comrade Sokolnikov
      retains the beginning (the increasing importance of big
      enterprises) and the end (small producers are being crowded
      out). In the middle, however, he adds that big enterprises "have
      merged into gigantic organisms which combine a series of
      consecutive steps of production and exchange". But this
      insertion deals with an entirely different matter, namely, the
      concentration of the means of production and the socialisation
      of labour by capitalism, the creation of the material conditions
      for the replacement of capitalism by socialism. In the old
      programme this point is not dealt with until the seventh
      section. 
    

      Comrade Sokolnikov adheres to the general plan of the old
      programme. He, too, speaks of the material conditions for the
      replacement of capitalism by socialism only in the seventh
      section. He also retains in the seventh section a mention
      of the concentration of means of production and the
      socialisation of labour! 
    

      And so the concentration of capital is indicated in part a few
      paragraphs before an entire general, summarising
      section specially devoted to the subject. This is devoid of all
      logic and is likely to render the programme less intelligible to
      the masses. 
 


      III
    

      Comrade Sokolnikov "subjects to a general revision" the fifth
      section of the programme, the one dealing with crises. He finds
      that the old programme "sins in theory to win popularity" and
      "deviates from Marx's theory of crises". 
    

      Comrade Sokolnikov suggests that the word "overproduction" is
      made "the basis of the explanation" of crises in the old
      programme and that "such a view is more in keeping with the
      theory of Rodbertus
      who explains crises as being due to under-consumption by the
      working class". 
    

      A comparison of the old text with the new one proposed by
      Comrade Sokolnikov will show how unsuccessful his hunt for
      theoretical heresy has been, and how Rodbertus has been dragged
      in by the hair.


      The old text contains the following, after mention (in
      the fourth section) of "technical progress", intensified
      exploitation of labour, and relatively lower consumption by the
      workers: "This state of affairs in the bourgeois
      countries, etc., makes it more and more difficult for them to
      market commodities produced in ever-increasing
      quantities. Overproduction, manifesting itself in
      . . . crises . . . and periods of stagnation . . . is an
      inevitable consequence. . . ." 
    

      It is clear that here overproduction is by no means used as the
      "basis of the explanation" of crises, but that this is only a
      description of the origin of crises and periods of
      stagnation. In Comrade Sokolnikov's draft we read the following: 
    

      "The development of the productive forces assuming these
      contradictory forms, in which the conditions of production come
      into conflict with the conditions of consumption and the
      conditions for the realisation of capital with those for its
      accumulation—this development, whose sole motive force is
      the pursuit of profit, has as its inevitable consequence acute
      industrial crises and depressions which signify the cessation of
      the sale of commodities, anarchically produced in
      ever-increasing quantities." 
    

      Comrade Sokolnikov said exactly the same thing, because "the
      cessation of the sale of commodities" produced in "ever
      increasing quantities", is exactly what we call
      overproduction. There is no need for him to fear this
      word, there is nothing inaccurate in it. It is useless for
      Comrade Sokolnikov to write that instead of "overproduction",
      "underproduction might be used, with much the same or even more
      reason" (page 15 of the Moscow pamphlet). 
    

      Well, just try calling the "cessation of the sale of
      commodities", "produced in ever-increasing quantities",
      "underproduction"! It cannot be done. 
    

      Rodbertus's theory is not merely a matter of using the word
      "overproduction" (which alone exactly describes one of
      the profoundest contradictions of capitalism), but of
      explaining crises merely as the result of insufficient
      consumption by the working class. The old programme does
      not deduce crises from insufficient consumption. It
      bases its explanation on "this state of affairs in the
      bourgeois countries", as has been described in the preceding
      section of the programme and which consists in "technical
      progress" and "the relatively lower demand for human
      labour-power". Alongside of this the old programme speaks of
      "the ever-growing competition on the world market". 
    

      Here something basic is said about the conflict between
      the conditions for accumulation and the conditions for
      realisation, and is said much more clearly. The theory
      has not been "changed" here at all, "to win popularity", as
      Comrade Sokolnikov erroneously thinks, but is presented clearly
      and popularly, which is a good point. 
    

      Of crises, to be sure, one could write volumes, one might give a
      more concrete analysis of the conditions of accumulation,
      mention the role of the means of production, of the
      exchange of surplus value and variable capital expressed in the
      means of production for constant capital expressed in articles
      of consumption, of the depreciation of constant capital due to
      new inventions, and so on, and so forth. But Comrade Sokolnikov
      makes no attempt to do this! His supposed correction of the
      programme consists only in the following: 
    

      1. Having preserved the plan of transition from the fourth to the
        fifth section, from the reference to technical progress, etc.,
        to crises, he weakened the connection between the two
        sections by leaving out the words, "this state of
        affairs". 
    

      2. He added theoretical-sounding phrases about the conflict
         between the conditions of production and the conditions of
         consumption, and between the conditions for realisation and
         the conditions for accumulation—phrases which are quite
         correct but which do not express any new idea, for the
         preceding section gives the substance of all this more
         clearly. 
    

      3. He adds "the pursuit of profit"—an expression hardly
        suited to the programme, and which is used here, we suspect,
        precisely "to win popularity", for the same
        idea is expressed several times in the phrases about
        "conditions for realisation", commodity production, etc. 
    

      4. He substitutes "depression" for "stagnation"; an unfortunate
        change. 
    

      5. He adds the word "anarchically" to the old text ("commodities,
        anarchically produced in ever-increasing quantities"). This
        addition is theoretically wrong, for "anarchy" or "absence of
        planning" using an expression from the Erfurt Programme and
        contested by Engels, does not exactly characterise
        trusts.[Engels criticised the expressions
        "private production" and "absence of planning" in the draft of
        the Erfurt Programme. He wrote: "If we go over from stock
        companies to trusts, which dominate and mononolise whole
        branches of industry, not only private production, but also
        the absence of planning comes to an end."]


      Here is how Comrade Sokolnikov puts it: 
 
    

      "Commodities are anarchically produced in ever-increasing
      quantities. Efforts of capitalist associations (trusts and the
      like) to prevent crises by limiting production end in failure,"
      etc. 
    

      But it is by trusts that commodities are not produced
      anarchically, but according to a plan. Trusts do not
      merely "limit" production. They do not make any
      efforts to prevent crises, nor can they make any such
      "efforts". Comrade Sokolnikov is guilty of a number of
      inaccuracies. What he should have said was: although trusts
      produce commodities not anarchically but according to a plan,
      crises nevertheless cannot be averted because of the
      above-mentioned characteristics of capitalism which are also
      inherent in the trusts. And if trusts, in periods of the
      greatest prosperity and speculation, limit production in the
      sense of being careful "not to go too far", then at best they
      only succeed in saving the largest enterprises; but crises come
      just the same. 
    

      Summarising all that has been said on the question of crises, we
      come to the conclusion that Comrade Sokolnikov has not improved
      upon the old programme. On the contrary, the new draft contains
      inaccuracies. The need to correct the old programme has not been
      proved. 


      IV
    

      In his draft Comrade Sokolnikov makes two theoretical errors on
      the question of wars of an imperialist nature. 
    

      First, he does not give an appreciation of the present war. He
      says that the imperialist epoch generates imperialist wars. This
      is correct and should, of course, be stated in the
      programme. But this is not enough. Besides this it is necessary
      to say that the present war of 1914-17 is imperialist. The
      German Spartacus group in their "theses" published in German in
      1915 advanced the proposition that in an era of imperialism
      national wars are impossible.[ 71] This is obviously a
      wrong assertion, for imperialism makes the oppression of nations
      more acute and, as a result, national revolts and national wars
      (attempts to draw a line of demarcation between revolts and wars
      are doomed to failure) are not only possible and probable but
      absolutely inevitable. 
    

      Marxism demands a very precise assessment of each separate war
      on the basis of concrete data. To evade the question of the
      present war by resorting to general discussions is wrong in
      theory and inadmissible in practice. This method is used as a
      screen by the opportunists, they use it for evasion. They say
      that imperialism is, in general, an epoch of imperialist wars,
      but this particular war is not wholly
      imperialist (thus argued, for instance, Kautsky). 
    

      Secondly, Comrade Sokolnikov links "crises and wars",
      as if they were a two-in-one companion of capitalism in general,
      and of modern capitalism in particular. On pages 20 and 21 of
      the Moscow pamphlet, he repeats the "crises and wars"
      combination in his draft three times. Here it is not
      only a question of the undesirability of repetitions in the
      programme. It is also a question of incorrectness in principle. 
    

      Crises in the shape of overproduction, or "cessation of the sale
      of commodities", if Comrade Sokolnikov insists on banishing the
      word overproduction, are phenomena exclusive to
      capitalism. But wars are also characteristic of the slave-owning
      and serf systems of economy. Imperialist wars also occurred in
      the period of slavery (the war between Rome and Carthage was on
      both sides an imperialist war), as well as in the Middle Ages
      and in the epoch of mercantile capitalism. A war is certainly
      imperialist if both warring sides oppress foreign
      countries or nationalities, and are fighting for their share of
      the loot and for the right to "oppress and rob" more than the
      others. 
    

      If we were to say that only modern capitalism, only imperialism,
      has brought imperialist wars in its wake, it would be correct,
      for the preceding stage of capitalism, the stage of
      free competition, or the stage of pre-monopoly capitalism, was
      characterised in Western Europe mainly by national
      wars. But if we were to say that in the preceding stage there
      were no imperialist wars at all, it would be incorrect. It would
      mean that we had forgotten the "colonial" wars, which are also
      imperialist. This is the first point. 
    

      And secondly, the linking up of "crises and wars" is
      particularly incorrect, for these are quite different phenomena
      of different historical origin and different class
      significance. For instance, it would be wrong to say, as Comrade
      Sokolnikov says in his draft, that "both crises and wars, in
      turn, mean still greater ruin for the small producers and
      increase the dependence of hired labour on capital. . .". For
      there could possibly be wars fought for the
      emancipation of hired labour from capital. In the course of the
      struggle of wage-workers against the capitalist class, wars of a
      revolutionary and not only of a reactionary-imperialist nature
      are possible. War is the continuation of the politics of this or
      that class; and in every class society, slave-owning, feudal, or
      capitalist, there have been wars which continued the politics of
      the oppressor classes and also wars which continued the politics
      of the oppressed classes. This is exactly why it would be wrong
      to say, as Comrade Sokolnikov does, that crises and wars show
      that the capitalist system is changing from a form of the
      development of productive forces into a hindrance to it". 
    

      It is true that the present imperialist war, by its reactionary
      character and the hardships it entails, revolutionises the
      masses and accelerates the revolution, and this must be
      stated. It is also true that imperialist wars in general are
      typical of an imperialist epoch, and this may be
      mentioned. But it would be wrong to say this about all "wars" in
      general, and, moreover, under no circumstances should crises and
      wars be tied up together. 
    

      V
    

      We must draw our conclusions on the chief question which should,
      according to the unanimous decision of all Bolsheviks, be
      primarily dealt with and assessed in the new programme—the
      question of imperialism. Comrade Sokolnikov maintains
      that such treatment and assessment could be more expediently
      given piecemeal, so to speak, dividing up the various
      characteristics of imperialism among various sections of the
      programme. I think it would be more to the purpose to present it
      in a special section or a special part of the programme, by
      gathering together everything that there is to say about
      imperialism. The members of the Party now have both drafts
      before them, and the congress will decide. We are in full accord
      with Comrade Sokolnikov in that imperialism must be dealt
      with. What we must find out is whether there are differences of
      opinion as to how imperialism should be treated and assessed. 
    

      From this point of view let us examine the two drafts of the new
      programme. In my draft five basic distinguishing features of
      imperialism are presented: (1) capitalist monopoly associations;
      (2) the fusion of banking and industrial capital; (3) the export
      of capital to foreign countries; (4) the territorial partition
      of the globe, already completed; (5) the partition of the globe
      among international economic trusts. (In my pamphlet Imperialism, the Highest
      Stage of Capitalism, which came out after the
      Materials Relating to the Revision of the Party
      Programme, these five distinguishing features of
      imperialism are cited on p. 85.[See present
      edition, Vol. 22, p. 266. —Ed.]) In Comrade
      Sokolnikov's draft we actually find the same five basic
      features, so that on the question of imperialism there is
      apparently complete agreement in principle within our
      Party—as was to be expected, for the practical propaganda
      of our Party on this question, both oral and printed, has long
      since, from the very beginning of the revolution, shown the
      complete unanimity of all the Bolsheviks on this fundamental
      question. 
    

      What remains to be examined is the differences in the way the
      definition and characterisation of imperialism are
      formulated. Both drafts point specifically to the time
      when capitalism may be properly regarded as having become
      transformed into imperialism. The necessity for such a statement
      in the interests of precision and correct historical evaluation
      of economic development would hardly be denied. Comrade
      Sokolnikov says: "during the last quarter of a century"; I say:
      "about the beginning of the twentieth century". In the
      above-mentioned pamphlet on imperialism (on pp: 10 and 11, for
      instance[See present edition, Vol. 22,
      pp. 200-02. —Ed.]) I cited the testimony of
      an economist who has made a special study of cartels and
      syndicates. According to him, the turn towards the
      complete victory of the cartels in Europe came with the
      crisis of 1900-03. That is why, it seems, it would be more
      accurate to say: "about the beginning of the twentieth century"
      than "during the last quarter of a century". It would be more
      correct for still another reason. The above-mentioned specialist
      and all other European economists, generally work with data
      supplied by Germany, and Germany is far ahead of other
      countries in the formation of cartels. 
    

      Furthermore, speaking of monopolies my draft says: "Monopolist
      associations of capitalists have assumed decisive importance."
      Comrade Sokolnikov calls attention to monopoly associations
      several times. Only once is he fairly definite: 
 
    

      "During the last quarter of a century the direct or indirect
      control of production organised on capitalist lines has passed
      into the hands of all-powerful, interlocking banks, trusts and
      syndicates which have formed world-wide monopoly associations
      under the direction of a handful of magnates of finance
      capital." 
    

      Here, it appears, there is too much "propaganda". "To win
      popularity" something that has no place there is injected into
      the programme. In newspaper articles, in speeches, in popular
      pamphlets, "propaganda" is indispensable; the programme of a
      party, however, must be distinguished by the precision of its
      economics; it must contain nothing superfluous. The statement
      that "capitalist monopoly associations have acquired decisive
      importance" seems to me more exact; it says all that is
      necessary. Besides much superfluous matter, the above-quoted
      excerpt from Comrade Sokolnikov's draft contains an expression
      questionable from the theoretical point of view—"control of
      production organised on capitalist lines". Is it only organised
      on capitalist lines? No. This is too weak. Even production
      not so organised—petty craftsmen, peasants, small
      cotton-growers in the colonies, etc., etc.—has become
      dependent on banks and finance capital in general. When we speak
      of "world capitalism" in general (and this is the only
      capitalism we can discuss here if we are not to make mistakes),
      our statement that monopolist associations acquire "a decisive
      importance" does not mean that any other producers are
      excluded from subordination to this rule. To limit the influence
      of monopolist associations to "production organised on
      capitalist lines" is incorrect. 
    

      To proceed. In his draft, Comrade Sokolnikov twice repeats the
      same thing about the role played by banks: once in the
      above-quoted passage and a second time in the section dealing
      with crises and wars, where he defines finance capital as "the
      product of a merger of banking and industrial capital". My draft
      says that "enormously concentrated banking capital has fused
      with industrial capital". To say it once in the programme is
      sufficient. 
    

      The third feature "the export of capital to foreign countries
      has assumed vast dimensions" (so in my draft). In Comrade
      Sokolnikov's draft, we find a mere reference to the "export of
      capital" in one place, while in another, and in an entirely
      different connection, we read of "new countries which are fields
      for the utilisation of capital exported in search of
      superprofits". It is difficult to accept as correct the
      statement on superprofits and new countries since capital has
      also been exported from Germany to Italy, from France to
      Switzerland, etc. Under imperialism, capital has begun to be
      exported to the old countries as well, and not for
      superprofits alone. What is true with regard to the new
      countries is not true with regard to the export of capital in
      general. 
    

      The fourth feature is what Hilferding has called "the struggle
      for economic territory". This term is not exact, for it does
      not indicate what mostly distinguishes modern
      imperialism from the older forms of struggle for
      economic territory. Ancient Rome fought for such territories;
      the European kingdoms in the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries
      fought for such territories and acquired colonies; so did old
      Russia by her conquest of Siberia, etc. The distinguishing
      feature of modern imperialism is (as pointed out in my draft)
      that "the whole world has been divided up territorially among
      the richer countries", i.e., the partition of the earth among
      various states has been completed. This circumstance makes the
      conflicts for a re-partitioning of the globe all the
      sharper, and is the cause of the particularly sharp collisions
      which lead to war. 
    

      All this is expressed in Comrade Sokolnikov's draft with great
      verbosity and is hardly accurate theoretically. But before I
      quote his statement of the case which also includes the economic
      partitioning of the globe, I will first touch upon that fifth
      and last feature of imperialism. Here is how this is expressed
      in my draft: 
    

      "The economic partitioning of the world among international
      trusts has begun." The data of political economy and statistics
      do not warrant any more elaborate statement. This
      partitioning of the world is a very important process, but it
      has just begun. This partitioning, or rather
      re-partitioning of the world, is bound to cause
      imperialist wars since the territorial partition is complete,
      i.e., there are no more "free" lands that can be grabbed without
      war against a rival nation. 
    

      Let us see now how Comrade Sokolnikov formulates this part of
      the programme: 
 
    

      "But the realm of capitalist relations becomes ever wider; they
      are carried across frontiers, into new lands. These lands serve
      the capitalists as markets for commodities, as sources of raw
      materials, as fields for the utilisation of capital exported in
      search of superprofits. The vast accumulation of surplus value
      at the disposal of finance capital (a product of a merger of
      banking and industrial capital) is dumped on to the world
      market. The rivalry of powerful nationally and at times
      internationally organised associations of capitalists for
      command of the market, for the possession or control of
      territories of weaker countries, i.e., for the exclusive right
      to oppress them mercilessly, inevitably leads to attempts at
      partitioning the whole world among the richest capitalist
      countries, to imperialist wars, which engender universal
      suffering, ruin, and degeneration." 
    

      Here we have too many words, covering up a series of theoretical
      errors. One cannot speak of "attempts" at dividing up the world,
      because the world has already been divided up. The war
      of 1914-17 is not "an attempt at partitioning" the world, but a
      struggle for the re-partitioning of a world already
      divided. The war became inevitable for capitalism, because a few
      years before it imperialism divided up the world
      according to yardsticks of strength now out of date, and which
      are being "corrected" by the war. 
    

      The struggle for colonies (for "new lands"), and the struggle
      for "the possession of territories of weaker countries", all
      existed before imperialism. Modern imperialism is
      characterised by something else, namely, by the fact
      that at the beginning of the twentieth century the whole earth
      was divided up and occupied by various countries. That is why,
      under capitalism, the re-partitioning of "world domination"
      could only take place at the price of a world
      war. "Internationally organised associations of capitalists"
      existed before imperialism. Every joint-stock company
      with a membership of capitalists from various countries is an
      "internationally organised association of capitalists". 
    

      The distinguishing feature of imperialism is something quite
      different, something which did not exist before
      the twentieth century—the economic partitioning of the
      world among international trusts, the partitioning of countries,
      by agreement, into market areas. This particular point
      has not been expressed in Comrade Sokolnikov's draft, the power
      of imperialism is, therefore, represented as much
      weaker than it really is. 
    

      Finally, it is theoretically incorrect to speak of dumping a
      vast accumulation of surplus value on to the world
      market. This reminds one of Proudhon's theory of realisation,
      according to which capitalists may easily realise both fixed and
      variable capital, but find it difficult to realise surplus
      value. As a matter of fact capitalists cannot realise without
      difficulties and crises either surplus value or variable and
      fixed capital. Commodities dumped on to the market are not only
      accumulated value, but also value reproducing variable capital
      and fixed capital. For instance, stocks of rails or iron are
      thrown into the world market, and should be exchanged for
      articles consumed by the workers, or for other means of
      production (wood, oil, etc.). 


      VI
    

      Having thus concluded our analysis of Comrade Sokolnikov's
      draft, we must note one very valuable addition which he proposes
      and which in my opinion should be adopted and even developed. To
      the paragraph which deals with technical progress and the
      greater employment of female and child labour, he proposes to
      add the phrase "as well as the labour of unskilled foreign
      workers imported from backward countries". This addition is
      valuable and necessary. The exploitation of worse paid
      labour from backward countries is particularly characteristic of
      imperialism. On this exploitation rests, to a certain degree,
      the parasitism of rich imperialist countries which
      bribe a part of their workers with higher wages while
      shamelessly and unrestrainedly exploiting the labour of "cheap"
      foreign workers. The words "worse paid" should be added and also
      the words "and frequently deprived of rights"; for the
      exploiters in "civilised" countries always take advantage of the
      fact that the imported foreign workers have no rights. This is
      often to be seen in Germany in respect of workers imported from
      Russia; in Switzerland of Italians; in France, of Spaniards and
      Italians, etc. 

    

      It would be expedient, perhaps, to emphasise more strongly and
      to express more vividly in our programme the prominence of the
      handful of the richest imperialist countries which prosper
      parasitically by robbing colonies and weaker nations. This is an
      extremely important feature of imperialism. To a certain extent
      it facilitates the rise of powerful revolutionary movements in
      countries that are subjected to imperialist plunder, and are in
      danger of being crushed and partitioned by the giant
      imperialists (such as Russia), and on the other hand, tends to a
      certain extent to prevent the rise of profound revolutionary
      movements in the countries that plunder, by imperialist methods,
      many colonies and foreign lands, and thus make a very large
      (comparatively) portion of their population
      participants in the division of the imperialist loot. 
    

      I would therefore suggest that the point on this exploitation of
      a number of weak countries by the richest should be inserted in
      that section of my draft where social-chauvinism is described
      (page 22 of the pamphlet[See present
      edition, Vol. 24, p. 470. —Ed.]). The
      relevant passage in the draft would then assume the following
      form (the additions are in italics): 
    

      "Such a perversion is, on the one hand, the social-chauvinist
      trend, socialism in word and chauvinism in deed, the use of the
      'defence of the fatherland' slogan to hide the predatory
      interests 'their own' national bourgeoisie pursues in an
      imperialist war and to maintain the privileged position of
      citizens of rich nations which make enormous profits by
      pillaging colonies and weak nations. Another such
      perversion, on the other hand, is the equally wide and
      international movement of the 'Centre', etc." 
    

      It is necessary to add the words "in an imperialist war" for
      greater accuracy. "Defence of the fatherland" is nothing but a
      slogan to justify the war, the recognition of it as legitimate
      and just. There are different kinds of wars. There may also be
      revolutionary wars. We must therefore say precisely what we
      mean: imperialist war. This is of course implied, but to avoid
      misinterpretation, it must not be implied, but stated directly
      and clearly. 


      VII
    

      From the general or theoretical part of the programme we shall
      now turn to the minimum programme. Here we at once encounter the
      ostensibly "very radical" but really very groundless proposal of
      Comrades N. Bukharin and V. Smirnov to discard the
      minimum programme in toto. The division into maximum
      and minimum programmes is out of date, they claim. Since we
      speak of a transition to socialism there is no need for it. No
      minimum programmes; our programme must indicate measures for the
      transition to socialism. 
    

      Such is the proposal of these two comrades. For some reason,
      they have not ventured to offer their own draft (although, since
      the revision of the Party programme was on the agenda of the
      next congress of the Party, they were really under an obligation
      to work out a draft). It is possible that the authors of the
      ostensibly "radical" proposal have themselves halted in
      indecision. . . . Be that as it may, their opinion should be
      examined. 
    

      War and economic ruin have forced all countries to advance from
      monopoly capitalism to state monopoly capitalism. This is the
      objective state of affairs. In a revolutionary situation, during
      a revolution, however, state monopoly capitalism is
      directly transformed into socialism. During a
      revolution it is impossible to move forward without moving
      towards socialism—this is the objective state of affairs
      created by war and revolution. It was taken cognisance of by our
      April Conference, which put forward the slogans, "a Soviet
      Republic" (the political form of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat), and the nationalisation of banks and syndicates (a
      basic measure in the transition towards socialism). Up to this
      point all the Bolsheviks unanimously agree. But Comrades Smirnov
      and Bukharin want to go farther, they want to discard the
      minimum programme in toto. This is contrary to the wise
      counsel of the wise proverb, "Do not boast when riding to
      battle; boast when you return from it". 
    

      We are riding to battle, that is, we are fighting for the
      conquest of political power by our Party. This power would be
      the dictatorship of the proletariat and the poor peasants. In
      taking power, we are not at all afraid of stepping beyond the
      bounds of the bourgeois system; on the contrary, we declare
      clearly, directly, definitely, and openly that we shall step
      beyond those bounds, that we shall fearlessly march towards
      socialism, that our road shall be through a Soviet Republic,
      through nationalisation of banks and syndicates, through
      workers' control, through universal labour conscription, through
      nationalisation of the land, confiscation of the landowners'
      livestock and implements, etc. In this sense we drafted our
      programme of measures for transition to socialism. 
    

      But we must not boast when riding to battle, we must not discard
      the minimum programme, for this would be an empty boast: we do
      not wish to "demand anything from the bourgeoisie", we wish to
      realise everything ourselves, we do not wish to work on petty
      details within the framework of bourgeois society. 
    

      This would be an empty boast, because first of all we must win
      power, which has not yet been done. We must first carry out the
      measures of transition to socialism, we must continue our
      revolution until the world socialist revolution is victorious,
      and only then, "returning from battle ", may we discard
      the minimum programme as of no further use.


      Is it possible to guarantee now that the minimum programme will
      not be needed any more? Of course not, for the simple reason
      that we have not yet won power, that socialism has not yet been
      realised, and that we have not achieved even the beginning of
      the world socialist revolution. 
    

      We must firmly, courageously, and without hesitation
      advance towards our goal, but it is ludicrous to
      declare that we have reached it when we definitely have
      not. Discarding the minimum programme would be equivalent to
      declaring, to announcing (to bragging, in simple language) that
      we have already won.
    

      No, dear comrades, we have not yet won. 
    

      We do not know whether our victory will come tomorrow or a
      little later. (I personally am inclined to think that it will be
      tomorrow—I am writing this on October 6, 1917—and that
      there may be a delay in our seizure of power; still, tomorrow is
      tomorrow and not today.) We do not know how soon after our
      victory revolution will sweep the West. We do not know whether
      or not our victory will be followed by temporary periods of
      reaction and the victory of the counter-revolution—there is
      nothing impossible in that—and therefore, after our
      victory, we shall build a "triple line of trenches" against such
      a contingency. 
    

      We do not know and cannot know anything of this. No
      one is in a position to know. It is therefore ridiculous to
      discard the minimum programme, which is indispensable
      while we still live within the framework of bourgeois society,
      while we have not yet destroyed that framework, not yet realised
      the basic prerequisites for a transition to socialism, not yet
      smashed the enemy (the bourgeoisie), and even if we have smashed
      them we have not yet annihilated them. All this will come, and
      perhaps much sooner than many people think (I personally think
      that it will begin tomorrow), but it has not yet
      come.


      Take the minimum programme in the political sphere. This
      programme is limited to the bourgeois republic. We add that we
      do not confine ourselves to its limits, we start immediately
      upon a struggle for a higher type of republic, a Soviet
      Republic. This we must do. With unshakable courage and
      determination we must advance towards the new republic and
      in this way we shall reach our goal, of that I am sure. But
      the minimum programme should under no circumstances be
      discarded, for, first of all, there is as yet no Soviet
      Republic; secondly, "attempts at restoration" are not out of the
      question, and they will first have to be experienced and
      vanquished; thirdly, during the transition from the old to the
      new there may be temporary "combined types" (as Rabochy
      Put correctly pointed out a day or two ago)—for
      instance, a Soviet Republic together with a Constituent
      Assembly. Let us first get over all that—then it
      will be time to discard the minimum programme. 
    

      The same in the economic sphere. We all agree that the
      fear of marching towards socialism is the most
      contemptible treason to the cause of the
      proletariat. We all agree that the most important of the first
      steps to be taken must be such measures as the nationalisation
      of banks and syndicates. Let us first realise this and other
      similar measures, and then we shall see. Then we shall
      be able to see better, for practical experience, which
      is worth a million times more than the best of programmes, will
      considerably widen our horizon. It is possible, and even
      probable, nay, indubitable, that without transitional "combined
      types" the change will not take place. We shall not, for
      instance, be able to nationalise petty enterprises with one or
      two hired labourers at short notice or subject them to real
      workers' control. Their role may be insignificant, they may be
      bound hand and foot by the nationalisation of banks and trusts,
      but so long as there are even odds and ends of bourgeois
      relations, why abandon the minimum programme? As Marxists,
      advancing boldly to the world's greatest revolution, but at the
      same time taking a sober view of the facts, we have no right to
      abandon the minimum programme. 
    

      By abandoning it we should prove that we have lost our heads
      before we have won. And we must not lose our heads either before
      our victory, at the time of victory, or after it; for if we lose
      our heads, we lose everything. 
    

      Comrade Bukharin actually proposed nothing concrete; he only
      repeated what had been said long before concerning the
      nationalisation of banks and syndicates. Comrade Smirnov in his
      article offered a very interesting and instructive series of
      tentative reforms that may be reduced to the regulation of
      production and consumption of commodities. In a general way all
      this is contained in my draft, followed by an
      "etc.". To go further, to venture into a discussion of
      separate and concrete measures, seems to me inexpedient. Many
      things will become clearer afterthe basic measures of
      the new type have been carried out, after the
      nationalisation of banks, after the introduction of
      workers' control; experience will tell us a lot more,
      for it will be the experience of millions, the experience in
      building a new system of economy with the conscious
      participation of millions. It stands to reason that to
      indicate the new, develop plans, evaluate them, analyse
      the local and partial experiences of various Soviets or supply
      committees, etc., is all very useful work to be done in
      articles, pamphlets and speeches. But to inject into the
      programme an overdose of detail is premature and may become even
      harmful by tying our hands with petty matters. Our hands must be
      free so that we may build the new with greater vigour, once we
      have fully entered upon the new path. 


      VIII
    

      Comrade Bukharin's article touches upon another question worthy
      of consideration. 
 
    

      "The question of the revision of our Party programme should be
      bound up with the question of working out a single programme for
      the international party of the proletariat." 
    

      This is not very clearly expressed. If we take it to mean that
      the author advises us not to accept a new programme until a
      single international programme, a programme of the Third
      International, has been drawn up, then we have to object to this
      opinion most decisively. To postpone it on this account (I
      presume that there are no other reasons for delay; no one, for
      instance, demanded a postponement on account of inadequate
      preparation of our Party material for the revision) would be
      equivalent to our delaying the foundation of the Third
      International. The foundation of the Third International ought
      not of course to be understood formally. Not until the
      proletarian revolution has triumphed in at least one country, or
      until the war has come to an end, may we hope for a speedy and
      successful advance in convening a great conference of
      internationalist revolutionary parties of various countries; or
      for their consent to a formal adoption of a new programme. In
      the meantime we must advance our cause on the initiative of
      those parties which are now in a more favourable position than
      the others and can take the first step—not viewing it, of
      course, as the last step, not necessarily opposing their
      programme to other "Left" (i.e., internationalist revolutionary)
      programmes, but working directly towards the
      formulation of a general programme. Outside of Russia there is
      at present no other country in the world where there is
      comparative freedom for internationalists to meet, and where
      there are as many comrades well informed on subjects concerning
      international movements and programmes as there are in our
      Party. This is why we must take the initiative upon
      ourselves. This is our immediate duty as internationalists. 
    

      Apparently Comrade Bukharin views this matter in exactly the
      same way. At the beginning of the article he says that "the
      Party Congress which has just been concluded [it was written in
      August] recognised the necessity of revising the programme" and
      that "a special congress will be called for this purpose". We
      conclude from this that Comrade Bukharin has no objections to
      the adoption of a new programme at that congress. 
    

      If so, then we have perfect unanimity on this question. Hardly
      anyone would be against the proposition that our congress, upon
      adopting a new programme, express a desire to draw up a single
      general programme for the Third International, and take certain
      steps in that direction—hasten the conference of the Lefts,
      publish a collection of articles in several languages, set up a
      committee for the purpose of collecting material on what has
      been done in other countries in order to "feel the way"
      (according to Comrade Bukharin's correct expression) for a new
      programme (the "Tribunists"
      in Holland, the Lefts in Germany. The Socialist
      Propaganda League in America has already been mentioned by
      Comrade Bukharin; we may also mention the American
      Socialist Labour Party and its demand that "the political
      state give way to industrial democracy"). 
    

      Comrade Bukharin has pointed out a flaw in my draft which I must
      acknowledge to be absolutely correct. He cites a passage in the
      draft (page 23 of the pamphlet[See present
      edition, Vol. 24, p. 471. —Ed.]) where I
      discuss the present situation in Russia, the capitalist
      Provisional Government, etc. Comrade Bukharin is right in
      criticising this passage and saying that it should be
      transferred to the resolution on tactics or to the platform. I
      therefore propose either to leave out the last paragraph on page
      23 altogether, or to put it as follows: 
    

      "Striving for a political system which would best ensure
      economic progress and the rights of the people in general, and,
      in particular, make the transition to socialism as painless as
      possible, the party of the proletariat cannot rest content",
      etc. 
    

      Finally, I must answer one question raised by a few comrades,
      but as far as I know, not yet discussed in the press. This is
      the question of Clause 9 of our political programme on the right
      of nations to self-determination. This clause consists of two
      parts: the first part is a new statement on the right to
      self-determination; the second contains not a demand but a
      declaration. I am asked whether a declaration is in place
      here. Generally speaking, there is no place for declarations in
      a programme, but I think an exception to the rule is necessary
      here. Instead of the word self-determination, which has given
      rise to numerous misinterpretations, I propose the perfectly
      precise concept: "the right to free secession". After six
      months' experience of the 1917 Revolution, it is hardly possible
      to dispute that the party of the revolutionary proletariat of
      Russia, the party which uses the Great Russian language, is
      obliged to recognise the right to secede. When we win power, we
      shall immediately and unconditionally recognise this right for
      Finland, the Ukraine, Armenia, and any other nationality
      oppressed by tsarism (and the Great-Russian bourgeoisie). On the
      other hand, we do not at all favour secession. We want as vast a
      state, as close an alliance of the greatest possible number of
      nations who are neighbours of the Great Russians; we desire this
      in the interests of democracy and socialism, to attract into the
      struggle of the proletariat the greatest possible number of the
      working people of different nations. We desire proletarian
      revolutionary unity, unification, and not
      secession. We desire revolutionary unification; that is
      why our slogan does not call for unification of all states in
      general, for the social revolution demands the unification
      only of those states which have gone over or are going
      over to socialism, colonies which are gaining their freedom,
      etc. We want free unification; that is why we must
      recognise the right to secede (without freedom to secede,
      unification cannot be called free). The more so must we
      recognise the right of secession, because tsarism and the
      Great-Russian bourgeoisie have by their oppression left great
      bitterness and distrust of the Great Russians generally in the
      hearts of the neighbouring nations, and these must be eradicated
      by deeds and not by words. 
    

      But we want unification, and this must be stated; it is so
      important to state it in the programme of a party of a
      heterogeneous state that it is necessary to abandon custom and
      to incorporate a declaration. We want the republic of the
      Russian (I am even inclined to say Great-Russian, for this is
      more correct) people to attract other nations to
      it. But how? Not by violence, but solely by voluntary
      agreement. Otherwise the unity and the brotherly ties of the
      workers of all countries are broken. Unlike the
      bourgeois democrats, we call for the brotherhood of
      workers of all nationalities, and not the brotherhood
      of nations, for we do not trust the bourgeoisie of any country,
      we regard them as our enemies. 
    

      This is why we should here allow an exception to the rule by
      inserting in Clause 9 a declaration of principles.


      IX
    

      The foregoing pages were written before No. 31 of Rabochy
      Put appeared with Comrade Y. Larin's article "The Labour
      Demands of Our Programme". We welcome this article as the
      beginning of the discussion of the various draft programmes by
      our Central Organ. Comrade Larin dwells especially on that
      section of the programme which I had no occasion to work upon,
      and the draft for which is in the possession of the editors of
      the "Subsection on Labour Protection", the subsection was formed
      at the Conference of April 24-29, 1917. Comrade Larin proposes a
      number of additions which seem to me quite acceptable but which,
      I am sorry to say, are not always quite accurately expressed. 
    

      One point seems to me to have been ineptly formulated by Comrade
      Larin: "The correct [?] distribution of the labour force on the
      basis [?] of democratic [?] self-government by the workers in
      deciding how to employ [?] their persons [?]". In my opinion
      this is worse than the formulation of the subsection: "The
      labour exchanges must be proletarian class organisations",
      etc. (see Materials, p. 15). Comrade Larin, moreover,
      should have gone into the problem of a minimum wage much more
      thoroughly. He should have formulated his proposition with
      greater exactness, and should have related it to the
      history of the views of Marx and Marxism on this subject. 
    

      Furthermore, Comrade Larin thinks that the political and
      agrarian parts of the programme should have been "more carefully
      edited". We do hope that our Party press forthwith begins to
      discuss the question of editing this or that demand,
      without waiting for the congress, since, firstly, we shall not
      have a well prepared congress, and secondly, everyone who has
      had occasion to work on programmes and resolutions knows how
      often a careful editing of a certain point
      discloses and eliminates vagueness and disagreements of
      principle. 
    

      Finally, concerning the financial and economic part of the
      programme, Comrade Larin writes that "it is almost a blank, no
      mention is made, even of the annulment of war loans and the
      state debts contracted by tsarism [only tsarism?] or of the
      struggle against the fiscal utilisation of state monopolies,
      etc.". It is extremely desirable for Comrade Larin not to
      postpone his practical proposals in anticipation of the
      congress. He should bring them up immediately, or we shall not
      be well prepared for the congress. On the question of the
      annulment of state debts (and of course, not of tsarism alone,
      but also of the bourgeoisie) we must give considerable thought
      to the question of small bondholders. As to the question about
      "the struggle against the fiscal utilisation of state
      monopolies", we must see how things stand with the monopoly
      production of articles of luxury, and what connection the
      proposed point has with programme demands for the abolition of
      all indirect taxes. 
    

      I repeat: in order to prepare our programme seriously, to ensure
      the actual co-operation of the entire Party, all those
      interested must immediately get busy and
      publish their suggestions as well as precise
      drafts of points already edited and which contain additions
      and amendments. 
    



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Advice of an Onlooker








Advice of an Onlooker




V. I. Lenin
Advice of an Onlooker


Written: October 8 (21), 1917 

      
First Published: November 7, 1920 in
      the newspaper Pravda No. 250; Published according to
      the Pravda text

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 149-178

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 

      I am writing these lines on October 8 and
      have little hope that they will reach Petrograd comrades by the
      9th. It is possible that they will arrive too late, since the
      Congress of the Northern Soviets has been fixed for October
      10. Nevertheless, I shall try to give my "Advice of an Onlooker"
      in the event that the probable action of the workers and
      soldiers of Petrograd and of the whole "region" will take place
      soon but has not yet taken place. 

    

      It is clear that all power must pass to the Soviets. It should
      be equally indisputable for every Bolshevik that proletarian
      revolutionary power (or Bolshevik power—which is now one
      and the same thing) is assured of the utmost sympathy and
      unreserved support of all the working and exploited people all
      over the world in general, in the belligerent countries in
      particular, and among the Russian peasants especially. There is
      no need to dwell on these all too well known and long
      established truths.

    

      What must be dealt with is something that is probably not quite
      clear to all comrades, namely, that in practice the transfer of
      power to the Soviets now means armed uprising. This would seem
      obvious, but not everyone has or is giving thought to the
      point. To repudiate armed uprising now would mean to repudiate
      the key slogan of Bolshevism (All Power to the Soviets) and
      proletarian revolutionary internationalism in general. 
    

      But armed uprising is a special form of political
      struggle, one subject to special laws to which attentive thought
      must be given. Karl Marx expressed this truth with remarkable
      clarity when he wrote that "insurrection is an art quite as
      much as war".  
    

      Of the principal rules of this art, Marx noted the following: 
    

      (1) Never play with insurrection, but when beginning it
         realise firmly that you must go all the way. 
    

      (2) Concentrate a great superiority of forces at the
         decisive point and at the decisive moment, otherwise the
         enemy, who has the advantage of better preparation and
         organisation, will destroy the insurgents. 
    

      (3) Once the insurrection has begun, you must act with the
         greatest determination, and by all means, without
         fail, take the of offensive. "The defensive is the
         death of every armed rising." 
    

      (4) You must try to take the enemy by surprise and seize the
         moment when his forces are scattered. 
    

      (5) You must strive for daily successes, however small
         (one might say hourly, if it is the case of one town), and at
         all costs retain "moral superiority". 
    

      Marx summed up the lessons of all revolutions in respect to
      armed uprising in the words of "Danton, the greatest master of
      revolutionary policy yet known: de l'audace, de
      l'audace, encore de l'audace ".[1]

      Applied to Russia and to October 1917, this means: a
      simultaneous offensive on Petrograd, as sudden and as rapid as
      possible, which must without fail be carried out from within and
      from without, from the working-class quarters and from Finland,
      from Revel and from Kronstadt, an offensive of the
      entire navy, the concentration of a gigantic
      superiority of forces over the 15,000 or 20,000 (perhaps
      more) of our "bourgeois guard" (the officers' schools), our
      "Vendee troops" (part of the Cossacks), etc. 
    

      Our three main forces—the fleet, the workers, and
      the army units—must be so combined as to occupy without
      fail and to hold at any cost: (a) the telephone
      exchange; (b) the telegraph office; (c) the railway stations;
      (d) and above all, the bridges. 
    

      The most determined elements (our "shock forces" and
      young workers, as well as the best of the sailors) must
      be formed into small detachments to occupy all the more
      important points and to take part everywhere in all
      important operations, for example:
    

      to encircle and cut off
      Petrograd; to seize it by a combined attack of the sailors, the
      workers, and the troops—a task which requires art and
      triple audacity;
    

      to form detachments from the best workers,
      armed with rifles and bombs, for the purpose of attacking and
      surrounding the enemy's "centres" (the officers' schools, the
      telegraph office, the telephone exchange, etc.). Their watch
      word must be: "Better die to a man than let the enemy
      pass!" 
    

      Let us hope that if action is decided on, the leaders will
      successfully apply the great precepts of Danton and Marx. 
    

      The success of both the Russian and the world revolution depends
      on two or three days' fighting.  
    

Footnotes

[1] See
      Engels's

      Revolution and
      Counter-Revolution in Germany, which was published in
      instalments in the New York Daily Tribune in 1851 and
      1852. It bore Marx's signature, who had intended to write the
      work but was too busy with his economic studies and asked Engels
      to do it. Engels consulted Marx on various points and submitted
      the articles for his perusal before dispatching them to the
      paper. The fact that the work was written by Engels came out
      later with the publication of their correspondence.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to the Bolshevik Comrades
    Attending the Congress of Soviets of the
    Northern Region







Letter to the Bolshevik Comrades Attending the Congress of Soviets of The Northern Region





V. I. Lenin
Letter to the Bolshevik Comrades
 Attending the Congress of Soviets of The Northern Region


Written: October, 1917
      
First Published: November 7, 1925 in
      Pravda No. 255; Published according to a type written copy 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 182-187

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Comrades,
    

      Our revolution is passing through a highly critical
      period. This crisis coincides with the great crisis—the
      growth of the world socialist revolution and the struggle waged
      against it by world imperialism. A gigantic task is being
      presented to the responsible leaders of our Party, and failure
      to perform it will involve the danger of a complete collapse of
      the internationalist proletarian movement. The situation is such
      that, in truth, delay would be fatal. 

    
      Take a glance at the international situation. The growth of a
      world revolution is beyond dispute. The outburst of indignation
      on the part of the Czech workers has been suppressed with
      incredible ferocity, testifying to the government's extreme
      fright. Italy too has witnessed a mass outbreak in Turin.[1] Most
      important, however, is the revolt in the German navy. One can
      imagine the enormous difficulties of a revolution in a country
      like Germany, especially under present conditions. It cannot be
      doubted that the revolt in the German navy is indicative of the
      great crisis—the growth of the world revolution. While our
      chauvinists, who are advocating Germany's defeat, demand a
      revolt of the German workers immediately, we Russian
      revolutionary internationalists know from the experience of
      1905-17 that a more impressive sign of the growth of revolution
      than a revolt among the troops cannot be imagined. 

    
      Just think what our position is now in the eyes of the German
      revolutionaries. They can say to us: We have only Liebknecht
      who openly called for a revolution. His voice has been stifled
      in a convict prison. We have not a single newspaper which openly
      explains the necessity for a revolution; we have not got freedom
      of assembly. We have not a single Soviet of Workers' or
      Soldiers' Deputies. Our voice barely reaches the real, broad
      mass of people. Yet we made an attempt at revolt, although our
      chance was only one in a hundred. But you Russian revolutionary
      internationalists have behind you a half-year of free agitation,
      you have a score of newspapers, you have a number of Soviets of
      Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, you have gained the upper hand
      in the Soviets of Petrograd and Moscow, you have on your side
      the entire Baltic fleet and all the Russian troops in
      Finland. And still you do not respond to our call for an
      uprising, you do not overthrow your imperialist, Kerensky,
      although the chances are a hundred to one that your uprising
      will be successful. 

    
      Yes, we shall be real traitors to the International if, at such
      a moment and under such favourable conditions, we respond to
      this call from the German revolutionaries with
      . . . mere resolutions. 

    
      Add to this, as we all perfectly well know, that the plotting
      and conspiracy of the international imperialists against the
      Russian revolution are rapidly growing. International
      imperialism is coming closer to the idea of stifling the
      revolution at all costs, stifling it both by military measures
      and by a peace made at the expense of Russia. It is this that is
      making the crisis in the world socialist revolution so acute,
      and is rendering our delay of the uprising particularly
      dangerous—I would almost say criminal. 

    
      Take, further, Russia's internal situation. The petty-bourgeois
      compromising parties which expressed the naÃ¯ve confidence of the
      masses in Kerensky and in the imperialists in general, are
      absolutely bankrupt. Their collapse is complete. The vote cast
      against coalition by the Soviet curia at the Democratic
      Conference, the vote cast against coalition by a
      majority of the local Soviets of Peasants' Deputies (in
      spite of their central Soviet, where Avksentyev and other
      friends of Kerensky's are installed), the elections in Moscow,
      where the working-class population has the closest ties with the
      peasants, and where over 49 per cent voted for the
      Bolsheviks (and among the soldiers fourteen thousand out of
      seventeen thousand)—does this not signify that the
      confidence of the people in Kerensky and in those who are
      compromising with Kerensky and Co. has completely collapsed? Can
      one imagine any way in which the people could say more clearly
      to the Bolsheviks than they did by this vote, "Lead us, we shall
      follow you"? 

    
      And we, who have thus won the majority of the people over to our
      side, and who have gained the Soviets in both the capital
      cities—are we to wait? What for? For Kerensky and his
      Kornilovite generals to surrender Petrograd to the Germans, and
      thus enter directly or indirectly, openly or secretly, into a
      conspiracy with both Buchanan and Wilhelm for
      the purpose of completely stifling the Russian revolution. 

    
      By the Moscow vote and by the re-elections to the Soviets, the
      people have expressed their confidence in us, but that is not
      all. There are signs of growing apathy and indifference. That is
      understandable. It implies not the ebb of the revolution, as the
      Cadets and their henchmen vociferate, but the ebb of confidence
      in resolutions and elections. In a revolution, the masses demand
      action, not words from the leading parties, they demand
      victories in the struggle, not talk. The moment is approaching
      when the people may conceive the idea that the Bolsheviks are no
      better than the others, since they were unable to act
      when the people placed confidence in them. . . . 

    
      The peasant revolt is spreading over the whole country. It is
      perfectly clear that the Cadets and their hangers-on are
      minimising it in every way and are claiming it to be nothing but
      "riots" and "anarchy". That lie is being refuted because in the
      revolt centres the land is beginning to be handed over to the
      peasants. "Riots" and "anarchy" have never led to such splendid
      political results! The tremendous strength of the peasant revolt
      is shown by the fact that the compromisers and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries of Dyelo Naroda, and
      even Breshko-Breshkovskaya, have begun to talk of
      transferring the land to the peasants in order to check the
      movement before it has finally engulfed them. 

    
      Are we to wait until the Cossack units of the Kornilovite
      Kerensky (who was recently exposed as a Kornilovite by the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries themselves) succeed in suppressing
      this peasant revolt piecemeal? 

    
      Apparently, many leaders of our Party have failed to note the
      specific meaning of the slogan which we all adopted and  
      which we have repeated endlessly. The slogan is "All Power to
      the Soviets". There were periods, there were moments during the
      six months of the revolution, when this slogan did not mean
      insurrection. Perhaps those periods and those moments blinded
      some of our comrades and led them to forget that now, at least
      since the middle of September, this slogan for us too has become
      equivalent to a call for insurrection.

      There can be no shadow of doubt on this score. Dyelo
      Naroda recently explained this "in a popular way", when it
      said "Kerensky will under no circumstances submit!" As if he
      could! 

    
      The slogan "All Power to the Soviets" is nothing but a call for
      insurrection. And the blame will be wholly and undoubtedly ours,
      if we, who for months have been calling upon the people to
      revolt and repudiate compromise, fail to lead them to revolt on
      the eve of the revolution's collapse, after the people have
      expressed their confidence in us.  

    
      The Cadets and compromisers are trying to scare us by citing the
      example of July 3-5, by pointing to the intensified agitation of
      the Black
      Hundreds, and so forth. But if any mistake was made on July
      3-5, it was that we did not take power. I do not think we made a
      mistake then, for at that time we were not yet in a
      majority. But now it would be a fatal mistake, worse than a
      mistake. The spread of Black Hundred agitation is
      understandable. It is an aggravation of extremes in an
      atmosphere of a developing proletarian and peasant
      revolution. But to use this as an argument against an
      uprising is ridiculous, for the impotence of the Black Hundreds,
      hirelings of the capitalists, the impotence of the Black
      Hundreds in the struggle, does not even require proof. In
      the struggle they are not worth considering. In the struggle
      Kornilov and Kerensky can only rely on the Savage Division and
      the Cossacks. And now demoralisation has set in even among the
      Cossacks; furthermore, the peasants are threatening them with
      civil war within their Cossack regions. 

    
      I am writing these lines on Sunday, October 8. You will read
      them not earlier than October 10. I have heard from a comrade
      who passed through here that people travelling on the Warsaw
      railway say, "Kerensky is bringing Cossacks to Petrograd!" This
      is quite probable, and it will be entirely our fault if we do
      not verify it most carefully and do not make a
      study of the strength and distribution of the
      Kornilovite troops of the second draft.

      Kerensky has again brought Kornilovite troops into the vicinity
      of Petrograd in order to prevent state power from passing into
      the hands of the Soviets, in order to prevent this power from
      proposing an immediate peace, in order to prevent all the land
      from being immediately handed over to the peasants, in order to
      surrender Petrograd to the Germans, and himself escape to
      Moscow! That is the slogan of the insurrection which we must
      circulate as widely as possible and which will have a tremendous
      success. 

    
      We must not wait for the All-Russia Congress of Soviets, which
      the Central Executive Committee may delay even until
      November. We must not delay and permit Kerensky to bring up more
      Kornilovite troops. Finland, the fleet and Revel are represented
      at the Congress of Soviets. These can together start an
      immediate movement on Petrograd against the Kornilovite
      regiments, a movement of the fleet, artillery, machine-guns and
      two or three army corps, such as have shown, for instance in
      Vyborg, the intensity of their hatred for the Kornilovite
      generals, with whom Kerensky is again in collusion. 

    
      It would be a great mistake to refuse to seize the opportunity
      of immediately smashing the Kornilovite regiments of the second
      draft on the ground that the Baltic fleet, by moving into
      Petrograd, would allegedly expose the front to the Germans. The
      Kornilovite slanderers will say this, as they will tell any lie,
      but it is unworthy of revolutionaries to allow themselves to be
      intimidated by lies and slanders. Kerensky will surrender
      Petrograd to the Germans, that is now as clear as daylight. No
      assertions to the contrary can destroy our full conviction that
      this is so, for it follows from the entire course of events and
      Kerensky's entire policy. 

    
      Kerensky and the Kornilovites will surrender Petrograd to the
      Germans. And it is in order to save Petrograd that Kerensky must
      be overthrown and power taken by the Soviets of both capital
      cities. These Soviets will immediately propose a peace to
      all the nations and will thereby fulfil their duty to the German
      revolutionaries. They will thereby also be taking a decisive
      step towards frustrating the criminal conspiracies against the
      Russian revolution, the conspiracies of international
      imperialism. 

    
      Only the immediate movement of troops from Finland, and of the
      Baltic fleet, Revel and Kronstadt against the Kornilovite forces
      quartered near Petrograd can save the Russian and the world
      revolution. Such a movement has a hundred to one chance of
      leading within a few days to the surrender of a part of
      the Cossack troops, to the utter defeat of the other part, and
      to the overthrow of Kerensky, for the workers and the soldiers
      of both capital cities will support such a movement. 

    
      In truth, delay would be fatal. 
    
      The slogan "All Power to the Soviets" is a slogan of
      insurrection. Whoever uses this slogan without having grasped
      this and given thought to it will have only himself to
      blame. And insurrection must be treated as an art. I
      insisted on this during the Democratic Conference and I insist
      on it now, because that is what Marxism teaches us, and
      it is what is being taught us by the present situation in Russia
      and in the world generally. 

    
      It is not a question of voting, of attracting the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, of additional provincial Soviets, or
      of a congress of these Soviets. It is a question of
      insurrection, which can and must be decided by
      Petrograd, Moscow, Helsingfors, Kronstadt, Vyborg and Revel. It
      is in the vicinity of Petrograd and in Petrograd itself
      that the insurrection can, and must be decided on and effected,
      as earnestly as possible, with as much preparation as possible,
      as quickly as possible and as energetically as possible. 

    
      The fleet, Kronstadt, Vyborg, and Revel can and must advance on
      Petrograd; they can and must smash the Kornilovite regiments,
      rouse both the capital cities, start a mass agitation for a
      government which will immediately give land to the peasants and
      immediately make proposals for peace, overthrow Kerensky's
      government and establish such a government. 

    
      Delay would be fatal.
    

      N. Lenin 
      October 8, 1917. 

    
Footnotes

[1] The
      reference is to the large anti-war manifestations in Turin,
      Italy, in August 1917. A demonstration against the food shortage
      broke out on August 21. The workers struck the following day,
      and a general strike followed. Barricades were thrown up. The
      movement assumed a political, anti-war character. On August 23
      Turin's suburbs were in the hands of the insurgents. The
      Government threw the army against them and imposed martial
      law. The general strike was called off on August 27. 

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of the Central Committee of
    the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)  October 10 (23),
    1917







Central Committee Meeting—10 Oct 1917




V. I. Lenin

      Meeting of the Central Committee
      of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
      October 10 (23), 1917[1]



Written: October, 1917
      
First Published: Proletarskaya
      Revolutsia No. 10, 1922; Published according to the
      hand-written copy of the Minutes 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 188-190

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters
      
      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      1 
    
Report 
      Minutes 

      Comrade Lenin maintains that a sort of indifference to the
      question of insurrection has been noticeable since the beginning
      of September. But this is impermissible if we are issuing the
      slogan of the seizure of power by the Soviets in all
      seriousness. It is therefore high time to pay attention to the
      technical aspect of the question. Apparently a lot of time has
      already been lost. 
    

      Nevertheless the question is an urgent one, and the decisive
      moment is near. 
    

      The international situation is such that we must take the
      initiative. 
    

      What is being done to surrender territory as far as Narva, and
      to surrender Petrograd makes it still more imperative for us to
      take decisive action. 
    

      The political situation is also working impressively in this
      direction. Decisive action on our part on July 3, 4 and 5 would
      have failed because we did not have the majority behind
      us. Since then we have made tremendous progress. 
    

      Absenteeism and indifference on the part of the masses is due to
      their being tired of words and resolutions. 
    

      We now have the majority behind us. Politically, the situation
      is fully ripe for taking power.

      The agrarian movement is also developing in that direction, for
      it is obvious that extreme effort would be needed to stem that
      movement. The slogan of the transfer of all land has become the
      general slogan of the peasants. The political situation,
      therefore, is mature. We must speak of the technical
      aspect. That is the crux of the matter. Nevertheless we, like
      the defencists, are inclined to regard the systematic
      preparation of an uprising as something in the nature of a
      political sin.

      It is senseless to wait for the Constituent Assembly that will
      obviously not be on our side, for this will only make our task
      more involved. 

    

      The regional congress and the proposal from Minsk[2] must be used
      for the beginning of decisive action. 

    

      2 
    

      Resolution 
    

      The Central Committee recognises that the international position
      of the Russian revolution (the revolt in the German navy which
      is an extreme manifestation of the growth throughout Europe of
      the world socialist revolution; the threat of peace by the
      imperialists with the object of strangling the revolution in
      Russia) as well as the military situation (the indubitable
      decision of the Russian bourgeoisie and Kerensky and Co. to
      surrender Petrograd to the Germans), and the fact that the
      proletarian party has gained a majority in the Soviets—all
      this, taken in conjunction with the peasant revolt and the swing
      of popular confidence towards our Party (the elections in
      Moscow), and, finally, the obvious preparations being made for a
      second Kornilov revolt (the withdrawal of troops from Petrograd,
      the dispatch of Cossacks to Petrograd, the encircling of Minsk
      by Cossacks, etc.)—all this places the armed uprising on
      the order of the day. 
    

      Considering therefore that an armed uprising is inevitable, and
      that the time for it is fully ripe, the Central Committee
      instructs all Party organisations to be guided accordingly, and
      to discuss and decide all practical questions (the Congress of
      Soviets of the Northern Region, the withdrawal of troops from
      Petrograd, the action of our people in Moscow and Minsk, etc.)
      from this point of view. 
    
Footnotes

[1] The
      Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. on October 10
      (23), 1917, was the first one Lenin attended after
      his return to Petrograd from Vyborg. Sverdlov was in the
      chair. Lenin gave a report on the current situation. The Central
      Committee adopted the resolution motioned by Lenin who proposed
      immediate preparations for an armed uprising. Only Zinoviev and
      Kamenev voted against the proposal. Trotsky abstained, but he
      held that it had to be postponed until the Second Congress of
      Soviets, which in practice meant bungling the insurrection and
      allowing the Provisional Government to pull up its forces to
      crush the uprising on the day the Congress opened. The Central
      Committee rebuffed the capitulants. The October 10 meeting of
      the Central Committee is of tremendous historical
      importance. The resolution on the uprising adopted by 10 to 2
      became the Bolshevik Party's directive in starting immediate
      preparations for an insurrection. To direct the insurrection,
      the Central Committee set up a Political Bureau headed by
      Lenin. 

    
[2]The
      reference is to Sverdlov's report to the Central Committee on
      October 10 (23),1917, on the third item of the agenda: "Minsk
      and the Northern Front". He said that there was a technical
      possibility of staging an armed uprising in Minsk, and that
      Minsk had offered to send a revolutionary corps to help
      Petrograd.  


    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of the Central Committee of
    the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)  October 16 (29),
    1917







Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) October 16 (29), 1917







V. I. Lenin
Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
      October 16 (29), 1917


Written:16 October, 1917
      
First Published: Proletarskaya
      Revolutsia No. 10, 1922; Published according to the
      hand-written copy of the Minutes 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 191-194

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      1 
    
Report 
      Minutes 

      Comrade Lenin read the resolution adopted by the Central
      Committee at the previous meeting. He stated that the resolution
      had been adopted with two dissenting votes. If the dissident
      comrades wished to make a statement, a discussion could be held;
      meanwhile he continued with the motives of the resolution.
    

      If the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary parties were to
      break with their policy of conciliation, a compromise with them
      could be proposed. The proposal had been made, but those parties
      had obviously rejected the compromise. On the other hand, by
      that time it had become definitely clear that the masses were
      following the Bolsheviks. That had been before the Korniloy
      revolt. Lenin cited election returns from Petrograd and Moscow
      as evidence. The Kornilov revolt had pushed the masses still
      more decisively to the side of the Bolsheviks. The alignment of
      forces at the Democratic Conference. The position was
      clear—either Kornilov's dictatorship or the dictatorship of
      the proletariat and the poorer strata of the peasantry. The
      Party could not be guided by the temper of the masses because it
      was changeable and incalculable; the Party must be guided by an
      objective analysis and an appraisal of the revolution. The
      masses had put their trust in the Bolsheviks and demanded deeds
      from them and not words, a decisive policy both in the struggle
      against the war and in the struggle against economic ruin. If
      the political analysis of the revolution were taken as the
      basis, it would be perfectly clear that even anarchic outbursts
      confirmed that.
    

      Lenin went on to analyse the situation in Europe and showed that
      revolution would be even more difficult in Europe than in
      Russia; if matters had gone as far as a revolt in the navy in
      such a country as Germany, there too they must already have gone
      very far. Certain objective data on the international situation
      showed that by acting at that moment the Bolsheviks would have
      all proletarian Europe on their side; he showed that the
      bourgeoisie wanted to surrender Petrograd. That could only be
      prevented by the Bolsheviks taking over Petrograd. The obvious
      conclusion from all this was—the armed uprising was on the
      order of the day as was stated in the resolution of the Central
      Committee.
    

      It would be better to draw practical conclusions from the
      resolution after hearing the reports of representatives from the
      centres.
    

      From a political analysis of the class struggle in Russia and in
      Europe there emerged the necessity to pursue the most determined
      and most active policy, which could be only the armed uprising.
    
2
      Speeches In Discussion
      Minutes

      I
    
Comrade Lenin argued against Milyutin and Schotmann
      and showed that it was not a matter of armed forces, that it was
      not a question of fighting against the troops but of one part of
      the army fighting against another. He could see no pessimism in
      what had been said there. He demonstrated that the forces on the
    side of the bourgeoisie were small. The facts showed that ours
    were superior to the enemy. Why could the Central Committee not
    begin? There was no reason that derived from the facts. To reject
    the resolution of the Central Committee it would have to be proved
    that there was no economic ruin and that the international
    situation would not lead to complications. If trade union leaders
    were in favour of full power they knew very well what they
    wanted. Objective conditions showed that the peasantry must be
    led; they would follow the proletariat.
    

      Some were afraid that Bolsheviks would not be able to maintain
      power, but at that moment there was a better chance than ever
      that they would be able to.
    

      Lenin expressed the wish that the debate be confined to the
      substance of the resolution.
    

      2
    

      If all resolutions were defeated in that manner nothing better
      could be wished for. Zinoviev was saying: do away with the
      "Power to the Soviets" slogan and bring pressure to bear on the
      government. When it was said that the time was ripe for
      insurrection there could be no question of conspiracy. Since an
      insurrection was inevitable politically, it must be regarded as
      an art. Politically, an insurrection was due.
    

      Because there was only enough bread for a day the Party could
      not wait for the Constituent Assembly. Comrade Lenin proposed
      that the resolution be approved, that energetic preparations be
      begun and that it be left to the Central Committee and the
      Soviet to decide when.
    
3

      Comrade Lenin opposed Zinoviev, saying that the revolution could
      not be contrasted to the February revolution. He proposed a
      resolution straight to the point.
    
3
      
      Resolution

      The meeting fully welcomes and fully supports the resolution of
      the Central Committee and calls upon all organisations and on
      workers and soldiers to make all-round, energetic preparations
      for an armed uprising and to support the centre set up for that
      purpose by the Central Committee; the meeting expresses its
      complete confidence that the Central Committee and the Soviet
      will indicate in good time the favourable moment and the most
      appropriate methods of attack.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to Comrades












Letter to Comrades


V. I. Lenin
Letter to Comrades


Written: October 17 (30), 1917   
      
First Published: Published in
      Rabochy Put  Nos. 40, 41 and 42, November 1, 2 and 3
      (October 19, 20 and 21), 1917  Published according to the
      newspaper  text      

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 195-215

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Comrades, 
    

      We are living in a time that is so critical, events are moving
      at such incredible speed that a publicist, placed by the will of
      fate somewhat aside from the mainstream of history, constantly
      runs the risk either of being late or proving uninformed,
      especially if some time elapses before his writings appear in
      print. Although I fully realise this, I must nevertheless
      address this letter to the Bolsheviks, even at the risk of its
      not being published at all, for the vacillations against which I
      deem it my duty to warn in the most decisive manner are of an
      unprecedented nature and may have a disastrous effect on the
      Party, the movement of the international proletariat, and the
      revolution. As for the danger of being too late, I will prevent
      it by indicating the nature and date of the information I
      possess. 
    

      It was not until Monday morning, October 16, that I saw a
      comrade who had on the previous day participated in a very
      important Bolshevik gathering in Petrograd,  and who informed me
      in detail of the discussion.[1] The subject of discussion was that same
      question of the uprising discussed by the Sunday papers of all
      political trends. The gathering represented all that is most
      influential in all branches of Bolshevik work in the
      capital. Only a most insignificant minority of the gathering,
      namely, all in all two comrades, took a negative stand. The
      arguments which those comrades advanced are so weak, they are a
      manifestation of such an astounding confusion, timidity, and
      collapse of all the fundamental ideas of Bolshevism and
      proletarian revolutionary internationalism that it is not easy
      to discover an explanation for such shameful vacillations. The
      fact, however, remains, and since the revolutionary party has no
      right to tolerate vacillations on such a serious question, and
      since this pair of comrades, who have scattered their principles
      to the winds, might cause some confusion, it is necessary to
      analyse their arguments, to expose their vacillations, and to
      show how shameful they are. The following lines are an attempt
      to do this. 
    


      "We have no majority among the people, and without this
      condition the uprising is hopeless. . . ."   

    

      People who can say this are either distorters of the truth or
      pedants who want an advance guarantee that throughout the whole
      country the Bolshevik Party has received exactly one-half of the
      votes plus one, this they want at all events, without taking the
      least account of the real circumstances of the
      revolution. History has never given such a guarantee, and is
      quite unable to give it in any revolution. To make such a demand
      is jeering at the audience, and is nothing but a cover to hide
      one's own flight from reality. 
    

      For reality shows us clearly that it was after the July days
      that the majority of the people began quickly to go over to the
      side of the Bolsheviks. This was demonstrated first by the
      August 20 elections in Petrograd, even before the Kornilov
      revolt, when the Bolshevik vote rose from 20 to 33 per cent in
      the city not including the suburbs, and then by the district
      council elections in Moscow in September, when the Bolshevik
      vote rose from 11 to 49.3 per cent (one Moscow comrade, whom I
      saw recently, told me that the correct figure is 51 per
      cent). This was proved by the new elections to the Soviets. It
      was proved by the fact that a majority of the peasant Soviets,
      their "Avksentyev" central Soviet notwithstanding, has expressed
      itself against the coalition . To be against the
      coalition means in practice to follow the
      Bolsheviks. Furthermore, reports from the front prove more
      frequently and more definitely that the soldiers are passing
      en masse over to the side or the Bolsheviks with ever
      greater determination, in spite of the malicious slanders and
      attacks by the Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders,
      officers, deputies, etc., etc.   
    

      Last, but not least, the most outstanding fact of present day
      Russian life is the revolt of the peasantry. This shows
      objectively, not by words but by deeds, that the people are
      going over to the side of the Bolsheviks. But the fact remains,
      notwithstanding the lies of the bourgeois press and its
      miserable yes-men of the "vacillating" Novaya Zhizn
      crowd, who shout  about riots and anarchy. The peasant movement
      in Tambov Gubernia[2]  was an uprising both in the physical
      and political sense, an uprising that has yielded such splendid
      political results as, in the first place, agreement to transfer
      the land to the peasants. It is not for nothing that the
      Socialist-Revolutionary rabble, including Dyelo Naroda,
      who are frightened by the uprising, now scream about
      the need to transfer the land to the peasants. Here is a
      practical demonstration of the correctness of
      Bolshevism and of its success. It proved to be impossible to
      "teach" the Bonapartists and their lackeys in the Pre-parliament
      otherwise than by an uprising. 
    

      This is a fact and facts are stubborn things. And such a factual
      "argument" in favour of an uprising is stronger than
      thousands of "pessimistic" evasions on the part of confused and
      frightened politicians. 
    

      If the peasant uprising were not an event of nation-wide
      political import, the Socialist-Revolutionary lackeys from the
      Pre-parliament would not be shouting about the need to hand over
      the land to the peasants. 
    

      Another splendid political and revolutionary consequence of the
      peasant uprising, as already noted in Rabochy Put, is
      the delivery of grain to the railway stations in Tambov
      Gubernia. Here is another "argument" for you, confused
      gentlemen, an argument in favour of the uprising as the only
      means to save the country from the famine that is knocking at
      our door and from a crisis of unheard-of dimensions. While the
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik betrayers of the people
      are grumbling, threatening, writing resolutions, promising to
      feed the hungry by convening the Constituent Assembly, the
      people are beginning to solve the bread problem
      Bolshevik-fashion, by rebelling against the
      landowners, capitalists, and speculators. 
    

      Even the bourgeois press, even Russkaya Volya,
      was compelled to admit the wonderful results of such a
      solution 
      (the only real solution) of the bread problem, by publishing
      information to the effect that the railway stations in Tambov
      Gubernia were swamped with grain. . . . And this after the
      peasants had revolted!


      To doubt now that the majority of the people are following and
      will follow the Bolsheviks is shameful vacillation and in
      practice is the abandoning of all the principles of
      proletarian revolutionism, the complete renunciation of
      Bolshevism. 
    


      "We are not strong enough to seize power, and the bourgeoisie is
      not strong enough to hinder the convening of the Constituent
      Assembly."   
    

      The first part of this argument is a simple paraphrase of the
      preceding one. It does not gain in strength or power of
      conviction, when the confusion of its authors and their fear of
      the bourgeoisie are expressed in terms of pessimism in respect
      of the workers and optimism in respect of the bourgeoisie. If
      the officer cadets and the Cossacks say that they will fight
      against the Bolsheviks to the last drop of blood, this deserves
      full credence; if, however, the workers and soldiers at hundreds
      of meetings express full confidence in the Bolsheviks and affirm
      their readiness to defend the transfer of power to the Soviets,
      then it is "timely" to recall that voting is one thing and
      fighting another! 
    

      If you argue like that, of course, you "refute" the possibility
      of an uprising. But, we may ask, in what way does this
      peculiarly orientated "pessimism" with its peculiar urge differ
      from a political shift to the side of the bourgeoisie? 
    

      Look at the facts. Remember the Bolshevik declarations, repeated
      thousands of times and now "forgotten" by our pessimists. We
      have said thousands of times that the Soviets of Workers' and
      Soldiers' Deputies are a force, that they are the vanguard of
      the revolution, that they can take power. Thousands of
      times have we upbraided the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries for phrase-mongering about the
      "plenipotentiary organs of democracy" accompanied by
      fear to transfer power to the Soviets. 
    

      And what has the Kornilov revolt proved? It has proved that the
      Soviets are a real force.   
    

      And, now, after this has been proved by experience, by facts, we
      are expected to repudiate Bolshevism, deny ourselves, and say
      that we are not strong enough (although the Soviets of Petrograd
      and Moscow and a majority of the provincial Soviets are on the
      side of the Bolsheviks)! Are these not shameful vacillations? As
      a matter of fact, our "pessimists" are abandoning the slogan of
      "All Power to the Soviets", though they are afraid to
      admit it. 
    

      How can it be proved that the bourgeoisie are not strong enough
      to hinder the calling of the Constituent Assembly? 
    

      If the Soviets have not the strength to overthrow the
      bourgeoisie, this means the latter are strong enough to
      prevent the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, for there
      is nobody else to stop them. To trust the promises of Kerensky
      and Co., to trust the resolutions of the servile
      Pre-parliament—is this worthy of a member of a proletarian
      party and a revolutionary? 
    

      Not only has the bourgeoisie strength enough to hinder
      the convocation of the Constituent Assembly if the present
      government is not overthrown, but it can also achieve this
      result indirectly by surrendering Petragrad to the
      Germans, laying open the front, increasing lockouts, and
      sabotaging deliveries of foodstuffs. It has been proved by
      facts that the bourgeoisie have already been partly
      doing this, which means that they are capable of doing it to
      the full extent, if the workers and soldiers do not
      overthrow them. 
    


      "The Soviets must be a revolver pointed at the head of the
      government with the demand to convene the Constituent Assembly
      and stop all Kornilovite plots."   
    

      This is how far one of the two sad pessimists has gone. 
    

      He had to go that far, for to reject the uprising is the
      same as rejecting the slogan "All Power to the Soviets". 
    

      Of course, a slogan is "not sacred"; we all agree to that. But
      then why has no one raised the question of changing
      this slogan (in the same way as I raised the question after the
      July days[See present edition, Vol. 25,"On
      Slogans", pp. 185-193.—Ed.])? Why be
      afraid to say it openly, when the Party, since
      September, has been discussing the question of the uprising,
      which is now the only way to realise the slogan "All
      Power to the Soviets". 
    

      There is no way for our sad pessimists to turn. A renunciation
      of the uprising is a renunciation of the transfer of power to
      the Soviets and implies a "transfer" of all hopes and
      expectations to the kind bourgeoisie, which has "promised" to
      convoke the Constituent Assembly. 
    

      Is it so difficult to understand that once power is in
      the hands of the Soviets, the Constituent Assembly and its
      success are guaranteed? The Bolsheviks have said so
      thousands of times and no one has ever attempted to
      refute it. Everybody has recognised this "combined type", but to
      smuggle in a renunciation of the transfer of power to
      the Soviets under cover of the words "combined type", to smuggle
      it in secretly while fearing to renounce our
      slogan openly is a matter for wonder. Is there any parliamentary
      term to describe it? 
    

      Someone has very pointedly retorted to our pessimist: "Is it a
      revolver with no cartridges?" If so, it means going over
      directly to the Lieberdans, who have declared the Soviets a
      "revolver" thousands of times and have deceived the people
      thousands of times. For while they were in control the
      Soviets proved to be worthless. 
    

      If, however, it is to be a revolver "with cartridges", this
      cannot mean anything but technical preparation for an
      uprising; the cartridges have to be procured, the revolver has
      to be loaded—and cartridges alone will not be enough. 
    

      Either go over to the side of the Lieberdans and openly
      renounce the slogan "All Power to the Soviets", or start the
      uprising. 
    

      There is no middle course. 
    


      "The bourgeoisie cannot surrender Petrograd to the Germans,
      although Rodzyanko wants to, for the fighting is done not by the
      bourgeoisie, but by our heroic sailors."   
    

      This argument again reduces itself to the same "optimism" in
      respect of the bourgeoisie which is fatally manifested at
      every step by those who are pessimistic about the revolutionary
      forces and capabilities of the proletariat. 
    

      The fighting is done by the heroic sailors, but this
      did not prevent two admirals from disappearing
      before the capture of Esel! 
    

      That is a fact and facts are stubborn things. The facts prove
      that admirals are capable of treachery no less than
      Kornilov. It is an undisputed fact that Field Headquarters has
      not been reformed, and that the commanding staff is Kornilovite
      in composition. 
    

      If the Kornilovites (with Kerensky at their head, for he is also
      a Kornilovite) want to surrender Petrograd, they can do
      it in two or even in three ways. 
    

      First, they can, through an act of treachery on the part of the
      Kornilovite officers, open the northern land front. 
    

      Second, they can "agree" on freedom of action for the entire
      German navy, which is stronger than we are; they can
      agree both with the German and the British
      imperialists. Moreover, the admirals who have disappeared may
      have delivered the plans to the Germans as
      well.  
    

      Third, they can, by means of lockouts, and by sabotaging the
      delivery of food, bring our troops to complete
      desperation and impotence. 
    

      Not a single one of these three ways can be denied. The facts
      have proved that the bourgeois-Cossack party of Russia has
      already knocked at all three doors and has tried to force open
      each of them. 
    

      What follows? It follows that we have no right to wait
      until the bourgeoisie strangle the revolution. 
    

      Experience has proved that Rodzyanko's wishes are no
      trifle. Rodzyanko is a man of affairs. Rodzyanko is backed by
      capital. This is beyond dispute. Capital is tremendous
      strength as long as the proletariat do not have power. For
      decades, Rodzyanko has faithfully and truly carried out the
      policies of capital. 
    

      What follows? It follows that to vacillate on the question of an
      uprising as the only means to save the revolution means to sink
      into that cowardly credulity in the bourgeoisie which is
      half-Lieberdan, Socialist-Revolutionary-Menshevik and half
      "peasant-like" unquestioning credulity, 
      against which the Bolsheviks have been battling most of all. 
    

      Either fold your idle arms on your empty chest, wait and swear
      "faith" in the Constituent Assembly until Rodzyanko and Co. have
      surrendered Petrograd and strangled the revolution or start an
      uprising. There is no middle course. 
    

      Even the convocation of the Constituent Assembly does not, in
      itself, change anything, for no "constituting", no voting by any
      arch-sovereign assembly will have any effect on the famine, or
      on Wilhelm. Both the convocation and the success of the
      Constituent Assembly depend upon the transfer of power to the
      Soviets. This old Bolshevik truth is being proved by reality
      ever more strikingly and ever more cruelly. 
    


      "We are becoming stronger every day. We can enter the
      Constituent Assembly as a strong opposition; why should we stake
      everything?. . ."   
    

      This is the argument of a philistine who has "read" that the
      Constituent Assembly is being called, and who trustingly
      acquiesces in the most legal, most loyal, most constitutional
      course. 
    

      It is a pity, however, that waiting for the Constituent
      Assembly does not solve either the question of famine or the
      question of surrendering Petrograd . This "trifle" is forgotten
      by the naÃ¯ve or the confused or those who have allowed
      themselves to be frightened. 
    

      The famine will not wait. The peasant uprising did not wait. The
      war will not wait. The admirals who have disappeared did not
      wait. 
    

      Will the famine agree to wait, because we Bolsheviks
      proclaim faith in the convocation of the Constituent
      Assembly? Will the admirals who have disappeared agree to wait?
      Will the Maklakovs and Rodzyankos agree to stop the lockouts and
      the sabotaging of grain deliveries, or to denounce the secret
      treaties with the British and the German imperialists? 
    

This is what the arguments of the heroes of
      "constitutional illusions" and parliamentary cretinism amount
      to. The living reality disappears, and what remains is only a
      paper   
      dealing with the convocation of the Constituent Assembly; there
      is nothing left-but to hold elections. 
    

      And blind people are still wondering why hungry people and
      soldiers betrayed by generals and admirals are indifferent to
      the elections! Oh, wiseacres! 
    


      "Were the Kornilovites to start again, we would show them! But
      why should we take risks and start?"   
    

      This is extraordinarily convincing and revolutionary. History
      does not repeat itself, but if we turn our backs on it,
      contemplate the first Kornilov revolt and repeat: "If only the
      Kornilovites would start"—if we do that, what excellent
      revolutionary strategy it would be. How much like a waiting game
      it is! Maybe the Kornilovites will start again at an inopportune
      time. Isn't this a "weighty" argument? What kind of an earnest
      foundation for a proletarian policy is this? 
    

      And what if the Kornilovites of the second draft will have
      learned a thing or two? What if they wait for the
      hunger riots to begin, for the front to be broken through, for
      Petrograd to be surrendered, before they begin? What
      then? 
    

      It is proposed that we build the tactics of the proletarian
      party on the possibility of the Kornilovites' repeating one of
      their old errors! 
    

      Let us forget all that was being and has been
      demonstrated by the Bolsheviks a hundred times, all that
      the six months' history of our revolution has proved, namely,
      that there is no way out, that there is no objective
      way out and can be none except a dictatorship of the
      Kornilovites or a dictatorship of the proletariat. Let us forget
      this, let us renounce all this and wait! Wait for what? Wait for
      a miracle, for the tempestuous and catastrophic course of events
      from April 20 to August 29 to be succeeded (due to the
      prolongation of the war and the spread of famine) by a peaceful,
      quiet, smooth, legal convocation of the Constituent Assembly and
      by a fulfilment of its most lawful decisions. Here you have the
      "Marxist" tactics! Wait, ye hungry! Kerensky has promised to
      convene the Constituent Assembly. 
    


      "There is really nothing in the international situation that
      makes it obligatory for us to act immediately, we would be more
      likely to damage the cause of a socialist revolution in the
      West, if we were to allow ourselves to be shot. . . ."   
    

      This argument is truly magnificent: Scheidemann
      "himself", Renaudel  "himself" would not be able to "manipulate"
      more cleverly the workers' sympathies for the international
      socialist revolution! 
    

      Just think of it: under devilishly difficult conditions, having
      but one Liebknecht (and he in prison) with no
      newspapers, with no freedom of assembly, with no Soviets, with
      all classes of the population, including every
      well-to-do peasant, incredibly hostile to the idea of
      internationalism, with the imperialist big, middle, and petty
      bourgeoisie splendidly organised—the Germans, i.e., the
      German revolutionary internationalists, the German workers
      dressed in sailors' jackets, started a mutiny in the navy with
      one chance in a hundred of winning. 
    

      But we, with dozens of papers at our disposal, freedom of
      assembly, a majority in the Soviets, we, the best
      situated proletarian internationalists in the world, should
      refuse to support the German revolutionaries by our uprising. We
      ought to reason like the Scheidemanns and Renaudels, that it is
      most prudent not to revolt, for if we are shot, then the world
      will lose such excellent, reasonable, ideal internationalists! 
    

      Let us prove how reasonable we are. Let us pass a resolution of
      sympathy with the German insurrectionists, and let us
      renounce the insurrection in Russia. This would be
      genuine, reasonable internationalism. Imagine how fast world
      internationalism would blossom forth, if the same wise policy
      were to triumph everywhere! 
    

      The war has fatigued and tormented the workers of all countries
      to the utmost. Outbursts are becoming frequent in Italy, Germany
      and Austria. We alone have Soviets of Workers' and
      Soldiers' Deputies. Let us then keep on waiting. Let us
      betray the German internationalists as we are betraying the
      Russian peasants, who, not by words but by deeds, by their
      uprising against the landowners, appeal to us to rise against
      Kerensky's government. . . .   
    

      Let the clouds of the imperialist conspiracy of the capitalists
      of all countries who are ready to strangle the Russian
      revolution gather—we shall wait patiently until we are
      strangled by the ruble! Instead of attacking the
      conspirators and breaking their ranks by a victory of the
      Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies, let us wait for the
      Constituent Assembly, where all international plots will be
      vanquished by voting, provided Kerensky and Rodzyanko
      conscientiously convene the Constituent Assembly. Have we any
      right to doubt the honesty of Kerensky and Rodzyanko? 
    


      "But 'everyone' is against us! We are isolated; the Central
      Executive Committee, the Menshevik internationalists, the
      Novaya Zhizn people, and the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have been issuing and will continue to
      issue appeals against us!"   
    

      A crushing argument. Up to now we have been mercilessly
      scourging the vacillators for their vacillations. By so
      doing, we have won the sympathies of the people. By so
      doing, we have won over the Soviets, without which the
      uprising could not be safe, quick, and sure. Now let us use the
      Soviets which we have won over in order to move into the
      camp of the vacillators. What a splendid career for
      Bolshevism! 
    

      The whole essence of the policy of the Lieberdans and Chernovs,
      and also of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks,
      consists in vacillations. The Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Menshevik internationalists have
      tremendous political importance as an indication of the
      fact that the masses are moving to the left. Two such
      facts as the passing of some 40 per cent of both Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries into the camp of the Left, on the one
      hand, and the peasant uprising, on the other, are clearly and
      obviously interconnected. 
    

      But it is the very character of this connection that reveals the
      abysmal spinelessness of those who have now under taken to
      whimper over the fact that the Central Executive Committee,
      which has rotted away, or the vacillating Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Co., have come out against us. For
      these vacillations of the petty-bourgeois
      leaders—the Martovs, Kamkovs, Sukhanovs and Co.—have
      to be compared to the uprising of the peasants. Here is
      a realistic political comparison. With whom shall we
      go? Should it be with the vacillating handfuls of Petrograd
      leaders, who have expressed indirectly the leftward
      swing of the masses, but who, at every political
      turn, have sbamefully whimpered, vacillated, run to ask
      forgiveness of the Lieberdans, Avksentyevs and Co., or with
      those masses that have moved to the left? 
    

      Thus, and only thus, can the question be presented. 
    

      Because the peasant uprising has been betrayed by the Martovs,
      Kamkovs, and Sukhanovs, we, the workers' party of revolutionary
      internationalists, are asked to betray it, too. This is what the
      policy of blaming the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Menshevik internationalists reduces itself to. 
    

      But we have said that to help the vacillating, we must stop
      vacillating ourselves. Have those "nice" Left petty-bourgeois
      democrats not "vacillated" in favour of the coalition? In the
      long run we succeeded in making them follow us because we
      ourselves did not vacillate. Events have shown we are right. 
    

      These gentlemen by their vacillations have always held back the
      revolution; We alone have saved it. Shall we now give up, when
      the famine is knocking at the gates of Petrograd and Rodzyanko
      and Co. are preparing to surrender the city?! 
    


      "But we have not even firm connections with the railwaymen and
      the postal employees. Their official representatives are the Plansons.
      And can we win without the post office and without railways?"   
    

      Yes, yes, the Plansons here, the Lieberdans there. What
      confidence have the masses shown them? Have we not
      always shown that those leaders betrayed the masses?
      Did the masses not turn away from those leaders towards
      us, both at the elections in Moscow and at the elections to
      the Soviets? Or perhaps the mass of railway and postal employees
      are not starving! Or do not strike against Kerensky and Co.? 
    

      "Did we have connections with these unions before February 28?"
      one comrade asked a pessimist. The latter replied by pointing
      out that the two revolutions could not be compared. But this
      reply only strengthens the position of the one who
      asked the question. For it is the Bolsheviks who have spoken
      thousands of times about prolonged preparation for the
      proletarian revolution against the bourgeoisie
      (and they have not spoken about it in order to forget their
      words when the decisive moment is at hand). The political and
      economic life of the unions of postal and telegraph employees
      and railwaymen is characterised by the very separation
      of the proletarian elements of the masses from the
      petty-bourgeois and bourgeois upper layer. It is not absolutely
      necessary to secure "connections" with one or the other union
      before hand; what matters is that only a victory of a
      proletarian and peasant uprising can satisfy the
      masses both of the army of railwaymen and of postal and
      telegraph employees. 
    


      "There is only enough bread in Petrograd for two or three
      days. Can we give bread to the insurrestionists?"   
    

      This is one of a thousand sceptical remarks (the sceptics can
      always "doubt" and cannot be refuted by anything but
      experience), one of those remarks that put the blame on the
      wrong shoulders. 
    

      It is Rodzyanko and Co., it is the bourgeoisie that are
      preparing the famine and speculating on strangling the
      revolution by famine. There is no escaping the famine and
      there can be none except by an uprising of the peasants
      against the landowners in the countryside and by a victory of
      the workers over the capitalists in the cities and Petrograd and
      Moscow. There is no other way to get grain from the
      rich, or to transport it despite their sabotage, or to break the
      resistance of the corrupt employees and the capitalist
      profiteers, or to establish strict accounting. The history of
      the supply organisations and of the food difficulties of the
      "democracy" with its millions of complaints against the
      sabotage of the capitalists, with its whimpering and
      supplication is proof of this. 
    

      There is no power on earth apart from the power of a victorious
      proletarian revolution that would advance from complaints and
      begging and tears to revolutionary action. And the
      longer the proletarian revolution is delayed, the longer it is
      put off by events or by the vacillations of the 
      wavering and confused, the more victims it will claim and the
      more difficult it will be to organise the
      transportation and distribution of food. 
    

      "In insurrection delay is fatal" this is our answer to those
      having the sad "courage" to look at the growing economic ruin,
      at the approaching famine, and still dissuade the
      workers from the uprising (that is, persuade them
      to wait and place confidence in the bourgeoisie for some further
      time). 
    


      "There is not yet any danger at the front either. Even if the
      soldiers conclude an armistice themselves, it is still not a
      calamity."    
    

      But the soldiers will not conclude an armistice. For this state
      power is necessary and that cannot be obtained without an
      uprising. The soldiers will simply desert. Reports from
      the front tell that. We must not wait because of the risk of
      aiding collusion between Rodzyanko and Wilhelm and the risk of
      complete economic ruin, with the soldiers deserting in
      masses, once they (being already close to desperation)
      sink into absolute despair and leave everything to the mercy of
      fate. 
    


      "But if we take power, and obtain neither an armistice nor a
      democratic peace, the soldiers may not be willing to fight a
      revolutionary war. What then?"   
    

      An argument which brings to mind the saying: one fool can ask
      ten times more questions than ten wise men can answer. 
    

      We have never denied the difficulties of those in power
      during an imperialist war. Nevertheless, we have always
      preached the dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      poor peasantry. Shall we renounce this, when the moment to act
      has arrived? 
    

      We have always said that the dictatorship of the proletariat in
      one country creates gigantic changes in the international
      situation, in the economic life of the country, in the condition
      of the army and in its mood—shall we now "forget" all this,
      and allow ourselves to be frightened by the "difficulties" of
      the revolution? 
    


      "As everybody reports, the masses are not in a mood that would
      drive them into the streets. Among the signs justifying
      pessimism may be mentioned the greatly increasing circulation of
      the pogromist and Black-Hundred press."   
    

      When people allow themselves to be frightened by the
      bourgeoisie, all objects and phenomena naturally appear yellow
      to them. First, they substitute an impressionist,
      intellectualist criterion for the Marxist criterion of the
      movement; they substitute subjective impressions of
      moods for a political analysis of the development of
      the class struggle and of the course of events in the entire
      country against the entire international background. They
      "conveniently" forget, of course, that a firm party line, its
      unyielding resolve, is also a mood-creating factor,
      particularly at the sharpest revolutionary moments. It is
      sometimes very "convenient" for people to forget that the
      responsible leaders, by their vacillations and by their
      readiness to burn their yesterday's idols, cause the most
      unbecoming vacillations in the mood of certain strata of the
      masses. 
    

      Secondly—and this is at present the main thing—in
      speaking about the mood of the masses, the spineless people
      forget to add: 
    

      that "everybody" reports it as a tense and expectant mood; 
    

      that "everybody" agrees that, called upon by the Soviets for the
      defence of the Soviets, the workers will rise to a man; 
    

      that "everybody" agrees that the workers are greatly
      dissatisfied with the indecision of the centres concerning the
      "last decisive struggle", the inevitability of which they
      clearly recognise; 
    

      that "everybody" unanimously characterises the mood of the
      broadest masses as close to desperation and points to the
      anarchy developing therefrom; 
    

      that "everybody" also recognises that there is among the
      class-conscious workers a definite unwillingness to go out into
      the streets only for demonstrations, only for
      partial struggles, since a general and not a partial struggle is
      in the air, while the hopelessness of individual strikes,
      demonstra tions and acts to influence the authorities has been
      seen and is fully realised. 
    

And so forth. 
    

      If we approach this characterisation of the mass mood from the
      point of view of the entire development of the class and
      political struggle and of the entire course of events during the
      six months of our revolution, it will become clear to us how
      people frightened by the bourgeoisie are distorting the
      question. Things are not as they were before April 20-21, June
      9, July 3, for then it was a matter of spontaneous
      excitement which we, as a party, either failed to
      comprehend (April 20) or held back and shaped into a peaceful
      demonstration (June 9 and July 3), for we knew very well at that
      time that the Soviets were not yet ours, that the
      peasants still trusted the Lieberdan-Chernov and not
      the Bolshevik course (uprising), that consequently we could not
      have the majority of the people behind us, and that consequently
      the uprising would be premature. 
    

      At that time the majority of the class-conscious workers did not
      raise the question of the last decisive struggle at all;
      not one of all our Party units would have raised it at
      that time. As for the unenlightened and very broad masses, there
      was neither a concerted effort nor the resolve born out of
      despair; there was only a spontaneous excitement with
      the naÃ¯ve hope of "influencing" Kerensky and the bourgeoisie by
      "action", by a demonstration pure and simple. 
    

      What is needed for an uprising is not this, but, on the one
      hand, a conscious, firm and unswerving resolve on the part of
      the class-conscious elements to fight to the end; and on the
      other, a mood of despair among the broad masses who
      feel that nothing can now be saved by half-measures;
      that you cannot "influence" anybody; that the hungry will "smash
      everything, destroy everything, even anarchically", if
      the Bolsheviks are not able to lead them in a decisive battle. 
    

      The development of the revolution has in practice brought
      both the workers and the peasantry to
      precisely this combination of a tense mood resulting from
      experience among the class-conscious and a mood of hatred
      towards those using the lockout weapon and the capitalists that
      is close to despair among the broadest masses. 
    

      We can also understand the "success" on this very soil of the
      scoundrels of the reactionary press who imitate Bolshevism. The
      malicious glee of the reactionaries at the approach of a
      decisive battle between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat has
      been observed in all revolutions without exception; it has
      always been so, and it is absolutely unavoidable. And if you
      allow yourselves to be frightened by this circumstance,
      then you have to renounce not only the uprising but the
      proletarian revolution in general. For in a capitalist society
      this revolution cannot mature without being
      accompanied by malicious glee on the part of the reaction arises
      and by hopes that they would be able to feather their nest in
      this way. 
    

      The class-conscious workers know perfectly well that the Black
      Hundreds work hand in hand with the bourgeoisie, and that a
      decisive victory of the workers (in which the petty bourgeoisie
      do not believe, which the capitalists are afraid of, which the
      Black Hundreds sometimes wish for out of sheer malice, convinced
      as they are that the Bolsheviks cannot retain power)—that
      this victory will completely crush the Black Hundreds,
      that the Bolsheviks will be able to retain power firmly
      and to the greatest advantage of all humanity tortured and
      tormented by the war. 
    

      Indeed, is there anybody in his senses who can doubt that the
      Rodzyankos and Suvorins are acting in concert, that the
      roles have been distributed among them? 
    

      Has it not been proved by facts that Kerensky acts on
      Rodzyanko's orders, while the State Printing Press of the
      Russian Republic (don't laugh!) prints the Black-Hundred
      speeches of reactionaries in the "Duma" at the expense of the
      state. Has not this fact been exposed even by the
      lackeys from Dyelo Naroda, who serve "their own
      mannikin"? Has not the experience of all elections
      proved that the Cadet lists were fully supported by Novoye
      Vremya,  which is a venal paper controlled by the
      "interests" of the tsarist landowners?   
    

      Did we not read yesterday that commercial and industrial
      capitalists (non-partisan capitalists, of course; oh,
      non-partisan capitalists, to be sure, for the Vikhlayevs and
      Rakitnikovs, the Gvozdyovs and Nikitins are not in coalition
      with the Cadets—God forbid—but with
      non-partisan commercial and industrial circles!) have
      donated the goodly sum of 300,000 rubles to the Cadets? 
    

      The whole Black-Hundred press, if we look at things from a class
      and not a sentimental point of view, is a branch 
      of the firm "Ryabushinsky, Milyukov, and Co.". Capitalists buy,
      on the one hand, the Milyukovs, Zaslavskys, Potresovs, and so
      on; on the other, the Black Hundreds. 
    

      The victory of the proletariat is the only means of
      putting an end to this most hideous poisoning of the people by
      the cheap Black-Hundred venom. 
    

      Is it any wonder that the crowd, tired out and made wretched by
      hunger and the prolongation of the war, clutches at the
      Black-Hundred poison? Can one imagine a capitalist society on
      the eve of collapse in which the oppressed masses are
      not desperate? Is there any doubt that the desperation
      of the masses, a large part of whom are still ignorant,
      will express itself in the increased consumption of all
      sorts of poison? 
    

      Those who, in arguing about the mood of the masses, blame the
      masses for their own personal spinelessness, are in a hopeless
      position. The masses are divided into those who are consciously
      biding their time and those who unconsciously are ready to sink
      into despair; but the masses of the oppressed and the hungry are
      not spineless. 
    


      "On the other hand, the Marxist party cannot reduce the question
      of an uprising to that of a military conspiracy. . . ."   
    

      Marxism is an extremely profound and many-sided doctrine. It is,
      therefore, no wonder that scraps of quotations from
      Marx—especially when the quotations are made
      inappropriately—can always be found among the "arguments"
      of those who break with Marxism. Military conspiracy is
      Blanquism, if it is organised not by a party of a
      definite class, if its organisers have not analysed the
      political moment in general and the international situation in
      particular, if the party has not on its side the
      sympathy of the majority of the people, as proved by objective
      facts, if the development of revolutionary events has
      not brought about a practical refutation of the conciliatory
      illusions of the petty bourgeoisie, if the majority of
      the Soviet-type organs of revolutionary struggle that have been
      recognised as authoritative or have shown themselves to be such
      in practice have not been won over, if there has not
      matured a sentiment in the army (if in war-time) against the
      government that protracts the unjust war against the will of the
      whole people, if the slogans of the uprising (like "All
      power to the Soviets" "Land to the peasants", or "Immediate
      offer of a democratic peace to all the belligerent nations, with
      an immediate abrogation of all secret treaties and secret
      diplomacy", etc.) have not become widely known and popular,
      if the advanced workers are not sure of the desperate
      situation of the masses and of the support of the countryside, a
      support proved by a serious peasant movement or by an uprising
      against the landowners and the government that defends the
      landowners, if the country's economic situation
      inspires earnest hopes for a favourable solution of the crisis
      by peaceable and parliannentary means. 
    

      This is probably enough. 
    

      In my pamphlet entitled:  Can the Bolsheviks
      Retain State Power? (I hope it will appear in a day or
      two), there is a quotation from Marx which really bears upon the
      question of insurrection and which enumerates the features of
      insurrection as an "art".  
    

      I am ready to wager that if we were to propose to all those
      chatterers in Russia who are now shouting against a military
      conspiracy, to open their mouths and explain the difference
      between the "art" of an insurrection and a military conspiracy
      that deserves condemnation, they would either repeat what was
      quoted above or would cover themselves, with shame and would
      call forth the general ridicule of the workers. Why not try, my
      dear would-be Marxists! Sing us a song against
      "military conspiracy"! 
    

POSTSCRIPT 

      The above lines had been written when I received, at eight
      o'clock Tuesday evening, the morning Petrograd papers; there was
      an article by Mr. V. Bazarov in Novaya
      Zhizn. Mr. V. Bazarov asserts that "a handwritten manifesto
      was distributed in the city, in which arguments were presented
      in the name of two eminent Bolsheviks, against immediate
      action". 
    

      If this is true, I beg the comrades, whom this letter cannot
      reach earlier than Wednesday noon, to publish it as
      quickly as possible. 
    

      I did not write it for the press; I wanted to talk to the
      members of our Party by letter. But we cannot remain silent when
      the heroes of Novaya Zhizn, who do not belong to the
      Party and who have been ridiculed by it a thousand times for
      their contemptible spinelessness (they voted for the Bolsheviks
      the day before yesterday, for the Mensheviks yesterday, and who
      almost united them at the world-famous unity
      congress)—when such individuals receive a
      manifesto from members of our Party in which they carry
      on propaganda against an uprising. We must agitate also in
      favour of an uprising. Let the anonymous individuals come
      right out into the light of day, and let them bear the
      punishment they deserve for their shameful vacillations, even if
      it be only the ridicule of all class-conscious workers. I have
      at my disposal only one hour before I send the present letter to
      Petrograd, and I therefore can say only a word or two about one
      of the "methods" of the sad heroes of the brainless Novaya
      Zhizn trend. Mr. V. Bazarov attempts to polemise against
      Comrade Ryazanov, who has said, and who is a thousand times
      correct in saying, that "all those who create in the masses a
      mood of despair and indifference are preparing an uprising".   
    

      The sad hero of a sad cause "rejoins" as follows:  
    

      "Have despair and indifference ever conquered?"   
    

      O contemptible fools from Novaya Zhizn! Do they know
      such examples of uprising in history, in which the masses of the
      oppressed classes were victorious in a desperate battle without
      having been reduced to despair by long sufferings and by an
      extreme sharpening of all sorts of crises, in which those masses
      had not been seized by indifference towards various lackey-like
      pre-parliaments, towards idle playing at revolution, towards the
      Lieberdans' reduction of the Soviets from organs of power and
      uprising to empty talking shops? 
    

      Or have the contemptible little fools from Novaya Zhizn
      perhaps discovered among the masses an indifference—to the
      question of bread, to the prolongation of the war, to and for
      the peasants? 

    

Footnotes

[1] A
      reference to the enlarged Central Committee meeting on October
      16 (29), 1917. Lenin remained in hiding in Petrograd and changed
      the date of the meeting to October 15 (28) in order to conceal
      his presence at the meeting, for reasons of secrecy he referred
      to a comrade who had allegedly informed him of the meeting.      
    

[2] The
      peasant movement in Tambov Gubernia in September 1917 assumed
      great proportions: the peasants seized tracts of landed estates,
      destroyed and burned landowners' mansions and confiscated grain
      stocks. In September, 82 landowners' estatas were destroyed in
      68 gubernias and regions, including 32 in Tambov Gubernia
      . Altogether there is a record of 166 peasant manifestations in
      the gubernia, especially in Kozlov Uyezd. The frightened
      landowners took their grain to the railway stations in an effort
      to sell it, so that the railway junctures were literally swamped
      with grain. The commanding officer of the Moscow Military
      District sent military units to Tambov Gubernia to crush the
      peasant uprising, and imposed martial law, but the peasants'
      revolutionary struggle for land continued to grow in scope.   

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to Bolshevik Party Members







Letter To Bolshevik Party Members







V. I. Lenin
Letter To Bolshevik Party Members^^87^^


Written: 18 October, 1917
      
First Published: pravda
      No. 250, 1917; Published according to the manuscript 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 216-219

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 
Comrades,
    

      I have not yet been able to obtain the Petrograd papers for
      Wednesday, October 18. When the full text of Kamenev's and
      Zinoviev's statement in the non-Party paper Novaya
      Zhizn was transmitted to me by telephone, I refused to
      believe it. But, as it has turned out, there can be no doubt
      about it and I have to avail myself of this opportunity to get a
      letter to Party members by Thursday evening or Friday morning;
      for to remain silent in the face of such unheard-of
      strike-breaking would be a crime.
    

      The more serious the practical problem, and the more responsible
      and "prominent" the persons guilty of strikebreaking, the more
      dangerous it is, the more resolutely must the strike-breakers be
      kicked out, and the more unpardonable would it be to stop even
      to consider the past "services" of the strike-breakers.
    

      Just think of it! It has been known in Party circles that the
      Party has been discussing the question of an insurrection since
      September. Nobody has ever heard of a single letter or manifesto
      by either of the persons named! Now, on the eve, one might say,
      of the Congress of Soviets, two prominent Bolsheviks come out
      against the majority, and, obviously, against the
      Central Committee. It is not said plainly, but the harm
      done to the cause is all the greater, for to speak in hints is
      even more dangerous.
    

      It is perfectly clear from the text of Kamenev's and Zinoviev's
      statement that they have gone against the Central
      Committee, for otherwise their statement would be
      meaningless. But they do not say what specific decision
      of the Central Committee they are disputing.
    

      Why?
    

      The reason is obvious: because it has not been published by the
      Central Committee.
    

      What does this boil down to?
    

      On a burning question of supreme importance, on the eve of the
      critical day of October 20, two "prominent Bolsheviks" attack an
      unpublished decision of the Party centre and attack it in the
      non-Party press and, furthermore, in a paper which on this very
      question is hand in glove with the bourgeoisie against the
      workers' party!
      


      This is a thousand times more despicable and a million times
      more harmful than all the statements Plekhanov, for
      example, made in the non-Party press in 1906-07, and which the
      Party so sharply condemned! At that time it was only a question
      of elections, whereas now it is a question of an insurrection
      for the conquest of power!
    

      On such a question, after a decision has been taken by
      the centre, to dispute this unpublished decision in
      front of the Rodzyankos and Kerenskys in a non-Party
      paper—can you imagine an act more treacherous or
      blacklegging any worse?
    

      I should consider it disgraceful on my part if I were to
      hesitate to condemn these former comrades because of my earlier
      close relations with them. I declare outright that I no longer
      consider either of them comrades and that I will fight with all
      my might, both in the Central Committee and at the Congress, to
      secure the expulsion of both of them from the Party.
    

      A workers' party, which the course of events is confronting more
      and more frequently with the need for an insurrection, is unable
      to accomplish that difficult task if, after their adoption,
      unpublished decisions of the centre are disputed in the
      non-Party press, and vacillation and confusion are brought into
      the ranks of the fighters.
    

      Let Mr. Zinoviev and Mr. Kamenev found their own party with the
      dozens of perplexed people or with candidates for election to
      the Constituent Assembly. The workers will not loin such a
      party, for its first slogan will be:
    


"Members of the Central Committee who are defeated at a meeting
of the Central Committee on the question of a decisive fight are
permitted to resort to the non-Party press for the purpose of
attacking the unpublished decisions of the Party."
      


      Let them build themselves such a party; our workers'
Bolshevik Party will only gain from it.
    

      When all the documents are published, the strike-breaking act of
      Zinoviev and Kamenev will stand out even more
      glaringly. Meanwhile, let the workers consider the following
      question:
    


'Let us assume that the Executive Committee of an all-Russia
trade union had decided, after a month of deliberation and by a
majority of over 80 per cent, that preparations must be made for
a strike, but that for the time being neither the date nor any
other details should be divulged. Let us assume that,
after the decision had been taken, two members, under
the false pretext of a "dissenting opinion", not only began to
write to local groups urging a reconsideration of the decision,
but also permitted their letters to be communicated to non-Party
newspapers. Let us assume, finally, that they themselves
attacked the decision in non-Party papers, although it had not
yet been published, and began to vilify the strike in front of
the capitalists.
      

'We ask, would the workers hesitate to expel such blacklegs from
their midst?'
      

*    *    *

      As to the situation with regard to an insurrection now, when
      October 20 is so close at hand, I cannot judge from afar to what
      exact extent the cause has been damaged by the strikebreaking
      statement in the non-Party press. There is no doubt that very
      great practical damage has been done. In order to
      remedy the situation, it is necessary first of all to restore
      unity in the Bolshevik front by expelling the blacklegs.
    

      The weakness of the ideological arguments against an
      insurrection will become clearer, the more we drag them into the
      light of day. I recently sent an article on this subject to
      Rabochy Put, and if the editors do not find it possible
      to print it, Party members will probably acquaint themselves
      with it in the manuscript.See pp. 195-215 of
      this volume—Ed.


      There are basically two so-called "ideological"
      arguments. First, that it is necessary to "wait" for the
      Constituent Assembly. Let us wait, perhaps we can hold on until
      then— that is the whole argument. Perhaps, despite famine,
      despite economic chaos, despite the fact that the patience of
      the soldiers is exhausted, despite Rodzyanko's steps to
      surrender Petrograd to the Germans, despite the lockouts,
      perhaps we can hold on.
    

      Perhaps and maybe—that is the whole point of the argument.
    

      The second is noisy pessimism. Everything is fine with the
      bourgeoisie and Kerensky; everything is wrong with us. The
      capitalists have prepared everything wonderfully; everything is
      wrong with the workers. The "pessimists" are shouting at the top
      of their voices about the military side of the matter, but the
      "optimists" are silent, for to disclose certain things to
      Rodzyanko and Kerensky is hardly pleasant to anybody but
      blacklegs.
    

      Difficult times. A hard task. A grave betrayal.
    

      Nevertheless, the task will be accomplished; the workers will
      consolidate their ranks, the peasant revolt and the extreme
      impatience of the soldiers at the front will do their work! Let
      us close our ranks—the proletariat must win! 
    

      N. Lenin


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    The Tasks of Our Party in the
    International







The Tasks Of Our Party in the International





V. I. Lenin

      The Tasks Of Our Party in the International
    

      Apropos Of The Third Zimmerwald Conference
    


Written:October, 1917

      
First Published: 1928 Lenin
      Miscellany VII; Published according  copy of the Minutes 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 220-222

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 
Rabochy Put No. 22 of September 28
      published the manifesto of the Third Zimmerwald Conference. If we
      are not mistaken, the only other newspaper that published this
      manifesto was the Menshevik, internationalist Iskraa[89]
      No. 1 of September 26, which added a very brief note referring to
      the composition of the

      Third
Zimmerwald
Conference and the date on which it was held (August 20 to 27,
      N. S.). No other newspaper published either the manifesto or any
      detailed information about the Conference.

    

      We are now in possession of certain materials on this Conference
      consisting of an article published in Politiken, the
      organ of the Swedish Left Social-Democrats (a translation of
      which appeared in Tydmies, the organ of the
      Social-Democratic Party of Finland)[90] and two written
      communications, one from a Polish and one from a Russian comrade
      who took part in the Conference. On the basis of this
      information we will first of all say something about the
      Conference in general and then make our appraisal of it and of
      the tasks of our Party.
I

      The representatives of the following parties and groups were
      present at the Conference: (1) the German Independent"
      Social-Democratic Party (the Kautskyites); (2) the Swiss party;
      (3) the Swedish Left party (which, you will remember,
      has broken off all connection with the opportunist Branting
      party); (4) the Norwegians and (5) the Danes (there is nothing
      in our material to indicate whether this refers to the official,
      opportunist, Danish party headed by the Minister Stauning); (6)
      the Social-Democratic Party of Finland; (7) the Rumanians; (8)
      the R.S.D.L.P. Bolsheviks; (9) the R.S.D.L.P. Mensheviks (Panin
      sent a written statement to the effect that he would not take
      part in this Conference on the grounds that it was not a
      representative conference; Axelrod, however, attended some of
      the meetings, but did not sign the manifesto); (10) the
      Menshevik internationalists; (11) the American group of
      Christian Socialist Internationalists (?); (12) the American
      Social-Democratic Propaganda Group (evidently this is the group
      I mentioned in my pamphlet, The Tasks of the Proletariat in
      Our Revolution, Draft Platform for the Proletarian
      Party, page 24, for this group began to publish the
      newspaper, The Internationalist[Journal of the American
      Socialist Propaganda League] in January 1917); (13)
      the Polish Secial-Democrats united under the National Executive;
      (14) the Austrian Opposition (the Karl Marx Club, which was
      closed down by the Austrian Government after the execution of
      Stürgkh by Friedrich
      Adler; this Club is also referred to in the above-mentioned
      pamphlet, page 25); (15) the Bulgarian Independent Trade Unions
      (which, as the writer of the letter I have in my possession
      adds, belong not to the Tesnyaki, i.e., not to the Left,
      internationalist Bulgarian party, but to the Shiroki group,
      i.e., to the opportunist Bulgarian party); this delegate arrived
      after the Conference had closed, as also did the delegates of
      (16) the Serbian party.

    

      Of these sixteen parties and groups, Nos. 3, 8, 12, 13, and 14
      belong to the "third" trend referred to in the resolution of our
      Conference of April 24-29, 1917 (and in my pamphlet, page 23 in
      which this trend is called "true internationalist"); closer to
      this Left trend or between it and the Kautskian Centre, stand
      groups 4 and 16, although it is difficult to define their
      position precisely—perhaps they also belong to the
      Centre. Then, group 1, and probably 2, 6 and 7, group 10 and
      probably 15, belong to the Kautskian Centre. Groups 5 (if this
      is Stauning's party) and 9 are ministerialists, defencists and
      social-chauvinists. Finally, group 11 obviously got to the
      Conference by accident.
    

      From this it is seen that the composition of the Conference was
      very mixed—even absurd, for the people who got together
      were not in agreement on the main thing, and
      therefore were incapable of really unanimous action, of
      really acting together; they were people who were bound to
      disagree on the fundamental trend of their
      policy. Naturally, the fruit of the "collaboration" of such
      people is either wrangling or gossip, or elastic, compromise
      resolutions written for the purpose of concealing the
      truth. Examples and proof of this we shall see in a moment......
    

[Here the manuscript breaks off—Ed.]



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to the Central Committee of the
    R.S.D.L.P.(B.)












Letter To The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)


V. I. Lenin
Letter To The Central Committee
      Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)


Written: 19 October, 1917
      
First Published: 1 November, 1927 in
      Pravda No. 250. Published according to the typewritten
      text.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 223-227

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Dear Comrades,
    

      No self-respecting party can tolerate strike-breaking and
      blacklegs [Scabs—Transcriber] in its
      midst. That is obvious. The more we reflect upon Zinoviev's and
      Kamenev's statement in the non-Party press, the more
      self-evident it becomes that their action is strike-breaking in
      the full sense of the term. Kamenev's evasion at the meeting of
      the Petrograd Soviet is something really despicable. He is,
      don't you see, in full agreement with Trotsky: But is it so
      difficult to understand that in the face of the enemy, Trotsky
      could not have said, he had no right to say, and should
      not have said more than he did? Is it so difficult to understand
      that it is a duty to the Party which has concealed
      its decision from the enemy (on the necessity for an
      armed uprising, on the fact that the time for it is fully ripe,
      on the thorough preparations to be made for it, etc.), and it is
      this decision that makes it obligatory in public
      statements to fasten not only the "blame", but also the
      initiative upon the adversary? Only a child could fail to
      understand that. Kamenev's evasion is a sheer fraud. The same
      must be said of Zinoviev's evasion, at least of his letter of
      "justification"(written, I think, to the Central Organ), which
      is the only document I have seen(for, as to a dissenting
      opinion, "an alleged dissenting opinion", which has been
      trumpeted in the bourgeois press, I, a member of the
      Central Committee, have to this very day seen nothing
      of it). Among Zinoviev's "arguments" there is this: Lenin, he
      says, sent out his letters "before any decisions were
      adopted", and you did not protest. That is literally what
      Zinoviev wrote, himself underlining the word before
      four times. Is it really so difficult to understand that
      before a decision has been taken on a strike by the
      centre, it is permissible to agitate for and against it; but
      that after a decision in favour of a strike (with the
      additional decision to conceal this from the enemy), to carry on
      agitation against the strike is strike-breaking? Any worker will
      understand that. The question of insurrection has been discussed
      in the centre since September. That is when Zinoviev and Kamenev
      could and should have come out in writing, so that
      everybody, upon seeing their arguments, would have
      realised that they had completely lost their heads. To conceal
      one's views from the Party for a whole month before a
      decision is taken, and to send out a dissenting opinion
      after a decision is taken—that is strike-breaking.

    
      Zinoviev pretends not to understand this difference, he pretends
      not to understand that after a decision to strike has been taken
      by the centre, only blacklegs can carry on agitation among the
      lower bodies against that decision. Any worker will understand
      that.

    
      And Zinoviev did agitate and attempted to defeat the centre's
      decision, both at Sunday's meeting, where he and Kamenev secured
      not a single vote, and in his present letter. For Zinoviev has
      the effrontery to assert that "the opinion of the Party has not
      been canvassed" and that such questions "cannot be decided by
      ten men". Just think! Every member of the Central Committee
      knows that more than ten C.C. members were present at the
      decisive meeting, that a majority of the plenary
      meeting were present, that Kamenev himself declared at the
      meeting that "this meeting is decisive", that it was known with
      absolute certainty that the majority of the absent
      members of the Central Committee were not in agreement
      with Zinoviev and Kamenev. And now, after the Central
      Committee has adopted a decision at a meeting which Kamenev
      himself admitted to be decisive, a member of the
      Central Committee has the audacity to write that "the opinion of
      the Party has not been canvassed", and that such questions
      "cannot be decided by ten men".That is strike-breaking in the
      full sense of the term. Between Party congresses, the Central
      Committee decides. The Central Committee has decided. Kamenev
      and Zinoviev, who did not come out in writing before
      the decision was taken, began to dispute the Central
      Committee's decision after it had been taken.

    
      That is strike-breaking in the full sense of the term. After a
      decision has been taken, any dispute is impermissible
      when it concerns immediate and secret preparations for
      a strike. Now Zinoviev has the insolence to blame us
      for "warning the enemy". Is there any limit to his brazenness?
      Who is it that has damaged the cause, frustrated the strike by
      "warning the enemy", if not those who came out in the
      non-Party press?

    
      How can one come out against a "decisive" resolution of
      the Party in a paper which on this question is hand in
      glove with the entire, bourgeoisie?

    
      If that is tolerated, the Party will become impossible, the
      Party will be destroyed.

    
      It is ridiculing the Party to give the name of "dissenting
      opinion" to that which Bazarov learns about and publishes in a
      non-Party paper.

    
      Kamenev's and Zinoviev's statement in the non-Party press was
      especially despicable for the additional reason that the Party
      is not in a position to refute their slanderous lie
      openly. I know of no decisions regarding the date, Kamenev
      writes and publishes his writings in his own name and in the
      name of Zinoviev. (After such a statement, Zinoviev bears full
      responsibility for Kamenev's conduct and statements.)

    
      How can the Central Committee refute this?

    
      We cannot tell the capitalists the truth, namely, that we have
      decided on a strike and have decided to conceal the
      moment chosen for it.

    
      We cannot refute the slanderous lie of Zinoviev and Kamenev
      without doing even greater damage to the cause. And the
      utter baseness, the real treachery of these two individuals is
      precisely in their having revealed the strikers' plan to the
      capitalists, for, since we remain silent in the press, everybody
      will guess how things stand.

    
      Kamenev and Zinoviev have betrayed to Rodzyanko and
      Kerensky the decision of the Central Committee of their Party on
      insurrection and the decision to conceal from the enemy
      preparations for insurrection and the date appointed for
      it. That is a fact and no evasions can refute it. Two members of
      the Central Committee have by a slanderous lie betrayed
      the decision of the workers to the capitalists. There can and
      must be only one answer to that: an immediate decision of the
      Central Committee:

    
      "The Central Committee, regarding Zinoviev's and Kamenev's
      statement in the non-Party press as strike-breaking in the full
      sense of the term, expels both of them from the Party."

    
      It is not easy for me to write in this way about former close
      comrades. But I should regard any hesitation in this respect as
      a crime, for otherwise a party of revolutionaries which does not
      punish prominent blacklegs would perish.

      The question of insurrection, even if the blacklegs have now
      delayed it for a long time by betraying it to Rodzyanko and
      Kerensky, has not been removed from the agenda, it has
      not been removed by the Party. But how can we prepare ourselves
      for insurrection and lay plans for it, if we tolerate
      "prominent" strike-breakers in our midst? The more prominent,
      the more dangerous they are, and the less deserving of
      "forgiveness". On n'est trahi que par les siens, the
      French say. Only your own people can betray you.

    
      The more "prominent" the strike-breakers are, the more
      imperative it is to punish them by immediate expulsion.

    
      That is the only way for the workers' party to recuperate, rid
      itself of a dozen or so spineless intellectuals, rally the ranks
      of the revolutionaries, and advance to meet great and momentous
      difficulties hand in hand with the revolutionary workers.
      

      We cannot publish the truth, namely, that after the
      decisive meeting of the Central Committee, Zinoviev and Kamenev
      at Sunday's meeting had the audacity to demand a
      revision, that Kamenev had the effrontery to shout:
      "The Central Committee has collapsed, for it has done nothing
      for a whole week" (I could not refute that because to
      say what really had been done was impossible), while
      Zinoviev with an air of innocence proposed this resolution,
      which was rejected by the meeting: "No action shall be taken
      before consulting with the Bolsheviks who are to arrive on
      October 20 for the Congress of Soviets."

    
      Just imagine! After the centre has taken a decision to
      call a strike, it is proposed at a meeting of the rank and file
      that it be postponed (until October 20, when the Congress was to
      convene. The Congress was subsequently postponed—the
      Zinovievs trust the Lieberdans) and be referred to a body
      such as the Party Rules do not provide for, that has
      no authority over the Central Committee, and that does
      not know Petrograd.

    
      And after this Zinoviev still has the insolence to
      write: "This is hardly the way to strengthen the unity of the
      Party."

    
      What else can you call it but a threat to effect a
      split?

    
      My answer to this threat is that I shall go the limit, I shall
      win freedom of speech for myself before the workers, and I
      shall, at whatever cost, brand the blackleg Zinoviev as
      a blackleg. My answer to the threat of a split is to declare war
      to a finish, war for the expulsion of both blacklegs from the
      Party.

    
      The Executive Committee of a trade union, after a month
      of deliberation, decides that a strike is inevitable, that the
      time is ripe, but that the date is to be concealed from the
      employers. After that, two members of the Executive Committee
      appeal to the rank and file, disputing the decision,
      and are defeated. Thereupon these two come out in the press and
      with a slanderous lie betray the decision of the Executive
      Committee to the capitalists, thus more than half wrecking the
      strike, or delaying it to a less favourable time by warning the
      enemy.

    
      Here we have strike-breaking in the full sense of the term. And
      that is why I demand the expulsion of both the black-legs,
      reserving for myself the right (in view of their threat of a
      split) to publish everything when publication becomes
      possible.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Socialist-Revolutionary Party Cheats
    the Peasants Once Again







Socialist-Revolutionary Party Cheats the Peasants Once Again







V. I. Lenin

      Socialist-Revolutionary Party
      Cheats The Peasants Once Again
    


Written: 20 October, 1917

      
First Published: 6 November, 1917, in
      Robochy Put No. 44. Published according to the
      newspaper text

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 228-233

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 

      The
      Socialist-Revolutionary
Party has made a solemn and public announcement, in its
      chief newspaper, Dyelo Naroda, of October 18 and 19,
      that the Minister of Agriculture’s new land bill is a
      “major step towards the implementation of the Party’s
      agrarian programme”, and that the “Party’s
      Central Committee insistently urges all Party organisations to
      launch a vigorous campaign in favour of the bill and popularise
      it among the masses”.
      
    
      Actually, however, this bill, produced by the Minister,
      S. L. Maslov, who is a member of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Party, and summarised in Dyelo Naroda, is a fraud
      on the peasants. The S.R. Party has deceived the peasants:
      it has crawled away from its own land bill and has adopted the
      plan of the landowners and Cadets for a “fair
      assessment” and preservation of landed proprietorship. At
      its congresses during the first Russian revolution (1905) and
      the second Russian revolution (1917), the S.R. Party solemnly
      and publicly committed itself to the peasant demand for
      confiscation of the landed estates, that is, for their
      transfer to the peasants without compensation. Under
      Mr. Maslov’s present project, however, not only are the
      landed estates left intact but the landlord,s are also to
      get the “fairly” assessed rent paid by the
      peasants for the “leased” lands.

    
      This bill of Mr. Maslov’s is downright betrayal of the
      peasants by the S.R. Party, and signifies its complete
      subservience to the landed proprietors. The utmost must be done,
      every effort must be made to drive this fact home to the widest
      possible sections of peasants.

    
      On October 18, Dyelo Naroda carried Clauses 25-40 of
      Maslov’s bill. Here are its main points:

    
      (1) Not all landed estates are to go into the proposed
      “provisional lease pool”.

    
      (2) Landed estates are pooled by land committees set up
      under the law of April 21, 1917, which was issued by Prince
      Lvov’s government of landed proprietors.

      (3) The rent paid by the peasants for these tracts is to be
      fixed by the land committees “in accordance with the net
      income” and after deduction of various payments goes to the
      “rightful owner”, that is, the landed
proprietor.

      This is a triple fraud worked on the peasants by the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, and each of these three points must
      be dealt with in greater detail.

    
Izvestia Vserossiiskogo Soveta Krestyanskikh Deputatov
      No. 88, dated August 19, carries a “model mandate drawn up
      on the basis of 242 mandates submitted by deputies from various
      localities to the First All-Russia Congress of Soviets of
      Peasants’ Deputies held in Petrograd in 1917”.

    
      This summary of 242 mandates, made by representatives of
      peasants in the localities, gives the best idea of
      what the peasants want. This summarised mandate shows
      very well that the project of Maslov and the SB. Party is a
      swindle.

    
      The peasants are demanding the abolition of the right to private
      ownership of land; the conversion of all private land
      holdings, etc., into the property of the whole people, without
      compensation; the conversion of land tracts farmed on a highly
      efficient level (orchards, plantations, etc.) into "model
      farms”, their transfer to “the exclusive use of the
      state and the communes”; the confiscation of
      “all livestock and farm implements”, etc.

    
      Such is the clear-cut statement of the peasant demands based on
      242 local mandates submitted by the peasants themselves.

    
      But the S.R. Party, having entered “a coalition” (that
      is, an alliance or agreement) with the bourgeoisie (the
      capitalists) and the landowners, and taking part in the
      government of capitalists and landowners, has now produced a
      bill which does not abolish landed property but
      transfers only a part of the landed estates into a
      provisional lease pool.

      Under the bill, no orchards, plantations, beet fields,
      etc., can go into the lease pool! Nor can the pool
      include lands required “to satisfy the needs of the owner,
      his family, employees and workers, or to ensure the maintenance
      of available livestock”!

    
      This means that the great landowner who has a sugar refinery, a
      potato processing plant, oil or other mill, orchards and
      plantations, hundreds of head of cattle and dozens of employees
      and workers, is to retain a great estate farmed on
      capitalist lines. The S.R. Party has indeed cheated the
      peasants with exceptional brazenness.

    
      Landed estates, or “privately held land”, as the bill
      puts it, are to be transferred to the lease pool by land
      committees set up under the law of April 21, 1917, by the
      government of landed proprietors headed by Prince
      Lvov and Co., the selfsame government of Milynkov and
      Guchkov, the imperialists and plunderers of the masses, who were
      routed by the workers’ and soldiers’ movement in
      Petrograd on April 20 and 21, i.e., a full six months ago.

    
      The land committee law issued by this government of landed
      proprietors is, of course, far from being a democratic (popular)
      law. On the contrary, it contains a whole series of outrageous
      departures from democracy. Take its Clause lit, which gives the
      “gubernia [1] land committees the right to suspend
      decisions of the volost  and uyezd
      committees, pending a final ruling by the central land
      committee”. Under this swindling landowners’ law, the
      committees are so constituted that the uyezd  committee
      is less democratic than the volost  committee, the
      gubernia  committee is less democratic than the
      uyezd  committee, and the central committee is less
      democratic than the gubernia  committee.

    
      The volost  land committee is entirely elected by the
      population of the volost . Under the law, for instance,
      the uyezd committee must include the local magistrate
      and five members of “provisional executive committees”
      (pending the establishment of a new local government body). The
      gubernia  committee includes a member of the circuit
      court and a magistrate, and also a representative of the
      ministry who is appointed by the minister, etc. The
      central land committee consists of 27 members “invited to
      sit on it by the Provisional Government”! This includes one
      each from the 11 political parties, with the majority (6 out of
      11) going to the Cadets and those to the right of them.
      Isn’t this an obvious swindle on the part of Lvov,
      Shingaryov (who signed the bill) and their friends? Isn’t
      this simply flouting democracy to please the landed proprietors?

    
      Does this not bear out the repeated Bolshevik statement that the
      will of the peasantry can be correctly expressed and implemented
      only by the Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies, elected
      by the mass of working people and subject to recall at
      any time?

    
      The Socialist-Revolutionaries, who were returned in a majority
      to the All-Russia Executive Committee of the Soviets of
      Peasants’ Deputies by the unsuspecting peasants, have now
      betrayed them; they have sold out the peasant
      Soviets, gone over to the landowners, and accepted the
      land committee law of Prince Lvov, the landed
      proprietor. Therein lies the second big fraud which the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have worked on the peasants.

    
      This makes it all the more imperative for us, the workers’
      party, to reiterate the Bolshevik demand: all power in the
      countryside to the Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies and
      Agricultural Labourers’ Deputies!

    
      The peasant mandates demand the confiscation, that is, the
      alienation of landed estates without compensation, and
      the confiscation of stud farms, private pedigree stock-breeding
      and poultry farms, the transfer to state use of all highly
      efficient farms, and the confiscation of all livestock and
      implements on the landed estates.

    
      Instead, the S.R. ministerial bill treats the peasants to a
      preservation of rent, which is still to go into
      landlords’ coffers.

    
      “Rent,” says Clause 33 of the S.R. bill, “shall
      be paid to the committees, which shall hand over the remainder
      [after various payments to the Treasury, etc.] to the rightful
      owner.”

    
      That is how the “Socialist-Revolutionaries”, having
      cheated the peasants with fine promises, now present them with a
      landowner-Cadet land bill!

    
      This is a swindle, pure and simple.

    
      Nothing at all remains of the peasant demand for
      confiscation. This is not confiscation of landed estates, but
      consolidation of landed property by a
      “republican” government which assures the
      landowners retention of both implements and land for
      the maintenance of their “employees and workers”, the
      retention of land “designated by the landowner [it’s
      as easy as that!] for the planting of sugar-beet and other
      industrial crops”, and of payment for the rest of
      the land which goes into the lease pool. The land committees are
      turned into rent collectors for the landed gentry!

    
      The Socialist-Revolutionaries do not abolish but consolidate
      landed property. It is now abundantly clear that they have
      betrayed the peasants and have defected to the landowners.

    
      The sly Cadets, these loyal friends of the capitalists and
      landowners, must not be allowed to bring off their fraud. The
      Cadets make believe that the S.R. bill is terribly
      “revolutionary”, and there is a great outcry in all
      the bourgeois papers against it; they all report
      “opposition” on the part of the bourgeois
      ministers (and, of course, of their avowed hangers-on like
      Kerensky) to this “terrible” bill. The whole thing is
      a farce, a game; it is the bartering of a trader who expects to
      drive a harder bargain with the spineless
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. Actually, Maslov’s is a
      landowners’ bill drawn up for the express
      purpose of securing an agreement with them and saving them.

    
      It is pure humbug for Dyelo Naroda to declare, as it
      does in these issues, that it is “an outstanding land bill
      inaugurating [!] a great [!!] reform in socialising [!!!]
      land”. There is no trace of “socialisation” in
      the bill (save perhaps for the “social” help given the
      landlord in assuring him of his rent); there is not the least
      trace of anything “revolutionary or democratic”; there
      is in fact nothing at all in it with the exception of the
      Irish-type “reforms”[Land reforms
      intiated by the British due to pressure from the radical Irish
      Land movement]which are a common feature of European
      bourgeois reformism.

      Let me say this again: it is a bill to save the
      landowners, and to “pacify” the incipient
      peasant uprising by making concessions on trifles and allowing
      the landowners to keep what is important.

    
      The fact that the Socialist-Revolutionaries have submitted such
      a mean bill to the government really shows the incredible
      hypocrisy of those who accuse the Bolsheviks of
      “frustrating” the Constituent Assembly with their
      plans for transferring power to the Soviets. “Only 40 days
      till the Constituent Assembly”—Cadets, capitalists,
      landowners, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, all have
      joined in this hypocritical cry. Meanwhile, they slip the
      government a sweeping land bill, swindling the
      peasants, saddling them with landlords,
      consolidating landed property.

    
      When it comes to supporting the landowners against the mounting
      peasant uprising, a sweeping bill can be rushed through
      40 and even 30 days before the Constituent Assembly is due to
      meet.

    
      When it comes to transferring all power to the Soviets in
      order to hand over all the land to the peasants,
      at once abolish landed property and at once
      offer a just peace, then Cadets, capitalists, landowners,
      Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries all join in the howl
      against the Bolsheviks.

    
      The peasants must know how they have been cheated and betrayed
      to the landowners by the Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

    
      The peasants must know that it is only the
      workers’ party, the Bolsheviks, who are
      prepared to stand to the last for the interests of the
      poor peasants and all working people
      against the capitalists and the landowners.
    
October 20, 1917.
    
Footnotes

[1]
      Gubernia, uyezd, volost—Russian administrative
      territorial units. The largest of these was the
      gubernia , divided into uyezds,  which in turn
      were subdivided into volosts . This system continued
      under Soviet power until the introduction of the new system of
      administrative territorial divisions in 1929-30.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to Central Committee
    Members







Letter To Central Committee Members







V. I. Lenin

      Letter To Central Committee Members
    


Written: Written on October 24 (November 6), 1917

      
First Published: First published in
      1924; published according to a typewritten copy 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 234-235

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
Comrades,
    

      I am writing these lines on the evening of the 24th. The
      situation is critical in the extreme. In fact it is now
      absolutely clear that to delay the uprising would be fatal.
    

      With all my might I urge comrades to realise that everything now
      hangs by a thread; that we are confronted by problems which are
      not to be solved by conferences or congresses (even congresses
      of Soviets), but exclusively by peoples, by the masses, by the
      struggle of the armed people.

    

      The bourgeois onslaught of the Kornilovites and the removal of
      Verkhovsky show that we must not wait. We must at all costs,
      this very evening, this very night, arrest the government,
      having first disarmed the officer cadets (defeating them, if
      they resist), and so on.

    

      We must not wait! We may lose everything!
    

      The value of the immediate seizure of power will be the defence
      of the people (not of the congress, but of the people,
      the army and the peasants in the first place) from the
      Kornilovite government, which has driven out Verkhovsky and has
      hatched a second Kornilov plot.

    

      Who must take power?
    

      That is not important at present. Let the Revolutionary
      Military Committee do it, or "some other institution" which
      will declare that it will relinquish power only to the true
      representatives of the interests of the people, the interests of
      the army (the immediate proposal of peace), the interests of the
      peasants (the land to be taken immediately and private property
      abolished), the interests of the starving.

    

      All districts, all regiments, all forces must be mobilised at
      once and must immediately send their delegations to the
      Revolutionary Military Committee and to the Central Committee of
      the Bolsheviks with the insistent demand that under no
      circumstances should power be left in the hands of Kerensky and
      Co. until the 25th&#151;not under any circumstances; the
      matter must be decided without fail this very evening, or this
      very night.

    

      History will not forgive revolutionaries for procrastinating
      when they could be victorious today (and they certainly will be
      victorious today), while they risk losing much tomorrow, in
      fact, they risk losing everything.

    

      If we seize power today, we seize it not in opposition to the
      Soviets but on their behalf.

    

      The seizure of power is the business of the uprising; its
      political purpose will become clear after the seizure.

    

      It would be a disaster, or a sheer formality, to await the
      wavering vote of October 25. The people have the right and are
      in duty bound to decide such questions not by a vote, but by
      force; in critical moments of revolution, the people have the
      right and are in duty bound to give directions to their
      representatives, even their best representatives, and not to
      wait for them.

    

      This is proved by the history of all revolutions; and it would
      be an infinite crime on the part of the revolutionaries were
      they to let the chance slip, knowing that the salvation of
      the revolution,the offer of peace, the salvation of
      Petrograd, salvation from famine, the transfer of the land to
      the peasants depend upon them.

    

      The government is tottering. It must be given the
      death&#151; blow at all costs.

    

      To delay action is fatal.


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    To the Citizens of Russia!







To the Citizens of Russia!







Vladimir Lenin

      To the Citizens of Russia!
    


Written: 25 October, 1917

      
First Published: 25 October, 1917 in
      the magazine Robochy I Soldat No. 8 No. 1-2. Published
      according to the magazine text.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 236

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The Provisional Government has been deposed.
      State power has passed into the hands of the organ of the
      Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies--the
      Revolutionary Military Committee, which heads the Petrograd
      proletariat and the garrison.
    

      The cause for which the people have fought, namely, the
      immediate offer of a democratic peace, the abolition of landed
      proprietorship, workers'control over production, and the
      establishment of Soviet power—this cause has been secured.
    

      Long live the revolution of workers, soldiers and peasants!
    

      Revolutionary Military Committee
      of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies
    

      10 a.m., October 25, 1917.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of the Petrograd Soviet of
    Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies







Meeting Of The Petrograd Soviet Of Workers' And Soldiers' Deputies October 25 (November 7), 1917







V. I. Lenin
Meeting Of The Petrograd Soviet Of Workers' And
      Soldiers' Deputies
October 25 (November 7), 1917 
[1]


Written: October 25 (November 7), 1917
      
First Published: Izvestia
      No. 207, October 26,   1917, Published according to the
      Izvestia text 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 239-241

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
1

      Report On The Tasks Of The Soviet Power
    
Newspaper Report
Comrades, the workers' and
      peasants' revolution, about the necessity of which the Bolsheviks
      have always spoken, has been accomplished. 

    

      What is the significance of this workers' and peasants'
      revolution? Its significance is, first of all, that we shall
      have a Soviet government, our own organ of power, in which the
      bourgeoisie will have no share whatsoever. The oppressed masses
      will themselves create a power. The old state apparatus will be
      shattered to its foundations and a new administrative apparatus
      set up in the form of the Soviet organisations. 

    

      From now on, a new phase in the history of Russia begins, and
      this, the third Russian revolution, should in the end lead to
      the victory of socialism. 

    

      One of our urgent tasks is to put an immediate end to the
      war. It is clear to everybody that in order to end this war,
      which is closely bound up with the present capitalist system,
      capital itself must be fought. 

    

      We shall be helped in this by the world working-class movement,
      which is already beginning to develop in Italy, Britain and
      Germany. 

    

      The proposal we make to international democracy for a just and
      immediate peace will everywhere awaken an ardent response among
      the international proletarian masses.  
      All the secret treaties[2] must be immediately published in order
      to strengthen the confidence of the proletariat. 

    

      Within Russia a huge section of the peasantry have said that
      they have played long enough with the capitalists, and will now
      march with the workers. A single decree putting an end to landed
      proprietorship will win us the confidence of the peasants. The
      peasants will understand that the salvation of the peasantry
      lies only in an alliance with the workers. We shall institute
      genuine workers' control over production. 

    

      We have now learned to make a concerted effort. The revolution
      that has just been accomplished is evidence of this. We possess
      the strength of mass organisation, which will overcome
      everything and lead the proletariat to the world revolution. 

    

      We must now set about building a proletarian socialist state in Russia. 
    

      Long live the world socialist revolution! (Stormy applause.) 
    
2

      RESOLUTION
    

      The Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies hails
      the victorious revolution of the proletariat and the garrison of
      Petrograd. The Soviet particularly emphasises the solidarity,
      organisation, discipline and complete unanimity displayed by the
      masses in this unusually bloodless and unusually successful
      uprising. 

    

      It is the unshakable conviction of the Soviet that the workers'
      and peasants' government which will be created by the
      revolution, as a Soviet government, and which will ensure the
      urban proletariat the support of the whole mass of the poor
      peasantry, will firmly advance towards socialism, the only means
      of saving the country from the untold miseries and horrors of
      war. 

    

      The new workers' and peasants' government will immediately propose a
      just and democratic peace to all belligerent nations. 

    

      It will immediately abolish landed proprietorship and hand over
      the land to the peasants. It will institute workers' control
      over the production and distribution of goods and establish
      national control over the banks, at the same time transforming
      them into a single state enterprise. 

    

      The Petrograd Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies calls on
      all workers and all peasants to support the workers' and
      peasants' revolution devotedly and with all their energy. The
      Soviet expresses the conviction that the urban workers, in
      alliance with the poor peasants, will display strict, comradely
      discipline and establish the strictest revolutionary order,
      which is essential for the victory of socialism. 

    

      The Soviet is convinced that the proletariat of the West
      European countries will help us to achieve a complete and
      lasting victory for the cause of socialism. 
    

Footnotes

[1] The
      meeting opened at 2.35 p.m. on October 25 (November 7), and
      heard a report of the Revolutionary Military Committee on the
      overthrow of the Provisional Government and the triumph of the
      revolution. Lenin gave a report on the tasks facing Soviet
      power. The resolution motioned by Lenin was adopted by an
      overwhelming majority. 

    

[2] The
      reference is to secret diplomatic documents, such as the secret
      treaties concluded by the tsarist and later by the bourgeois
      Provisional Government of Russia with the governments of
      Britain, France, Germany, Japan and other imperialist
      powers. From November 10 (23), 1917, these documents were
      published in Pravda and Izvestia, and in
      December were put out in a series entitled Collection of
      Secret Documents from the Archives of the Former Ministry of
      Foreign Affairs. Seven volumes were published from December
      1917 to February 1918. By publishing the secret treaties, the
      Soviet Government's revolutionary propaganda struck a great blow
      for a general democratic peace, without annexations and
      indemnities, and exposed the imperialist nature of the First
      World War.  

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets
    of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies











Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' and
    Soldiers' Deputies




      Vladimir Lenin
    

      Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies
    


      Contents:
    

To Workers, Soldiers and Peasants!
      ................................. 4 k
      
      
Report on Peace; Decree on Peace
      ................................. 12 k

    

Concluding Speech (following the discussion on
the report of peace) .......... 8 k


Report on Land; Decree on Land
      ..................................... 14 k

      
Decision to Form the Workers' and Peasants'
      Government ...................... 3 k

    


Spoken: October 25-26, 1917
      
First Published: October 26-27, 1917
      in Rabochy i Soldat, No. 9 & 10

      
Transcription\Markup:
Brian Baggins

Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive
      (marxists.org) 2000

    

Introduction

      On October 25, 1917, soldiers and workers were storming the
      Winter Palace, renouncing the Provisional
      Government that for eight months had not met their demands
      of an immediate end to the war and nationalisation of the
      land. The government had been broken apart once already in
      April, and reformed into a Dual
      power. This coupling was unable to advance the demands of
      the masses, but only tied itself up into bureaucratic
      dead-lock. In July the masses swelled again pressing their
      demands for peace and land, this time not finding any
      "compromise", but bullets, mass arrests and deporations. On
      October 24, 1917, the masses took to the streets again, under
      the leadership of the Bolshevik party, and resolved not to give
      up until victory was one.
    

      Throughout the day of October 25, Lenin was in the streets and
      barracks directing the revolutionary forces. The Second
      Congress of Soviets had been convened by the Petrograd
      Central Excecutive Committee, and initial cuacases were going on
      throughout the day; though without the Bolsheviks present: they
      were on the streets. By nightfall however, Delegates swarmed
      into the Smolny Institute, and the Congress saw the tide rise to
      an overwhelming majority of boisterous and sweating Bolsheviks;
      elected to the Congress by Soviets throughout the
      country. Minority leaders took the floor first, putting forward
      plans of concilliation and backpedalling of the revolutionary
      tide, explaining that the masses ought to lay down their weapons
      and plaqards, and enter into negotiations with the Provisional
      Government. The Congress hall, packed with men and women in
      every place conceivable, let up an enourmous roar at the
      suggestion: it was time for power to go into the hands of the Soviets,
      into the hands of the people.
    

      "Lenin, whom the Congress has not yet seen, is given the floor
      for a report on peace. His appearance in
      the tribune evokes a tumultuous greeting. The trench delegates
      gaze with all their eyes at this mysterious being whom they had
      been taught to hate and whom they have learned without seeing
      him to love. "Now Lenin, gripping the edges of the
      reading-stand, let little winking eyes travel over the crowd as
      he stood there waiting, apparently oblivious to the long-rolling
      ovation, which lasted several minutes. When it finished, he said
      simply, 'We shall now proceed to construct the socialist
      order.'" 
    

      Selected exerpts of Lenin's speeches:
    

Report on Peace: "If any nation whatsoever
      is forcibly retained within the borders of a given state, if, in
      spite of its expressed desire — no matter whether expressed
      in the press, at public meetings, in the decisions of parties,
      or in protests and uprisings against national oppression —
      is not accorded the right to decide the forms of its state
      existence by a free vote, taken after the complete evacuation of
      the [aggressive] troops of the
      incorporating or, generally, of the stronger nation and without
      the least pressure being brought to bear, such incorporation is
      annexation, i.e., seizure and violence.
    

Concluding Speech on Peace: "Let everyone
      know what their governments have in mind. We do not want any
      secrets. We want a government to be always under the supervision
      of the public opinion of its country.... Our idea of strength is
      different. Our idea is that a state is strong when the people
      are politically conscious. It is strong when the people know
      everything, can form an opinion of everything and do everything
      consciously."
    

Report on Land: Voices are being raised
      here that the decree itself and the Mandate were drawn up by the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries.
      What of it? Does it matter who drew them up? As a democratic
      government, we cannot ignore the decision of the masses of the
      people, even though we may disagree with it."
    

      Trotsky explains the results:
    

      "The whole prÃ¦sidium, with Lenin at its head, stood and sang
      with excited enraptured faces and shining eyes.".... The last
      sound of the

      [International]
      died away, but the Congress remained standing, a fused human
      mass enchanted by the greatness of that which they had
      experienced. And the eyes of many rested on the short, sturdy
      figure of the man in the tribune with his extraordinary head,
      his high cheekbones and simple features, altered now by the
      shaved beard, and with that gaze of his small, slightly Mongol
      eyes which looked straight through everything. For four months
      he had been absent. His very name had almost separated itself
      from any living image. But no. He was not a myth. There he stood
      among his own — how many now of "his own" — holding
      the sheets of a message of peace to the peoples of the
      world. Even those nearest, those who knew well his place in the
      party, for the first time fully realised what he meant to the
      revolution, to the people. It was he who had taught them; it was
      he who had brought them up. Somebody's voice from the depth of
      the hall shouted a word of greeting to the leader. The hall
      seemed only to have awaited the signal. Long live Lenin! The
      anxieties endured, the doubts overcome, pride of initiative,
      triumph of victory, gigantic hopes — all poured out
      together in one volcanic eruption of gratitude and rapture...."
    

History
      of the Russian Revolution
The
      Congress of the Soviet Dictatorship

      Leon Trotsky
    


To Workers, Soldiers and Peasants!


Lenin Internet Archive
Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Regulations On Workers'
    Control







Draft Regulations On Workers’ Control







V. I. Lenin
 Draft Regulations On Workers’ Control


Written: 26 or 27 of October 1917
      
First Published: 1929 in the second
      and theird editions of Lenin’s Collected Works, Volume
      22. Published according to the manuscript.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 264-265, from the manuscript.

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      1.Workers’ control over the production, storage,
        purchase and sale of all products and raw materials shall be
        introduced in all industrial, commercial, banking,
        agricultural and other enterprises employing not less than
        five workers and office employees (together), or with an
        annual turnover of not less than 10,000 rubles.
2.Workers’ control shall be exercised by all the
    workers and office employees of an enterprise, either directly, if
    the enterprise is small enough to permit it, or through their
    elected representatives, who shall be elected immediately at
    general meetings, at which minutes of the elections shall be taken
    and the names of those elected communicated to the government and
    to the local Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
    Deputies. 

      3.Unless permission is given by the elected
        representatives of the workers and office employees, the
        suspension of work of an enterprise or an industrial
        establishment of state importance (see Clause 7), or any change
        in its operation is strictly prohibited. 

      4.The elected representatives shall be given access to
        all books and documents and to all warehouses and stocks of
        materials, instruments and products, without exception. 

      5.The decisions of the elected representatives of the
        workers and office employees are binding upon the owners of
        enterprises and may be annulled only by trade unions and their
        congresses. 

      6.In all enterprises of state importance all owners and
        all representatives of the workers and office employees
        elected for the purpose of exercising workers’ control shall
        be answerable to the state for the maintenance of the
        strictest order and discipline and for the protection of
        property. Persons guilty of dereliction of duty, concealment
        of stocks, accounts, etc., shall be punished by the
        confiscation of the whole of their property and by
        imprisonment for a term of up to five years. 

      7.By enterprises of state importance are meant all
        enterprises working for defence, or in any way connected with
        the manufacture of articles necessary for the existence of the
        masses of the population. 

      8.More detailed rules on workers’ control shall be drawn
        up by the local Soviets of Workers’ Deputies and by
        conferences of factory committees, and also by committees of
        office employees at general meetings of their
        representatives. 


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Direct-Line Conversation With
    Helsingfors







 Direct-Line Conversation With Helsingfors 







V. I. Lenin
Direct-Line Conversation With Helsingfors
October 27 (November 9), 1917


Conversation: 27 of October 1917
      
First Published: 1922 in the magazine
      Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 10. Published according to
      the telegraph tape.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 267-269, from the manuscript.

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 
I
Conversation With A. L. Sheinman, Chairman Of The Executive
    Committee Of The Helsingfors Soviet Of Deputies Of The Army, Navy
    And Workers Of Finland

Lenin: Are you authorised to speak on behalf of the
      Regional Army and Navy Committee?
    

Sheinman: Of course, I am.
    

Lenin: Can you move the greatest possible number of
      destroyers and other warships to Petrograd at once?
    

Sheinman: Let me call the
      Tsentrobalt
      [the Central Committee of the Baltic
Fleet.--Ed.]

      Chairman,
      because this is a purely naval matter. What's new in Petrograd?
    

Lenin: There is a report that Kerensky's troops have
      moved up and have taken Gatchina, and since a part of the
      Petrograd troops are tired, it is imperative that we have the
      strongest reinforcements as soon as possible.
    

Sheinman: Anything else?
    

Lenin: Instead of the "anything else" I expected you to
      say you were ready to set out and fight.
    

Sheinman: That goes without saying: we have
      announced our decision and will, consequently, act up to it.
    

Lenin: Have you any stocks of rifles and machine-guns,
      and in what quantities?
    

Sheinman: Here is Mikhailov, Chairman of the
      Regional Committee's Military Department. He will tell you about
      the army in Finland.
    
2
Conversation With Mikhailov, Chairman Of The Military
      Department Of The Regional Committee Of The Army, Navy And Workers
      Op Finland

Mikhailov: How many men do you need?
    

Lenin: As many as possible, but only loyal men who are
      ready to fight. How many such men have you?
    

Mikhailov: All of 5,000. Those who will fight can be
      sent urgently.
    

Lenin: If sent with all possible dispatch, how many
      hours will it take them to reach Petrograd for sure?
    

Mikhailov: Twenty-four hours, from now, at the outside.
    

Lenin: By the overland route?
    

Mikhailov: By rail.
    

Lenin: Can you supply them with rations?
    

Mikhailov: Yes. There are plenty of rations. There are
      also about 35 machine-guns; we could also send a few field guns
      with their detachments without worsening the situation here.
    

Lenin: On behalf of the Government of the Republic I
      insistently request you to start such dispatch at once, and also
      to tell me whether you are aware of the formation of the new
      government, and how the news has been met by your Soviets?
    

Mikhailov: We heard about the government only from the
      papers. People over here are enthusiastic about power passing
      into the hands of the Soviets.
    

Lenin: So, you say, the troops will set out at once,
      and will be supplied with rations?
    

Mikhailov: That's right. We'll set about their dispatch
      right away and will supply them with rations. Here's the
      Tsentrobalt Deputy Chairman, because Dybenko himself went to
      Petrograd at 10.00 pin, today.
    
3
Conversation With N. F. Izmailov.
      Deputy Chairman Of Tsentrobalt

Lenin: How many destroyers and other warships can you send?
    

Izmailov: We can send the battleship Republic and
      two destroyers.
    

Lenin: Will they also be supplied with rations from your end?
    

Izmailov: Our fleet has enough rations, and they
      will be supplied. I want to say I am sure the Republic and all
      the destroyers we send will do their duty in defending the
      revolution. Have no doubt about the dispatch of the armed
      forces. This will be fulfilled without fail.
    

Lenin: In how many hours?
    

Izmailov: Eighteen, at the most. Is there any need to
      send them out now?
    

Lenin: Yes. The government is absolutely convinced that
      there is need for their immediate dispatch so that the
      battleship could enter the Ship Canal as close to the shore as
      possible.
    

Izmailov: The battleship is a large vessel with
      12-inch guns, and cannot anchor offshore: if it did it could be
      easily boarded and captured. This can be done by the destroyers,
      with their small-calibre guns and machine-guns; as for the
      battleship, it should be in the roads or close by, or near the
      cruiser Aurora, because its guns have a range of

      25 versts [25 versts= 16.5 miles.-Ed.];

      in
      short let the sailors and their command handle this.
    

Lenin: The destroyers must enter the Neva near the
      Rybatskoye village, in order to protect the Nikolayevskaya
      railway line and all the approaches to it.
    

Izmailov: Right, all this will be done. What else is there?
    

Lenin: Is there a wireless telegraph on the Republic
      and can it communicate with Petrograd while on its way?
    

Izmailov: Not only on the Republic, but also on
      the destroyers, they can all communicate with the Eiflel
      Tower. Let me assure you that everything will be done well.
    

Lenin: May we expect that the ships will set out immediately?
    

Izmailov: Yes, that is so. We shall issue urgent
      orders right away so that these ships will get to Petrograd in
      time.
    

Lenin: Have you stocks of rifles and ammunition? Let's
      have everything you can spare.
    

Izmailov: There are some on the ships, but we shall let
      you have everything there is.
    

Lenin: Good-bye. Good luck.
    

Izmailov: Good-bye. Was that you speaking? Will
      you tell me your name?
    

Lenin: Lenin.
    

Izmailov: Good-bye. We're setting everything in motion.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Conference of Regimental Delegates of
    the Petrograd Garrison







Conference Of Regimental Delegates Of The Petrograd Garrison







V. I. LeninConference of Regimental Delegates of the
    Petrograd Garrison 
October 29 (November 11), 1917
Newspaper Report


Written: 29 October, 1917
      
First Published: 13 November in
      Pravda No. 13.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 270-273, from the Pravda text.

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Report On The Current Situation

      The political situation does not warrant long speeches. The
      political question is now merging with the military question. It
      is all too clear that Kerensky has recruited the Kornilovites,
      and they are his only support. In Moscow they have seized the
      Kremlin, but they have no control over the suburbs, where the
      workers and the poor in general live. There is no one to back
      Kerensky at the front. Even those who are of two minds, like the
      members of the Railwaymen's Union, are speaking in favour of the
      Decrees on Peace and on Land.

     The vast majority of workers, soldiers and peasants want a
      policy of peace.

     This is not a Bolshevik policy. In no
      sense is it a "party" policy. It is the policy of the workers,
      soldiers and peasants, that is, the majority of the people. Nor
      are we implementing a Bolshevik programme on the land question,
      because there, too, our programme has been taken bodily from
      peasant mandates.

     It is not our fault that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks have gone. They
      were invited to share political power, but they want to sit on
      the fence until the fight against Kerensky is over.

     We
      asked everyone to take part in the government. The Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries said they wanted to support the Soviet
      Government's policy. They did not even dare voice disagreement
      with the new government's programme.

     People in the
      provinces give credence to papers like Dyelo Naroda.
      Here everyone knows that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
      Mensheviks went because they were left in a minority. The men of
      the Petrograd garrison are aware of this. They know that we
      wanted a coalition Soviet government. We did not exclude anyone
      from the Soviet. If they do not want to work with us, so much
      the worse for them. The mass of soldiers and peasants will not
      follow the Mensheviks or the Socialist-Revolutionaries. I am
      sure that nine-tenths of any workers' or soldiers' meeting will
      be on our side.

     Kerensky's bid is just as pathetic a
      gamble as Kornilov's. But the situation is a difficult
      one. Vigorous efforts must be made to get some order into the
      food situation, and put an end to the misery at the fronts. We
      cannot wait, nor can we tolerate Kerensky's mutiny a single
      day. If the Kornilovites launch another offensive, they will get
      what the mutinous officer cadets got today. The cadets have only
      themselves to blame. We took power almost without bloodshed. If
      there were any losses they were on our side. The entire people
      wanted the policy the new government is conducting. It did not
      borrow this policy from the Bolsheviks, but from the soldiers at
      the front, the peasants in the villages, and the workers in the
      towns.

     The Decree on Workers' Control is to be issued
      presently. Let me say this again; the political situation is now
      reduced to a military one. We cannot allow Kerensky to win; if
      he did there would be no peace, no land, and no freedom. I am
      sure that the soldiers and workers of Petrograd, who have just
      brought off a victorious revolution, will be able to crush the
      Kornilovites. We have had our defects. There is no use denying
      it. We have had to pay for them. But they can be
      eliminated. Without losing a single hour, a single minute, we
      must get organised, and set up a headquarters, and we must do it
      today. Once organised, we are sure to win out within a few days,
      and possibly even earlier.

     The government set up by the
      will of the workers', soldiers' and peasants' deputies will not
      tolerate any nonsense from the Kornilovites.

    
      The political and
      the military task is to set up a headquarters, to concentrate
      the material forces, and to provide the soldiers with all they
      need. If we are to go on from strength to strength, this must be
      done without wasting a single hour, nay, minute.

      2
Speech On Arming The Troops

      The period of great chaos is at an end. A chief of staff has
      been appointed and this will be announced. The period of
      vacillation is over. We felt keenly the lack of military order
      and communications. It has now been established that there is a
      great deal of enthusiasm and unity among the troops. It is now
      up to you to take things in hand, personally verify every act,
      the execution of your orders and assignments, see whether the
      workers' organisations have been contacted, etc. The workers
      will help you in this matter. Let me give you some advice:, you
      must check every report through the control commission or
      through the regimental delegates, without relying on others to
      see that orders are carried out, or to check reports on
      stocks. The best guarantee of success is to do all this
      yourself, to check everything, take account of all stocks and
      verify every step personally.
3

      Speech On Restoring Law And Order In The City

      I fully agree with what has been said: the workers must take a
      hand in guarding the city. As they do this together, the
      soldiers will teach the workers how to handle arms. The
      wholesale arming of the people and the abolition of the regular
      army is a task which we must not lose sight of for a single
      minute. If we recruit the working population the task will be
      much easier. The comrades' proposal that we meet every day is a
      practical one. It is true that the Russian revolution produces a
      great deal of what is novel, that has not occurred in any other
      revolution. For one thing, there have never been such organs as
      the Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies. You must merge
      with the workers, they will give you everything the bourgeoisie
      has failed to give you. Every unit, together with the workers'
      organisation, must see to it that there is a stock of everything
      necessary for this war of yours, without waiting for pointers
      from above. We must tackle this task on our own tonight. The
      units must not wait for instructions from headquarters, they
      must make their own proposals. You have something the
      bourgeoisie have never had: their only way is to buy; you can
      contact the workers who produce everything.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Wireless Message of the Council of
    People’s Commissars October 30 (November
    12), 1917







Wireless Message Of The Council Of People’S Commissars







V. I. Lenin
Wireless Message Of The Council
      Of People’S Commissars
October 30 (November 12), 1917


Wired: 30 October, 1917
      
First Published: Izvestia
      No. 212, 31 October, 1917. Published according to the
      Izvestia text. 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 274

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

Calling Everyone


      The All-Russia Congress of Soviets has set up a new Soviet
      Government. Kerensky’s government has been overthrown and
      arrested. Kerensky has fled. All institutions are in the hands
      of the Soviet Government. A revolt of officer cadets who had
      been released on parole on October 25 broke out on October
      29. The revolt was suppressed that same day. Kerensky and
      Savinkov, together with the officer cadets and a part of the
      Cossacks, have made their way by deceit to Tsarskoye Syelo. The
      Soviet Government has mustered forces for the suppression of the
      new Kornilov advance on Petrograd. The fleet, headed by the
      armoured battleship Republic, has been summoned to the
      capital. Kerensky’s officer cadets and Cossacks are
      wavering. Prisoners arriving from Kerensky’s camp assure us
      that the Cossacks have been deceived and that if they come to
      realise the true state of affairs they will refuse to shoot. The
      Soviet Government is making every effort to avert bloodshed. If
      bloodshed cannot be avoided and if Kerensky’s units do
      begin to shoot, the Soviet Government will not hesitate to
      suppress the new Kerensky-Kornilov campaign ruthlessly.

    

      We announce for your information that the Congress of Soviets
      which has already dispersed, adopted two important decrees: (1)
      on the immediate transfer of all the landed estates to the
      peasant committees, and (2) on the proposal of a democratic
      peace.

    Vladimir Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Soviet Government
    



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Rules For Office
    Employees







Draft Rules For Office Employees







V. I. Lenin
Draft Rules For Office Employee


Transmitted: End of October, 1917
      
First Published: In 1928 in Lenin
      Miscellany VIII

Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 275. 

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      
      1. All employees of state, public and large private industrial
         enterprises (employing at least five wage-workers) undertake
         to perform the business assigned to them, and not to leave
         their posts without special permission from the government,
         the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, or
         trade unions.

      2. Violation of the rule set forth in § 1, or negligence in
         the dispatch of business or presenting accounts to the
         government and organs of power, or in discharge of services
         for the public and the economy shall be punishable with
         confiscation of all the property of the offender and
         imprisonment for a term of up to five years.


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speeches at a Meeting of the
    C.C.—Nov. 1 (14), 1917







Speeches at a Meeting of the C.C.—Nov. 1 (14), 1917







V. I. Lenin
Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
 
      October 16 (29), 1917


Delivered:1 November, 1917
      
First Published: Proletarskaya
      Revolutsia No. 10, 1922; Published according to the
      hand-written copy of the Minutes 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 276

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Comrade Lenin considers that Kamenev’s policy must be
      checked at once. There is now no point in negotiating with the
      Vikzhel.[1]
      Troops must be dispatched to Moscow. He proposes a resolution on
      the Vikzhel. The Vikzhel is not represented on the Soviet, and
      must not be admitted to it; the Soviets are voluntary
      organisations, and the Vikzhel has no support among the people.

      

Comrade Lenin considers that the negotiations were to serve as
diplomatic cover for military operations. The only correct
solution would be to put an end to the wavering of the
waverers and to become firm ourselves. Assistance must be
given to the Muscovites, and our victory will be assured.  

      

Comrade Lenin considers the question a fundamental one, and
thinks it is time to put an end to wavering. It is obvious
that the Vikzhel sides with the Kaledins and Kornilovs. There
must be no vacillation. We are backed by the majority of the
workers and peasants and of the army. Nobody here has proved
that the rank and file are against us. Either with the agents
of Kaledin, or with the rank and file. We must rely on the
people, we must send propagandists into the countryside. The
Vikzhel was called upon to transport troops to Moscow; it
refused, we must appeal to the people, and they will overthrow
it.

  
      
Footnotes

[1] The
      reference is to the Bolsheviks’ participation in a
      conference called by the Vikzhel for talks on the composition of
      the government. 
    
 Vikzhel, the All-Russia Central Committee of
      the Railwaymen’s Trade Union which was dominated by the
      Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, was one of the
      bulwarks of the counter-revolution after the victory of the
      October insurrection in Petrograd. On October 29 (November 11),
      1917 it adopted a resolution calling for a so-called
      “uniform socialist government”, consisting of
      representatives of all parties, from the Bolsheviks to the
      Popular Socialists. The Conference on the composition of the
      government opened on the same day and was attended by Menshevik
      defencists, Menshevik internationalists, Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, and
      members of the Postal Union, the Petrograd Duma, the Executive
      Committee of the Soviet of Peasants’ Deputies, etc. The
      Bolshevik Central Committee decided to attend stating that any
      talks on the enlargement of the government and the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee could take place only on the basis
      of the programme for Soviet power adopted by the Second Congress
      of Soviets. Kamenev and Sokolnikov were authorised by the
      Central Committee to attend. The All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee also sent its representatives to the Conference, among
      whom was Ryazanov. 
    
 The Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries expected to
      play the leading part in any coalition government and to use it
      to fight the dictatorship of the proletariat. In the
      Co-ordinating Committee set up by the Conference, they demanded
      that resistance to Kerensky’s troops be stopped and
      insisted that the All Russia Central Executive Committee should
      be replaced by a People’s Council which would have a
      majority of members representing the Executive Committee of the
      All-Russia Soviet of Peasants’ Deputies City councils and
      other organisations which they had under control They proposed
      the establishment of a new government headed by Chernov or
      Avksentyev. The Bolshevik delegates who attended took a
      conciliatory attitude and did not object to discussing the
      proposals tabled by the Mensheviks and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
    
 The Bolshevik Central Committee discussed the question of
      negotiations with the Vikzhel and the behaviour of the Bolshevik
      delegates on November 1 (14). The majority censured the policy
      of conciliation and proposed that the talks should either be
      broken off or formulated as an ultimatum. Kamenev, Milyutin,
      Rykov and Ryazanov insisted on a continuation of the talks. A
      C.C. resolution said the parties of conciliation were
      negotiating to subvert Soviet power, and the C.C. therefore
      authorised Bolshevik representatives to attend the talks with
      the sole aim of exposing the futile attempts to set up a
      coalition government, and terminating the talks. The All-Russia
      Executive Committee discussed the progress of the talks on the
      night of November 1 (14) and adopted a Bolshevik resolution
      drawn up in the spirit of the C.C. decision of November 1
      (14). However, the opposition group of Kamenev, Zinoviev, Rykov,
      Milyutin, Larin, Ryazanov and others, who took a Right-wing
      opportunist stand, opposed their line to that of the Central
      Committee and fought against the C.C. decision. On November 2
      (15), the C.C. adopted a resolution on the opposition within the
      C.C. (see pp. 277-79) At the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee meeting on the night of November 2 (15), following the
      speeches of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries who demanded a
      review of the Committee’s decision on the terms of an
      agreement, Kamenev and Zinoviev pushed through a resolution
      which clashed with that of the Central Committee adopted
      earlier. Their resolution provided for a change in the
      composition of the government and gave the Bolsheviks only half
      the government posts. The opposition voted for this
      resolution. Following the ultimatum which the majority of the
      Central Committee presented to the opposition minority (see
      pp. 280-82 on November 3 (16), Kamenev, Zinoviev, Rykov,
      Milyutin and Nogin withdrew from the Central Committee, while
      the last three and Teodorovich resigned from their posts of
      People’s Commissars. They were joined by Ryazanov, Larin
      and several others. On November 5 or 6 (18 or 19), the Central
      Committee once again demanded in the form of an ultimatum that
      Kamenev, Zinoviev, Ryazanov and Larin should stop their
      disrupting tactics (they had come out against the C.C. decisions
      in non-Party organisations) (see p. 301 On November 7 (20), the
      Central Committee published in Pravda an appeal to all
      members of the Party and all working classes of Russia, branding
      the opposition as deserters of the revolution who had abandoned
      the principles of Bolshevism (see pp. 303-07)
      


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Resolution of C.C. of the
    R.S.D.L.P.(B) on the Opposition within the
    C.C.—November 2 (15), 1917 







Resolution of C.C. on the Opposition within the C.C.







V. I. Lenin
Resolution of C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) on the Opposition
    within the C.C.November 2 (15), 1917


Written:2 November, 1917
      
First Published: without the first
      three  points, on November 17 (4), 1917 in Pravda No.
      180  First published in full in 1932 in the second and  third
      editions of Lenin's Collected Works, Vol.  XXX 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 277-279

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The Central Committee considers that the present meeting is of
      historic importance and that it is therefore necessary to record
      the two positions which have been revealed here. 

    

      1. The Central Committee considers that the opposition formed
         within the Central Committee has departed completely from all
         the fundamental positions of Bolshevism and of the
         proletarian class struggle in general by reiterating the
         utterly un-Marxist talk of the impossibility of a socialist
         revolution in Russia and of the necessity of yielding to the
         ultimatums and threats of resignation on the part of the
         obvious minority in the Soviet organisation, thus thwarting
         the will and the decision of the Second All-Russia Congress
         of Soviets and sabotaging the dictatorship of the proletariat
         and the poor peasantry which has been inaugurated. 

    

      2. The Central Committee lays the whole responsibility for
         hindering revolutionary work and for the vacillations, so
         criminal at the present moment, on this opposition, and
         invites them to transfer their discussion and their
         scepticism to the press and to withdraw from the practical
         work they do not believe in. For this opposition reflects
         nothing but intimidation by the bourgeoisie and the
         sentiments of the exhausted (not the revolutionary) section
         of the population. 
    

      3. The Central Committee affirms that the purely Bolshevik
         government cannot be renounced without betraying the slogan
         of Soviet power, since the majority at the Second All-Russia
         Congress of Soviets, without excluding anybody from the
         Congress, entrusted power, to this government. 
    

      4. The Central Committee affirms that, without betraying the
         slogan of the power of the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and
         Peasants' Deputies, there can be no entering into petty
         bargaining over the affiliation to the Soviets of
         organisations of a non-Soviet type, i.e., organisations which
         are not voluntary associations of the revolutionary vanguard
         of the people who are fighting for the overthrow of the
         landowners and capitalists. 
    

      5. The Central Committee affirms that to yield to the ultimatums
         and threats of the minority of the Soviets would be
         tantamount to complete renunciation not only of Soviet power
         but of democracy, for such yielding would be tantamount to
         the majority's fear to make use of its majority, it would be
         tantamount to submitting to anarchy and inviting the
         repetition of ultimatums on the part of any minority. 
    

      6. The Central Committee affirms that, not having excluded
         anybody from the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets, it is
         even now fully prepared to permit the return of those who
         walked out and to agree to a coalition within the Soviets
         with those who walked out, and that, consequently, all talk
         about the Bolsheviks refusing to share power with anybody is
         absolutely false. 
    

      7. The Central Committee affirms that on the day the present
         government was formed, a few hours before its formation, the
         Central Committee invited three representatives of the Left
         Socialist-Revolutionaries to attend its meeting and formally
         proposed that they should join the government. The refusal of
         the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, although it was
         provisional and conditional, places on these Left
         Socialist-Revolutionaries the entire responsibility for the
         fact that an agreement with them was not reached. 
    

      8. The Central Committee recalls that a resolution, proposed by
         the Bolshevik group, was adopted by the Second All-Russia
         Congress of Soviets expressing readiness to reinforce the
         Soviet both by soldiers from the trenches and by peasants
         from the localities, from the villages, and that therefore
         the assertion that the Bolshevik government is opposed to a
         coalition with the peasants is absolutely false. On the
         contrary, the Central Committee declares that the land law of
         our government, which was wholly copied from the
         Socialist-Revolutionary Mandate, is practical proof of the
         complete and most sincere readiness of the Bolsheviks to
         effect a coalition with the vast majority of Russia's
         population. 
    

      9. The Central Committee affirms, finally, that despite all
         difficulties, the victory of socialism both in Russia and in
         Europe can only be ensured by the unswerving continuation of
         the present government's policy. The Central Committee
         expresses its firm belief in the victory of this socialist
         revolution and calls upon all sceptics and waverers to
         abandon their waverings and whole-heartedly and with supreme
         energy support the actions of this government.
    Lenin


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Ultimatum from the C.C. Majority of
    the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) to the Minority







Ultimatum from the C.C. Majority







V. I. Lenin

      Ultimatum from the C.C. Majority
of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.) to the Minority


Delivered:3 November, 1917
      
First Published: Proletarskaya
      Revolutsia No. 7, 1922; Published according to typewritten
      copy

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 280-282

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      The majority on the Central Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks), fully approving the policy so far
      pursued by the Council of People's Commissars, considers it
      necessary to address the following categorical statement to the
      minority on the Central Committee.

    

      Our Party's policy at the present moment is defined in the
      resolution submitted by Comrade Lenin and adopted yesterday,
      November 2, by the Central Committee.[See
      pp. 277-79 of this volume.  This resolution
      declares that every attempt to induce our Party to decline power
      is treason to the proletariat's cause, since the All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets, in the name of the millions of workers,
      soldiers and peasants, has entrusted this power to the
      representatives of our Party on the basis of our programme. This
      fundamental line of our tactics, which follows logically from
      our whole struggle against the conciliators and which guided us
      in the uprising against Kerensky's government, at present
      constitutes the revolutionary essence of Bolshevism and is once
      again endorsed by the Central Committee. This line is absolutely
      binding on all members of the Party, and first and foremost, on
      the Central Committee minority. 

    

      Yet members of the minority, both before and after yesterday's
      meeting of the Central Committee, have been pursuing a policy
      which obviously runs counter to our Party's fundamental line and
      which is demoralising our own ranks by causing hesitation at a
      moment when the greatest firmness and steadfastness are
      essential.

    

      Thus, at yesterday's meeting of the Central Executive Committee,
      the Bolshevik group, with the direct participation of the
      Central Committee's minority members, openly voted against a
      decision of the Central Committee (on the number and persons of
      the representatives of our Party in the government). This
      unparalleled violation of discipline, committed by Central
      Committee member's behind the back of the Central Committee
      after many hours' discussions on the Central Committee,
      discussions provoked by these same members of the opposition,
      makes it obvious to us that the opposition intend to force the
      hand of Party institutions by sabotaging the Party's work at a
      moment when the fate of the Party, the fate of the revolution,
      depends upon the immediate result of this work.

    

      We cannot and do not wish to bear responsibility for such a
      state of affairs.

    

      Addressing the present statement to the minority of the Central
      Committee, we categorically demand a written reply to the
      question: Does the minority undertake to submit to Party
      discipline and to carry out the policy formulated in Comrade
      Lenin's resolution which was adopted by the Central Committee?

    

      In the event of a negative or indefinite reply to this question
      we shall immediately place before the Petrograd Committee, the
      Moscow Committee, the Bolshevik group on the Central Executive
      Committee, the Petrograd City Conference and the Extraordinary
      Party Congress, the following alternative proposal:

    
      
      Either the Party must entrust the present opposition with the
      task of forming a new government in conjunction with those of
      its allies on whose behalf the opposition is at present
      sabotaging our work—in which case we shall consider
      ourselves absolutely free in relation to this new government,
      which can contribute nothing but wavering, impotence and chaos.

    
      
      Or—which we do not doubt—the Party will endorse the
      only possible revolutionary line, as expressed in yesterday's
      decision of the Central Committee—in which case the Party
      must categorically demand that the members of the opposition
      conduct their disorganising work outside our Party
      organisation. There is not and cannot be any other solution. It
      stands to reason, a split would be highly deplorable. But an
      honest and open split would now be incomparably better than
      internal sabotage, the thwarting of our own decisions,
      disorganisation and prostration. At any rate, we do not doubt
      for a moment that the submission of our differences (which are
      in the main a replica of our differences with the Novaya
      Zhizn and Martov groups) to the people's judgement will
      ensure our policy the unreserved and devoted support of the
      revolutionary workers, soldiers and peasants, and will very soon
      condemn the wavering opposition to impotent isolation.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Resolution on Freedom of the
    Press







Draft Resolution On Freedom Of The Press







V. I. Lenin
Draft Resolution On Freedom Of The Press


Written:4 November, 1917
      
First Published: Pravda
      November 7, 1932; Published according to manuscript

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 283-284

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 



      For the bourgeoisie, freedom of the press meant freedom for the
      rich to publish and for the capitalists to control the
      newspapers, a practice which in all countries, including even
      the freest, produced a corrupt press.
    

      For the workers’ and peasants’ government, freedom of
      the press means liberation of the press from capitalist
      oppression, and public ownership of paper mills and printing
      presses; equal right for public groups of a certain size (say,
      numbering 10,000) to a fair share of newsprint stocks and a
      corresponding quantity of printers’ labour.
    

      As a first step towards this goal, which is bound up with the
      working people’s liberation from capitalist oppression, the
      Provisional Workers’ and Peasants’ Government has
      appointed a Commission of Inquiry to look into the ties between
      capital and periodicals, the sources of their funds and
      revenues, the list of their donors, covers for their deficits,
      and every other aspect of the newspaper business in
      general. Concealment of books, accounts or any other documents
      from the Commission of Inquiry, or the giving of any evidence
      known to be false shall be punishable by a revolutionary court.
    

      All newspaper owners, shareholders, and all members of their
      staffs shall be under the obligation to immediately submit
      written reports and information on the said questions to the
      Commission of Inquiry, probing the ties between capital
      and the press, and its dependence on capital, at Smolny
      Institute, Petrograd.
    

      The following are appointed to serve on the Commission of
      Inquiry: [Follows space for list of
      names—Ed.]


      The Commission shall have the power to co-opt members, call
      experts, subpoena witnesses, order the presentation of all
      accounts, etc.
 


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee—November 4 (17),
    1917







Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee







V. I. Lenin
Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee
November 4 (17), 1917


Delivered: 4 November, 1917

      
First Published: Izvestia
      No. 218, 7 November 1917; Published according to
      Izvestia text, Resolution on the resignation, according
      to the text of Minutes of the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee of Soviets of Workers’s, Soldier’s,
      Peasant’s and Cossack’s Deputies, Second
      Convocation, Moscow, 1918.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 285-293

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
1
Speech On The Press

      Comrade Karelin assured us that the way he was taking led to
      socialism, but I am afraid this would be marching to socialism
      backwards. Trotsky was right: the officer cadets staged their
      uprising, and war was declared in Petrograd and Moscow for
      freedom of the press. This time the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      did not act at all like socialists or revolutionaries. This week
      all the telegraph offices were in Kerensky’s hands. The
      Vikzhel was on their side. But they had no troops. It turned out
      that the army was on our side. The civil war was started by a
      handful of men. It is not over. Kaledin’s troops are
      approaching Moscow, and the shock troops are approaching
      Petrograd. We do not want a civil war. Our troops have shown
      great restraint. They held their fire, and it all began when
      three of our men were killed. Krasnov was given soft
      treatment. He was only placed under house arrest. We are against
      civil war. But if it nevertheless goes on what are we to do?
      Trotsky was right in asking in whose behalf you spoke? We asked
      Krasnov whether he could sign on behalf of Kaledin that the
      latter would not continue the war. He naturally replied that he
      could not. How can we stop retaliative measures against an enemy
      who has not stopped his hostile operations?

    
      We shall negotiate when peace terms are offered to us. But so
      far peace is being offered to us by those on whom it does not
      depend. These are only fine words. After all, Rech
      is an organ of the Kaledinites. We can well allow that the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are sincere, but it is, after all, a
      fact that Kaledin and Milyukov are behind them.

    
      The firmer your stand, soldiers and workers, the more we shall
      gain. Otherwise they will say to us: “If they’ve let
      out Milyukov, they can’t be strong.” Earlier on we
      said that if we took power, we intended to close down the
      bourgeois newspapers. To tolerate the existence of these papers
      is to cease being a socialist. Those who say: “Open the
      bourgeois newspapers”, fail to understand that we are
      moving at full speed to socialism. After all, tsarist newspapers
      were closed down after the overthrow of tsarism. Now we have
      thrown off the bourgeois yoke. We did not invent the social
      revolution: it was proclaimed by the Congress of the
      Soviets—no one protested, all adopted the decree
      proclaiming it. The bourgeoisie proclaimed liberty, equality and
      fraternity. The workers say: “We want something
      else”. We are told that we are retreating. No, comrades, it
      is the Socialist-Revolutionaries who are returning to
      Kerensky. We are told that there are new elements in our
      resolution. Of course there are, because we are advancing to
      socialism. When the Socialist-Revolutionaries made speeches in
      the First and the Second Duma, they were also ridiculed for
      saying something new.

    
      There should be a monopoly of private advertisements. The
      members of the printers’ union look at them from the point
      of view of income. They will get it, but in another form. We
      cannot provide the bourgeoisie with an opportunity for
      slandering us. We must appoint a commission right away to probe
      the ties between the banks and the bourgeois newspapers. What
      kind of freedom do these newspapers want? Isn’t it freedom
      to buy rolls of newsprint and hire crowds of pen-pushers? We
      must escape from the freedom of a press dependent on
      capital. This is a matter of principle. If we are to advance to
      socialism we cannot allow Kaledin’s bombs to be reinforced
      by the bombs of falsehood.

    
      Of course, our draft law is not perfect. But it will be applied
      everywhere by the Soviets in accordance with their local
      conditions. We are not bureaucrats and do not want to insist on
      the letter of the law everywhere, as was the practice in the old
      government offices. I recall the Socialist-Revolutionaries
      saying that people in the countryside knew
      so very little. They were getting their information from Russkoye
      Slovo. We should blame ourselves for leaving the
      newspapers in the hands of the bourgeoisie. We must go forward,
      to a new society, and take the same attitude to the bourgeois
      newspapers as we did to the ultra-reactionary papers in February
      and March.

2
Reply To A Question From The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries’ question was answered
      by Lenin.[1]
      He recalled that in the first days of the revolution the
      Bolsheviks invited the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries to join the
      new government, but the group of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      who refused to share responsibility in those difficult, critical
      days with their neighbours on the Left, declined to collaborate
      with the Bolsheviks.

    
      In its activity the new regime could not afford to reckon with
      all the obstacles which could arise in its way if it
      scrupulously observed all formalities. The situation was much
      too grave and allowed of no procrastination. There was no time
      to waste on smoothing off rough corners that merely changed
      outward appearances without altering the essence of the new
      measures. After all, the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets
      itself, brushing aside all difficulties of a formal nature,
      adopted two laws of world importance at one long sitting. These
      laws may have formal defects from the standpoint of bourgeois
      society, but power is, after all, in the hands of the Soviets,
      which can always make the necessary amendments. The Kerensky
      government’s criminal failure to act brought the country
      and the revolution to the brink of disaster: delay may indeed
      prove to be fatal, and the new regime is setting up milestones
      in the development of new forms of life by issuing laws to meet
      the aspirations and hopes of the broad masses. The local
      Soviets, depending on time and place, can amend, enlarge and add
      to the basic provisions worked out by the government. Creative
      activity at the grass roots is the basic factor of the new
      public life. Let the workers set up workers’ control at
      their factories. Let them supply the villages with manufactures
      in exchange for grain. Account must be taken of every single
      article, every pound of grain, because what socialism implies
      above all is keeping account of everything. Socialism cannot be
      decreed from above. Its spirit rejects the mechanical
      bureaucratic approach; living, creative socialism is the product
      of the masses themselves.
    

3
Speeches Concerning The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries’
      Question
I

      Lenin examines the concrete charges made against the Council of
      People’s Commissars. It first learned of Muravyov’s
      order[2]
      from the press, because the Commander-in-Chief had the power to
      issue emergency orders on his own authority. In view of the fact
      that the order did not contain anything clashing with the spirit
      of the new power, but was so worded that it could lead to
      undesirable misunderstandings, the Central Executive Committee
      has rescinded it. Furthermore, you criticise the Decree on
      Land. But it meets the demands of the people. You accuse us of
      schematising, but where are your own drafts, amendments and
      resolutions? Where are the fruits of your legislative activity?
      You were free to produce them. But we see nothing of them. You
      say we are extremists, but who are you? You are apologists for
      the sort of parliamentary obstruction that used to be known as
      scandal-mongering. If you are dissatisfied, why don’t you
      call another congress and act, but don’t talk about the
      collapse of power. Power is in the hands of our Party, which
      enjoys the confidence of the broad masses. Some of our comrades
      may have adopted a platform which has nothing in common with
      Bolshevism. But the mass of Moscow workers will not follow Rykov
      and Nogin. Comrade Proshyan said that in Finland, where the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries were in touch with the mass, they
      believed there was need for the closest collaboration within the
      entire Left wing of revolutionary socialism. The fact that the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries are not with us here merely shows
      that they have gone the way of their predecessors, the
      defencists. They have lost the common touch.
    
II

      Lenin and Trotsky, referring to the example of the Party
      congresses and the need for them to submit to Party discipline,
      announce that they will take part in the voting.

4
Speech And Resolution On The Resignation Of A Group Of
      People’S Commissars From The Council Of Peoples
      Commissars

      Comrade Lenin replies to the preceding speakers. lie says no
      internationalist can use the expression: “The West is
      disgracefully silent.” Only the blind fail to see the
      ferment among the working masses in Germany and the West. The
      top sections of the German proletariat and the socialist
      intelligentsia there, as everywhere else, are mostly
      defencists. But the lower strata of the proletariat are prepared
      to respond to our call in defiance of the will of their
      leaders. The fierce discipline of the German army and navy
      failed to prevent action by the opposition elements. The
      revolutionary sailors of the German navy, fully aware that their
      attempt was doomed, boldly went to their death in order to waken
      the spirit of revolt still dormant among the people. The Spartacus
      group is intensifying its revolutionary propaganda. The name
      of Liebknecht, a tireless fighter for proletarian ideals, is
      daily gaining in popularity in Germany.

    
      We believe in the revolution in the West. We know that it is
      inevitable, but it cannot, of course, be made to order. Did we
      know last December what exactly would happen in the coming
      February? Did we, in September, know with any certitude at all
      that within a month the revolutionary democrats of Russia would
      carry out the world’s greatest revolution? We were aware
      that the old power was on top of a volcano. Many signs told us
      of the great work going on deep down in people’s minds. We
      felt that the air was charged with electricity. We were sure
      that it would inevitably explode in a purifying
      thunderstorm. But we could not predict the day and hour. We now
      see the same picture in Germany. There, too, there is a swelling
      undercurrent of dissatisfaction which will inevitably take the
      forms of a popular movement. We cannot decree a revolution, but
      we can help it along. We shall conduct organised fraternisation
      in the trenches and help the peoples of the West to start an
      invincible socialist revolution. Comrade Zaks further spoke
      about decreeing socialism. But doesn’t the present
      government urge the masses to create better forms of life
      themselves? You have the beginnings of socialism in the exchange
      of manufactured goods for grain, and the strict control and
      accounting of production. We are sure we are going to have a
      republic of labour. He who will not work, will have to go
      without food.

    
      But to continue: what is the sign of our Party’s.isolation?
      It is the breakaway of a few intellectuals. But we daily find
      more and more support among the peasants. Victory will belong
      only to those who have faith in the people, those who are
      immersed in the life-giving spring of popular creativity.

    
      Comrade Lenin then proposes to the Central Executive Committee
      the following resolution:

    
      The Central Executive Committee authorises the Council of
      People’s Commissars to nominate, by the next sitting,
      candidates for the People’s Commissars of the Interior, and
      Trade and Industry, and invites Comrade Kolegayev to fill the
      post of People’s Commissar of Agriculture.

    

Footnotes

[1]
      The question was addressed to Lenin, as the Chairman of the
    Council of People's Commissars, at a meeting of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee on November 4 (17), 1917, in
    connection with the issue of several decrees by the Council of
    People's Commissars without the sanction of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee. Having heard Lenin's explanations, the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionary group declared them to be
    unsatisfactory. Uritsky tabled a resolution on behalf of the
    Bolshevik group expressing full confidence in the
    government. Before the vote on the resolution, the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries declared that the People's Commissars,
    being parties in interest, should not take part in the voting. A
    majority of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee passed a
    resolution approving the government's activity.
    

[2]
      A reference to order No. 1 of November 1 (14), 1917, issued by
      the officer in command of the troops defending Petrograd,
      Muravyov, calling on the soldiers, sailors and Red Guardsmen to
      deal ruthlessly with any criminal elements. Because his wording
      could lead to undesirable consequences, the All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee on November 2 (15) asked the People's
      Commissariat of the Interior to rescind it.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech at a Joint Meeting of the
    Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and
    Soldiers’ Deputies and Delegates From the
    Fronts







Speech at a Joint Meeting of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’
      and Soldiers’ Deputies and Delegates From the Fronts







V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Joint Meeting of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’
      and Soldiers’ Deputies and Delegates From the Fronts
November 4 (17), 1917


Delivered: 4 November, 1917
      
First Published: Pravda
      No. 181, 18 November 1917; Published according to
      Pravda text.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 294-296

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
Newspaper Report

      I am unable to make a long speech; I can merely outline the new
      government’s position, programme and tasks.

    
      You are aware that there was a unanimous demand for a policy of
      peace, for an immediate offer of peace. There is not a single
      bourgeois minister in the whole of Europe, including this
      country, who has not promised peace; the soldiers of Russia have
      found these speeches to be false; they were promised a policy of
      peace, but no peace was offered and instead they were driven
      into an offensive. We believed it to be our government’s
      first duty to offer an immediate peace, and this has been done.

    
      Comrade Lenin sets forth the terms on which the new government
      has proposed peace, and. adds: If the powers keep their
      colonies, there will never be an end to this war. What is the
      way out? There is only one: it is for the workers’ and
      peasants’ revolution to defeat capital. We never promised
      that the war could be ended at one stroke, by driving bayonets
      into ground. War springs from the clash of fortunes running to
      thousands of millions, which have divided up the world, and if
      the war is to be brought to an end, the power of capital must be
      destroyed.

    Comrade Lenin speaks on the transfer of power to the
    Soviets, and declares that we have witnessed a new phenomenon: the
    peasants refuse to believe that all power belongs to the Soviets,
    they are still expecting something else from the government and
    forget that the Soviet is not a private but a state
    institution. We declare that we want a new state, that the Soviet
    must replace the old officialdom, and that all the people must
    learn to govern. You should stand up to your full stature and
    straighten your backs, and then you need have no fear of
    threats. The officer cadets tried to engineer an uprising but we
    were able to deal with them; they organised a bloodbath in Moscow
    and shot soldiers on the Kremlin wall. But when the people won
    out, they let the enemy keep not only their military honour but
    also their arms.

    
      The Vikzhel has threatened a strike, but we shall turn to the
      masses and ask them whether they want to go on strike and starve
      the soldiers at the front and the people in the rear, and I am
      sure that the railway proletariat won’t have it. We are
      accused of making arrests. Indeed, we have made arrests; today
      we arrested the director of the State Bank. We are accused of
      resorting to terrorism, but we have not resorted, and I hope
      will not resort, to the terrorism of the French revolutionaries
      who guillotined unarmed men. I hope we shall not resort to it,
      because we have strength on our side. When we arrested anyone we
      told him we would let him go if he gave us a written promise not
      to engage in sabotage. Such written promises have been
      given. Our fault is that the Soviet organisation has not yet
      learned to govern, and that there are far too many meetings. Let
      the Soviets form teams and get down to the business of
      government. Our task is to advance to socialism. A few days ago
      the workers received the law on the control of production[1] which makes
      the factory committee a state institution. The workers must
      implement this law immediately. They will supply the peasants
      with cloth andiron, and the peasants will give them grain. I
      just saw a comrade from Ivanovo-Voznesensk, and he told me this
      was the main thing. Socialism means keeping account of
      everything. You will have socialism if you take stock of every
      piece of iron and cloth. We need engineers for production, and
      we value their labour highly. We shall be glad to pay them. We
      do not intend, at the moment, to deprive them of their
      privileged position. We value everyone who is willing to work
      but he must not behave as a boss but as an equal, under
      workers’ control. We have no feeling of animosity for
      individuals, and we shall try to help them fit into the new
      pattern.

    
      As for the peasants we say: help the working peasant, spare the
      middle peasant, compel the rich peasant to pay. After the
      October 25 Revolution we were threatened with destruction. Some
      were scared and wanted to escape power, but we were not
      destroyed. This was because our enemies could find support only
      from the officer cadets, whereas we had the people on our
      side. But for the massive drive by the soldiers and workers,
      power would never have dropped from the hands that held
      it. Power passed to the Soviets, which are organisations giving
      the people full freedom. We, the Soviet Government, have
      received our powers from the Congress of Soviets and, confident
      of your support, we shall continue to act as we have acted. We
      have not excluded anyone. The Mensheviks and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries have gone, but that is a crime on
      their part. We invited the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries to
      take part in the government, but they refused. We do not want
      any bargaining over power, we don’t want any bids or
      counterbids. We shall keep the City Council away from power
      because it is a Kornilovite centre. Some say we are
      isolated. The bourgeoisie has surrounded us with an atmosphere
      of lies and slander, but I have yet to see the soldier who is
      not enthusiastic over the Soviets having taken power. I have yet
      to see the peasant who opposes the Soviets. There must be an
      alliance of the poor peasants and the workers, and socialism
      will triumph the world over. (Members of the Soviet rise,
      and give Lenin a stormy ovation as he leaves.)


Footnotes

[1]
      See Draft Decree on Workers’s Control



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    To the Population







To The Population







V. I. Lenin
To The Population
    


Written: 5 November, 1917
      
First Published: Pravda
      No. 4, 19 November 1917; Published according to the manuscript
      text.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 297-299

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      Comrades—workers, soldiers, peasants and all working people!
    
      The workers’ and peasants’ revolution has definitely
    triumphed in Petrograd, having dispersed or arrested the last
    remnants of the small number of Cossacks deceived by Kerensky. The
    revolution has triumphed in Moscow too. Even before the arrival of
    a number of troop trains dispatched from Petrograd, the officer
    cadets and other Kornilovites in Moscow signed peace
    terms—the disarming of the cadets and the dissolution of the
    Committee of Salvation.[1]

      Daily and hourly reports are coming in from the front and from
      the villages announcing the support of the overwhelming majority
      of the soldiers in the trenches and the peasants in the uyezds
      for the new government and its decrees on peace and the
      immediate transfer of the land to the peasants. The victory of
      the workers’ and peasants’ revolution is assured
      because the majority of the people have already sided with it.

    
      It is perfectly understandable that the landowners and
      capitalists, and the top groups of office employees and
      civil servants closely linked with the bourgeoisie, in a word,
      all the wealthy and those supporting them, react to the new
      revolution with hostility, resist its victory, threaten to close
      the banks, disrupt or bring to a standstill the work of the
      different establishments, and hamper the revolution in every
      way, openly or covertly. Every politically-conscious worker was
      well aware that we would inevitably encounter resistance of this
      kind. The entire Party press of the Bolsheviks has written about
      this on numerous occasions. Not for a single minute will the
      working classes be intimidated by this resistance; they will not
      falter in any way before the threats and strikes of the
      supporters of the bourgeoisie.

    
      The majority of the people are with us. The majority of the
      working and oppressed people all over the world are with
      us. Ours is the cause of justice. Our victory is assured.

    
      The resistance of the capitalists and the high-ranking employees
      will be smashed. Not a single person will be deprived of his
      property except under the special state law proclaiming
      nationalisation of the banks and syndicates. This law is being drafted. Not one of
      the working people will suffer the loss of a kopek; on the
      contrary, he will be helped. Apart from the strictest accounting
      and control, apart from levying the set taxes in full the
      government has no intention of introducing any other measure.

    
      In support of these just demands the vast majority of the people
      have rallied round the Provisional Workers’ and
      Peasants’ Government.

    
      Comrades, working people! Remember that now you yourselves are
      at the helm of state. No one will help you if you yourselves do
      not unite and take into your hands all aflairs
      of the state. Your Soviets are from now on the organs
      of state authority, legislative bodies with full powers.

    
      Rally around your Soviets. Strengthen them. Get on with the job
      yourselves; begin right at the bottom, do not wait for
      anyone. Establish the strictest revolutionary law and order,
      mercilessly suppress any attempts to create anarchy by
      drunkards, hooligans, counter-revolutionary officer cadets,
      Kornilovites and their like.

    
      Ensure the strictest control over production and accounting of
      products. Arrest and hand over to the revolutionary courts all
      who dare to injure the people’s cause, irrespective of
      whether the injury is manifested in sabotaging production
      (damage, delay and subversion), or in hoarding grain and
      products or holding up shipments of grain, disorganising the
      railways and the postal, telegraph and telephone services, or
      any resistance whatever to the great cause of peace, the cause
      of transferring the land to the peasants, of ensuring
      workers’ control over the production and distribution of
      products.

    
      Comrades, workers, soldiers, peasants and all working people!
      Take all power into the hands of your Soviets. Be watchful and
      guard like the apple of your eye your land, grain, factories,
      equipment, products, transport—all that from now onwards
      will be entirely your property, public property. Gradually, with
      the consent and approval of the majority of the peasants, in
      keeping with their practical experience and that of the
      workers, we shall go forward firmly and unswervingly to the
      victory of socialism—a victory that will be sealed by the
      advanced workers of the most civilised countries, bring the
      peoples lasting peace and liberate them from all oppression and
      exploitation.

    
      
      V. Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
    

      November 5, 1917, Petrograd.
    

Footnotes

[1]
Committee of Salvation (Committee of Public Safety) was
    set up on October 25 (November 7), 1917, by the Moscow City
    Council to fight the Soviets in Moscow, and led the
    counter-revolutionary revolt of officer cadets which broke out on
    October 28 (November 10). The revolt was crushed on November 2
    (15), and the Committee capitulated to the Moscow Revolutionary
    Military Committee.


    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Reply to Questions From
    Peasants







Reply To Questions From Peasants







V. I. Lenin
Reply To Questions From Peasants[1]


Written: 5 November, 1917
      
First Published: Izvestia
      No. 219, 8 November 1917; Published according to the manuscript.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 300-301

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      In reply to numerous questions from peasants, be it known that
      all power in the country henceforth belongs wholly to the
      Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies. The workers’ revolution has won in Petrograd and
      Moscow and is winning everywhere else in Russia. The
      Workers’ and Peasants’ Government ensures the alliance
      of the mass of the peasants, the poor peasants, the majority of
      the peasants, with the workers against the landowners, against
      the capitalists.

    
      Hence the Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies, primarily the
      uyezd and then the gubernia Soviets, are from now on, pending
      the convocation of the Constituent Assembly, vested with full
      governmental authority in their localities. Landed
      proprietorship has been abolished by the Second All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets. A decree on land has already been issued by
      the present Provisional Workers’ and Peasants’
      Government. In conformity with this decree aU landed estates
      pass over wholly to the Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies.
    
      The volost land committees must at once take over the
      administration of all landed estates, instituting the strictest
      accounting, maintaining perfect order and safeguarding with
      utmost strictness the former property of the landowners, which
      henceforth is the property of the whole people and which the
      people themselves must therefore protect.
    
      All rulings of the volost land committees issued with
      the approval of the uyezd Soviets of peasants’
      Deputies have the force of law and must be carried out
      unconditionally and without delay.
    
      The Workers’ and Peasants’ Government appointed by the
      Second All-Russia. Congress of Soviets has been named the
      Council of People’s Commissars.
    
      The Council of People’s Commissars calls upon the peasants
      to take all power into their own hands in their respective
      localities. The workers give their full, undivided, all-round
      support to the peasants, are getting the production of machines
      and implements started, and ask the peasants to help by
      delivering grain.
    


      V. Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars


      Petrograd.
      November 5, 1917.

Footnotes

[1]
      Written in connection with numerous questions submitted by
    peasant messengers to the Council of People's Commissars. Each
    messenger got a typewritten answer bearing Lenin's personal
    signature. It was published in the newspapers Derevenskaya
    Bednota, Izvestia and others, and was issued as a leaflet
      under the title, 'Instruction to Peasants". The answer was an
      important document regulating the revolutionary abolition of
      landed estates.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    From the Central Committee of the
    Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
    (Bolsheviks)







From The Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks)







V. I. Lenin
From The Central Committee
      of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks)


Written: 5 or 6 November, 1917
      
First Published: in 1927 in the
      pamphlet The Party’s fight Against Zinoviev’s and
      kamenev’s Strike-breaking Tactics in October of 1917.
      Published according to the manuscript

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 302-303

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive December,
    2000

  

 

To Comrades Kamenev, Zinoviev, Ryazanov and Larin


      Once before, the Central Committee delivered an ultima—turn
      to the leading exponents of your policy (Kamenev and Zinoviev),
      demanding complete subordination to the Central Committee’s
      line and decisions, and renunciation of efforts to sabotage its
      work and of all subversive activity. [See
      pp. Ultimatum to the Majority
      inthis volume. —Transcriber]

      By leaving the Central Committee, but remaining in the Party,
      the exponents of your policy undertook to abide by Central
      Committee decisions. Actually, however, you have not confined
      yourselves to criticism within the Party, but have brought
      confusion into the ranks of the fighters- in an uprising which
      is still going on, and continue, in violation of Party
      discipline, to frustrate Central Committee decisions and hamper
      its work outside the Party, in the Soviets, the municipal
      bodies, the trade unions, etc.
    
      In view of this, the Central Committee is forced to restate its
      ultimatum and to request that you immediately pledge yourselves
      in writing either to abide by Central Committee decisions and to
      conduct its policy in all your statements, or to withdraw from
      all Party activity in public and resign from all responsible
      posts in the working-class movement until the next Party
      congress.
    
      Refusal to pledge yourselves to either course will make it
      imperative for the Central Committee to consider the question of
      your immediate expulsion from the Party.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    From the Central Committee of the
    Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party
    (Bolsheviks)







From the Central Committee of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks)







V. I. Lenin
From the Central Committee
    of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party (Bolsheviks)


Written: 5—6 November, 1917
      
First Published: in Pravda
      No. 182, 20 November 1917. Published according to the newspaper
      text

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 304-308

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      To All Party MembersAnd To All The Working Classes Of Russia 
    

      Comrades, 
    
      It is a matter of common knowledge that the majority at the
    Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers'
    Deputies were delegates belonging to the Bolshevik Party. 

    
      This fact is fundamental for a proper understanding of the
      victorious revolution that has just taken place in Petrograd,
      Moscow and the whole of Russia. Yet that fact is constantly
      forgotten and ignored by all the supporters of the capitalists
      and their unwitting aides, who are undermining the
      fundamental principle of the new revolution, namely, all
      power to the Soviets. There must be no government in Russia
      other than the Soviet Government. Soviet power has been
      won in Russia, and the transfer of government from one Soviet
      party to another is guaranteed without any revolution, simply by
      a decision of the Soviets; simply by new elections of deputies
      to the Soviets. The majority at the Second All-Russia Congress
      of Soviets belonged to the Bolshevik Party. Therefore the only
      Soviet Government is the one formed by that Party. And everybody
      knows that the Central Committee of the Bolshevik Party, several
      hours prior to the formation of the new government, and to the
      presentation of the list of its members to the Second All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets, summoned to its session three of the most
      prominent members of the group of Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, Comrades Kamkov, Spiro and Karelin,
      and invited them to join the new government. We very
      much regret that the Left Socialist-Revolutionary comrades
      refused; we regard their refusal as impermissible on the part of
      revolutionaries and champions of the working people. We are
      ready at any moment to include Left Socialist-Revolutionaries in
      the government, but we declare that, as the majority party at
      the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets, we are entitled to
      form the government, and it is our duty to the people to do
      so.

      Everybody knows that the Central Committee of our Party
      submitted a purely Bolshevik list of People's Commissars to the
      Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets, and that the Congress
      approved this list of a purely Bolshevik government.

      The statements to the effect that the Bolshevik government is
      not a Soviet Government are therefore pure lies, and come, and
      can come, only from the enemies of the people, from the enemies
      of Soviet power. On the contrary, now, after the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets, and until the Third Congress
      meets, or until new elections to the Soviets are held, or until
      a new government is formed by the Central Executive Committee,
      only a Bolshevik government can be regarded as the
      Soviet Government. 
    
*  *  *

      Comrades, yesterday, November 4, several members of the Central
      Committee of our Party and of the Council of People's
      Commissars—Kamenev, Zinoviev, Nogin, Rykov, Milyutin and a
      few others—resigned from the Central Committee of our
      Party, and the three last named from the Council of People's
      Commissars. In a large party like ours, notwithstanding the
      proletarian and revolutionary line of our policy, it was
      inevitable that individual comrades should have proved to be
      insufficiently staunch and firm in the struggle against the
      enemies of the people. The tasks that now face our Party are
      really immense, the difficulties are enormous, and several
      members of our Party who formerly held posts of responsibility
      have flinched in face of the onslaught of the bourgeoisie and
      fled from our ranks. The bourgeoisie and all its helpers are
      jubilant over this fact and are maliciously rejoicing,
      clamouring about disintegration and predicting the fall of the
      Bolshevik government. 
    
      Comrades, do not believe these lies. The comrades who have
      resigned have acted as deserters, since they not only quitted
      the posts entrusted to them, but violated the direct decision of
      the Central Committee of our Party binding them to delay their
      resignation at least until a decision was taken by the Petrograd
      and Moscow Party organisations. We strongly condemn this
      desertion. We are profoundly convinced that all class-conscious
      workers, soldiers and peasants who belong to or sympathise with
      our Party will condemn the actions of the deserters with equal
      severity. 
    
      But we declare that the desertion of a few individuals belonging
      to the leading group of our Party cannot for a moment or in the
      slightest way shake the unity of the masses who follow our Party
      and that it therefore will not shake our Party. 
    
      You must recall, comrades, that two of the deserters, Kamenev
      and Zinoviev, acted as deserters and blacklegs even before the
      Petrograd uprising; for they not only voted against the uprising
      at the decisive meeting of the Central Committee on October 10,
      1917, but, even after the decision had been taken by
      the Central Committee, agitated among the Party workers against
      the uprising. It is common knowledge that newspapers which fear
      to take the side of the workers and are more inclined to side
      with the bourgeoisie (e.g., Novaya Zhizn ), raised at
      that time, in common with the whole bourgeois press, a hue and
      cry about the "disintegration" of our Party, about "the collapse
      of the uprising" and so on. Events, however, swiftly refuted the
      lies and slanders of some and the doubts, waverings and
      cowardice of others: The "storm" they tried to raise over the
      efforts of Kamenev and Zinoviev to thwart the Petrograd uprising
      proved to be a storm in a teacup, while the great
      enthusiasm of the people, the great heroism of millions of
      workers, soldiers, and peasants in Petrograd, in Moscow, at the
      front, in the trenches and in the villages, pushed the deserters
      out of the way as easily as a railway train pushes aside
      splinters of wood. 
    
      Shame on all the faint-hearted, all the waverers and doubters,
      on all those who allowed themselves to be intimidated by the
      bourgeoisie or who have succumbed to the outcries of their
      direct and indirect supporters! There is not the
      slightest hesitation among the mass of the workers
      and soldiers of Petrograd, Moscow and other places. Our Party
      stands solidly and firmly, as one man, in defence of Soviet
      power, in defence of the interests of all the working people,
      and first and foremost of the workers and poor peasants. 
    
      Bourgeois hacks and those who allowed themselves to be
      intimidated by the bourgeoisie accuse us in chorus of being
      uncompromising, of being irreconcilable, of refusing to share
      power with another party. That is not true, comrades. We
      have invited and continue to invite the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries to share power with us. It is not our
      fault that they have refused. We began the
      negotiations, and, after the delegates of the Second Congress of
      Soviets had dispersed, we made all kinds of concessions in the
      course of these negotiations, even to the point of provisionally
      agreeing to admit representatives of a section of the Petrograd
      City Council, that nest of Kornilov men, which will be the first
      to be swept away by the people should the Kornilovite
      scoundrels, should the darling sons of the capitalists and
      landowners, the officer cadets, attempt once more to resist the
      will of the people as they did last Sunday in Petrograd and as
      they would like to do again (as is proved by the exposure of the
      conspiracy of Purishkevich and the documents seized on him
      yesterday, November 3). But the gentlemen who stand behind the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and act through them in the
      interests of the bourgeoisie interpreted our readiness to make
      concessions as weakness, and took advantage of this readiness to
      present us with new ultimatums. At the conference on November 3,
      Mr. Abramovich and Mr. Martov appeared and presented an
      ultimatum: no negotiations until our government puts a stop to
      the arrests and to the suppression of bourgeois newspapers. 
    
      Both our Party and the Central Executive Committee of the
      Congress of Soviets refused to accept this ultimatum,
      which obviously emanated from the supporters of Kaledin, the
      bourgeoisie, Kerensky and Kornilov. The conspiracy of
      Purishkevich and the appearance in Petrograd on November 5 of a
      delegation from a unit of the 17th Army Corps threatening us
      with a march on Petrograd (a ridiculous threat, for the advanced
      detachments of these Kornilovites have already been beaten and
      have fled at Gatchina, while most of them have refused to fight
      against the Soviets)—all these events have proved who were
      the real authors of the ultimatum of Mr. Abramovich and
      Mr. Martov and whom these people really served. 
    
      Let the working people, therefore, remain calm and firm! Our
      Party will never yield to the ultimatums of the minority in the
      Soviets, the minority who have allowed themselves to be
      intimidated by the bourgeoisie and, despite their "good
      intentions" virtually act as puppets in the hands of the
      Kornilov gang. 
    
      We stand firmly by the principle of Soviet power, i.e., the
      power of the majority obtained at the last Congress of
      Soviets. We agreed, and still agree, to share power
      with the minority in the Soviets, provided that minority loyally
      and honestly undertake to submit to the majority and carry out
      the programme, approved by the whole Second All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets, for gradual, but firm and undeviating steps
      towards socialism. But we shall not submit to any ultimatums of
      groups of intellectuals who are not backed by the people, and
      who in actual fact are backed only by the Kornilovites,
      the Savinkov men, the officer cadets, etc. 
    
      Let the working people, therefore, remain calm and firm! Our
      Party, the party of the Soviet majority, stands solid and united
      in defence of their interests and, as before, behind our Party
      stand the millions of the workers in the cities, the soldiers in
      the trenches and the peasants in the villages, prepared at all
      costs to achieve the victory of peace and the victory of
      socialism! 

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Direct-Line Conversation Between the
    Government and Field H.Q. November 9 (22),
    1917







Direct-Line Conversation







V. I. Lenin
Direct-Line Conversation
Between The Government and Field H. Q. November 9 (22),
      1917[1]



Written: 5 or 6 November, 1917
      
First Published: on 9 November, 1917
      in Robochy I Soldat No. 20. Published according to the
      newspaper text

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 309-311

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:  Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      Is that the Commander-in-Chief?

    
      Dieterichs here.

    
      We should like to speak to the Acting
      Commander-in-Chief. If General Dukhonin is no longer charged
      with these duties, please let us have the person now acting in
      his stead. As far as we are aware, General Dukhonin has not yet
      resigned.

    
Field H. Q. replying: Acting C.-in-C. General Dukhonin
      waited for your call until 1 a.m., and is now asleep. The
      telegraph was out of order, and later was used by Field H. Q. to
      communicate with G. H. Q.

    
      Could you tell us whether you have received a
      wireless message from the Council of People’s Commissars
      sent at 4:00 o’clock, and what has been done to carry out
      the instructions of the Council of People’s Commissars?

    
Field H. Q. replying: An undated and unnumbered message
      of State importance was received, and that is why General
      Dukhonin requested General Mnnikovsky for the necessary
      guarantees confirming its authenticity.


    
      What was Manikovsky’s reply, at what time
      was the query sent, and was it radioed, telephoned or
      telegraphed?

    
Field H. Q. replying: No answer has been received yet,
      and a request was sent an hour ago to speed up the reply.


    
      Please specify the time and means used in
      sending the first query. Will you hurry up, please?

    
Field H. Q. replying: The message was telegraphed and
      radioed to General Manikovsky—the time, just a minute....

    
      The message was sent at 19.50.

    
      Why wasn’t a copy of the query sent to me,
      the People’s Commissar for War[2]? From a personal conversation with
      me the C.-in-C. was aware that General Manikovsky’s sole
      responsibility is continuity of technical operations in
      logistics and food supplies, and that I have been entrusted with
      the political direction of and responsibility for the War
      Ministry’s activity.

    
Field H. Q. replying: I can say nothing at all about this.

    
      We declare most emphatically that we place all
      the responsibility for the delay in this crucial state matter
      upon General Dukhonin and unconditionally demand: first, the
      immediate dispatch of truce envoys, and second, General
      Dukhonins personal presence on the line at 11 a.m. sharp
      tomorrow. Should the delay result in famine, disorganisation or
      defeat, or anarchic revolts, the full blame will fall upon you,
      and the soldiers will be duly informed of it.

    
Field H. Q. replying: I shall inform General Dukhonin of this.

    
      When? Right away? We are waiting for Dukhonin.

    
Field H. Q. replying: I shall wake him up at once.

    
      This is Acting C.-in-C. General Dukhonin.

    
      The People’s Commissars here; what’s your answer?

    I see from the tape
      I just got of your conversation with G. H. Q. that your message to
      me was sent before any decision was taken on the substance of
      the message signed by the People’s Commissars
      Ulyanov-Lenin, Trotsky and Krylenko; in view of this I must have
      the following factual information: (1) Has the Council of
      People’s Commissars received any reply to its message to
      the belligerent powers containing the Decree on Peace; (2) What
      was to be done with the Rumanian Army, which is a part of our
      front; (3) Was there any intention, of engaging in talks about a
      separate armistice arid with whom, only with the Germans or with
      the Turks, or are we to negotiate a general armistice?

    
      The text of the message sent to you is
      absolutely clear and to the point; it speaks of an immediate
      opening of armistice talks with all the belligerents, and we
      resolutely deny the right to delay this matter of state
      importance by any preliminary queries whatsoever; we insist that
      truce envoys should be dispatched immediately and that we
      receive progress reports every hour.

    
Field H. Q. replying: My questions are of a purely
      technical character and unless they are answered it will be
      impossible to negotiate.

    
      You must be aware that many technical, rather
      detailed questions will arise during the talks, and we shall
      answer them as they arise or are raised by the enemy; that is
      why we demand once again, in the form of an ultimatum, that
      formal armistice negotiations be started unconditionally and
      without delay with all the belligerent countries, both Allied
      and those hostile to us. Please state your reply in precise
      terms.

    
      I can understand only one thing, and
      it is that you cannot negotiate directly with the powers. It is
      even less possible for me to do so on your behalf. Only a
      central government supported by the army and the nation can have
      enough prestige and importance for the enemy to lend these
      negotiations the authority necessary to achieve results. I also
      believe that an early conclusion of a general peace is in
      Russia’s interests.

    
      Do you flatly refuse to give us a precise reply
      and carry out our orders?

    
      I have given you a precise reply as
      to the reasons why I find it impossible to put your message into
      effect, and I repeat that the peace Russia needs can be obtained
      only by a central government. Dukhonin.

    
      In the name of the Government of the Russian
      Republic, on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars,
      we dismiss you from your post for refusing to obey government
      orders and for conduct that entails untold hardships for the
      working people of all countries and especially the armies. We
      order you, on pain of responsibility under war-time laws, to
      continue your duties pending the arrival at Field Headquarters
      of a new Commander-in-Chief or a person empowered by him to take
      over from you. Ensign Krylenko is appointed
      Commander-in-Chief.

      Lenin, Stalin, Krylenko

Footnotes

[1] The
      circumstances which led to the conversation between members of the
      Soviet Government and Field H. Q. in Mogilev are set forth on
      pp. 312-13 and 316-17. Field HQ., which in that period was a
      centre where plans were being hatched for the overthrow of Soviet
      power, was occupied by revolutionary troops on November 20
      (December 3).
    

[2]
      The conversation was conducted by the People's Commissar for War
      N.y. Krylenko.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Wireless Message to All Regimental,
    Divisional, Corps, Army, and Other Committees,
    to all Soldiers of the Revolutionary, Army and
    Sailors of the Revolutionary Navy







Wireless Message: To All Regimental, Divisional, Corps,
      Army,And Other Committees







V. I. Lenin
Wireless Message


Sent: 9 November, 1917
      
First Published: In Robochy I
      Soldat No. 20, 9 November, 1917. 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 312-313

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      To All Regimental, Divisional, Corps, Army, and Other
      Committees, to all Soldiers of the Revolutionary, Army and
      Sailors of the Revolutionary Navy[1]


      On the night of November 7 the Council of People’s
      Commissars sent a wireless message to Commander-in-Chief
      Dukhonin ordering him immediately and formally to propose an
      armistice to all the belligerent countries, both Allied and
      those hostile to us.

    
      This message was received at Field Headquarters on November 8 at
      5.05 am. Dukhonin was ordered to keep the Council of
      People’s Commissars constantly informed of the progress of
      the negotiations and to sign the armistice agreement only after
      it had been approved by the Council of People’s
      Commissars. Simultaneously, a similar proposal to conclude an
      armistice was formally submitted to all the plenipotentiary
      representatives of the Allied countries in Petrograd.

    
      Not having received a reply from Dukhonin by the evening of
      November 8, the Council of People’s Commissars empowered
      Lenin, Stalin and Krylenko to ascertain the causes of the delay
      from Dukhonin over the direct line.

    
      The conversation lasted from 2 a.m. to 4.30 a.m. on November
      9. Dukhonin made numerous attempts to evade, giving an
      explanation of his conduct and a precise reply to the orders of
      the government, but when Dukhonin was given a categorical order
      to enter immediately into formal negotiations for an armistice,
      he refused to obey. Thereupon, in the name of the Government of
      the Russian Repub]ic, on behalf of the Council of People’s
      Commissars, Dukhonin was informed that he was dismissed from his
      post for refusing to obey government orders and for conduct that
      entailed untold hardships for the working people of all
      countries and
      especially for the armies. At the same time, Dukhonin was
      ordered to continue his duties pending the arrival of a new
      Commander-in-Chief or a person empowered by the latter to take
      over from Dukhonin. Ensign Krylenk has been appointed the new
      Commander-in-Chief.

    
      Soldiers, the cause of peace is in your hands! Do not allow
      the counter-revolutionary generals to frustrate the great cause
      of peace, place them under guard in order to avert acts of
      summary justice unworthy of a revolutionary army and to prevent
      these generals from escaping the trial that awaits
      them. Maintain the strictest revolutionary and military order.

    
      Let the regiments at the front immediately elect representatives
      to start formal negotiations for an armistice with the enemy.
    
      The Council of People’s Commissars authorises you to do
      this.
    
      Do everything possible to keep us informed of every step in the
      negotiations. The Council of People’s Commissars 15 alone
      authorised to sign the final armistice agreement.
    
      Soldiers, the cause of peace is in your hands! Maintain
      vigilance, restraint and energy, and the cause of peace will
      triumph!
    
      
      In the name of the Government of the Russian Republic
    
      V.Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
    
      N.Krylenko,
      People’s Commissar for War and
      Commander-in-Chief
    
Footnotes

[1]
The Soviet Government's call on the soldiers to take the initiative in
      the armistice negotiations met with broad response in the
      army. On various sectors divisions, corps and armies, and even
      entire fronts (e.g., the Western Front) sent envoys across the
      line and concluded cease-fire agreements, which provided for a
      stop to military operations, reinforcements, construction of
      military installations, etc. These so-called soldiers' peace
      treaties" remained in force until the conclusion of a general
      armistice.
      
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Foreword to the Pamphlet,How the
    Socialist Revolutionaries Cheated the
    People







Foreword to the Pamphlet, How the Socialist Revolutionaries Cheated The People







V. I. Lenin
Foreword to the Pamphlet,
How the Socialist
      Revolutionaries Cheated
      The People, and What the New
      Bolshevik Government
      Has Given the People


Written: 9 November, 1917
      
First Published: In a pamphlet issued
      by Selsky Vestnik (Rural Herald) in
      Petrograd. Published according to the pamphlet text. 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 314-315

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      The peasants of Russia are now faced with the prospect of taking
      their country’s destiny into their own hands.

    
      The victory of the workers’ revolution in the two leading
      Cities and in most of the rest of Russia has given the peasants
      the possibility of taking the land arrangements into
      their own hands. Not all peasants have as yet realised
      that their Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies are the
      true, authentic, supreme state power, but they soon
      will.

    
      When they do realise it, their alliance with the workers, the
      alliance of the bulk of the peasants—the poor, working
      peasants—will be consolidated. This alliance, both
      in the Soviets and the Constituent Assembly, and not the
      alliance of the peasants and the capitalists, is the only one
      really capable of ensuring the working people’s interests.
    
      It will surely very soon be brought home to the peasants that if
      they are to be rid of the horrors of war and the oppression of
      the landowners and capitalists, they must ally themselves with
      the working people of the towns, above all the factory workers,
      and not with the rich.
    
      If the peasants are to see this soon, they must, among other
      things, make a closer and more amply documented comparison of
      the promises and draft laws of the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
      and the Decree on Land issued by the new, workers’ and
      peasants’ government.
    
      Such a comparison is made in this pamphlet. It gives the
      documents, which is the first thing anyone needs if he
      is going to use his head. The main document relating to the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries is their Minister Maslov’s draft
      land law. I take it in full from Dyelo Naroda
      (Chernov’s newspaper). I am also republishing in full my own article on the subject from
      Robochy Put.

      The Decree on Land issued by
      the workers’ and peasants’ government is also given in
      full.
    
      Peasant comrades, seek the truth about the various parties, and
      you shall find it! Collect and compare the draft land laws
      proposed by the various parties.
    
      You must read carefully the draft land law put forward by the
      Socialist-Revolutionary minister, and the Decree on Land issued
      by the present Bolshevik government, which received its powers
      from the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets. We have no doubt
      at all as to what the peasants’ final conclusion will be.
    
      N. Lenin
    

      Petrograd,
      November 9, 1917

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee November 10 (23),
    1917







Meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee







V. I. Lenin

      Meeting of the All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee

      November 10 (23), 1917


Written: 10 November, 1917
      
First Published: In Pravda
      No. 188, 26 November, 1917. Published according to the text of
      Minutes of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of
      Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers'’, Peasants’ and
      Cossacks’ Deputies, Second Convocation, Moscow, 1918.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 316-319

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      I
Report on Talks with Dukizonin

      The full text of our talks with Dukhonin has been printed, so I
      can confine myself to a few remarks. It was clear to us that we
      were dealing with an opponent of the people's will and an enemy
      of the revolution. Dukhonin resorted to all manner of shifts and
      dodges to delay matters. Doubt was expressed as to the
      authenticity of our message, and the query was not addressed to
      Krylenko but to General Manikovsky. Thus, the generals have
      stolen at least one full day in this important and vital matter
      of peace. General Dukhonin came to the apparatus only when we
      said we would refer the matter to the soldiers. We told Dukhonin
      of our demand that he should start armistice negotiations
      immediately, and nothing more. Dukhonin was not empowered to
      conclude an armistice. Not only was the conclusion of an
      armistice outside Dukhonin's competence, but his every step in
      the matter of the armistice negotiations was to have been under
      the control of the People's Commissars. The bourgeois press has
      accused us of offering a separate armistice and of ignoring the
      interests of the Rumanian Army. That is a lie. We propose that
      the peace talks should be started immediately, and an armistice
      concluded with all countries, without exception. We have
      information that our wireless messages have been reaching
      Europe. Thus, our message about the
      victory over Kerensky was monitored and relayed by the Austrian
      wireless telegraph. The Germans, on their part, tried to jam
      it. We can contact Paris by wireless, and when the peace treaty
      is drawn up, we shall be able to inform the French people that
      it can be signed, and that it is up to them to have the
      armistice concluded within two hours. Let's see what Clemenceau
      will have to say then. Our Party has never said that it could
      produce a peace all at once. It said that it would make an
      immediate offer of peace and would publish the secret
      treaties. That has been done—the fight for peace is on. It
      will be an uphill fight. International imperialism is mobilising
      all its forces against us, but despite its great strength our
      chances are quite good in the revolutionary struggle for peace,
      in which we shall combine revolutionary fraternisation with the
      struggle for peace. The bourgeoisie would very much like the
      imperialist governments to combine against us.
    
2
Concluding Speech

      Comrade Chudnovsky said here that he had "taken the liberty" of
      making some sharp criticisms of the Commissars’
      actions. There can be no question at all as to whether or not
      sharp criticism is to be allowed, for it is a revolutionary's
      duty to engage in such criticism, and the People's Commissars do
      not claim to be infallible.

    
      Comrade Chudnovsky said we could not accept an indecent peace,
      but he failed to cite a single word or fact to show that this
      peace was unacceptable. We said: peace can be concluded only by
      the Council of People's Commissars. When we began our talks with
      Dukhonin we were aware that we were about to negotiate with an
      enemy, and we cannot procrastinate when dealing with an
      enemy. We could not foretell the outcome of the talks. But we
      were fully determined. We had to take a decision on the spot,
      without leaving the line. We had to act against an insubordinate
      general there and then. We could not get the Central Executive
      Committee together on the line; that was in no sense a violation
      of the Central Executive Committee's prerogatives. You don't
      wait for the outcome in a war, and it was a war we were fighting
      against the counter-revolutionary generals, so we turned to the
      soldiers. We removed Dukhonin but we are not formalists or
      bureaucrats, and we are well aware that it was not enough to
      remove him. He opposed us and we appealed over his head to the
      army masses. We authorised them to enter into armistice
      negotiations. But we did not conclude an armistice. The soldiers were warned to keep an eye on the
      counter-revolutionary generals. I think any regiment is
      disciplined enough to maintain the necessary revolutionary
      order. In the event of betrayal during the soldiers' armistice
      negotiations or an attack during fraternisation, it is the
      soldiers' duty to shoot the traitors on the spot, without more
      ado.

    
      It is monstrous to allege that we have now weakened our front in
      the event of the Germans starting an offensive. Until Dukhonin's
      exposure and removal, the army was never sure that it was
      conducting an international policy of peace. It now has this
      assurance: the only way to fight Dukhonin is to appeal to the
      sense of discipline and initiative of the masses of
      soldiers. Peace cannot be concluded only from above. Peace must
      be won from below. We put no trust in the German generals, but
      we have faith in the German people. A peace concluded by the
      commanders-in-chief, without the active participation of the
      soldiers, would be precarious. I do not object to Kamenev's
      proposal as a matter of principle but because it is inadequate
      and too weak. I have no objections to a commission but I suggest
      that we keep an open mind on its functions; I dislike
      half-measures and propose that we should be given a free hand in
      this respect.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    From the Council of People's
    Commissars to the Revolutionary Military
    Committee







From The Council Of People's Commissars To The Revolutionary Military Committee







V. I. Lenin
From The Council Of People's Commissars
      To The Revolutionary Military Committee


Written: 10 November, 1917
      
First Published: In Izvestia
      12 November 1917
      No. 223. Published according to the newspaper text. 
      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 320

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The disruption of the food supply caused by war and
      mismanagement is being aggravated to the extreme by profiteers,
      marauders and their accomplices on the railways, on steamship
      lines, in transport offices, etc.

    
      At a time of great national hardship, criminal plunderers are
      jeopardising the health and lives of millions of soldiers and
      workers for their own gain.

    
      Such a state of affairs cannot be tolerated for a single day
      longer.

    
      The Council of People's Commissars orders the Revolutionary
      Military Committee to adopt the most vigorous measures to
      eradicate profiteering and sabotage, concealment of supplies,
      the malicious delay of freight, etc.

    
      All persons guilty of such actions are liable, by special
      decision of the Revolutionary Military Committee, to
      immediate arrest and custody. in the prisons of Kronstadt,
      pending their trial by revolutionary court martial.

    
      All public organisations must be drawn into the fight against
      the food plunderers.
    
V.Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    The Extraordinary All-Russia Congress
    of Soviets of Peasants' Deputies November
    10-25 (November 23-December 8),
    1917







The Extraordinary All-Russia Congress Of Soviets
      Of Peaseats' Deputies







V. I. Lenin

      The Extraordinary All-Russia Congress Of Soviets
      Of  Peasants' Deputies[See glossary entry]
November 10-25 (November 23-December 8), 1917


Written: 12-14 November, 1917
      
First Published: Various; listed under
      each section. 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 321-332

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription/HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 
1
Statement to the Bolshevik Group
      at the Extraordinary All-Russia Congress
      of Soviets of Peasants' Deputies[1]


      We demand most emphatically that the Bolsheviks insist, in the
      form of an ultimatum, on an open vote on the question of issuing
      an immediate invitation to several representatives of
      the Government.

    If the reading of this proposal and voting on it
    at the plenary session are refused, the whole Bolshevik group
    should walk out by way of protest.

    Lenin
Written on 12 November, 1917

      First Published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXIPublished according to the manuscript

2
Speech On The Agrarian Question November 14 (27)
Newspaper Report

      On the instructions of the Bolshevik group, Comrade Lenin
      delivered a speech setting forth the views of the Bolshevik
      Party on the agrarian question.

    
      He said that the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries had suffered
      defeat over the agrarian question, since it had advocated the
      confiscation of the landed estates, but refused to carry it into
      effect.

    
      Landed proprietorship forms the basis of feudal oppression, and
      the confiscation of the landed estates is the first step of the
      revolution in Russia. But the land question cannot be settled
      independently of the other problems of the revolution. A correct
      view of these problems can be derived from an analysis of the
      stages through which the revolution has passed. The first stage
      was the overthrow of the autocracy and the establishment of the
      power of the bourgeoisie and the landowners. The interests of
      the landowners were closely interwoven with those of the
      bourgeoisie and the banks. The second stage was the
      consolidation of the Soviets and a policy of compromise with the
      bourgeoisie. The mistake of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
      was that at that time they failed to oppose the policy of
      compromise on the plea that the masses were not sufficiently
      enlightened. A party is the vanguard of a class, and its duty is
      to lead the masses and not merely to reflect the average
      political level of the masses. But in order to lead those who
      vacillate the Left Socialist-Revolutionary comrades must
      themselves stop vacillating.

    
      Comrades Left Socialist-Revolutionaries! In July there began a
      period in which the masses of the people started breaking away
      from the policy of compromise, but to this very day the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries are stretching out a hand to the
      Avksentyevs, while offering the workers only their little
      finger. If compromise continues, the revolution is doomed. Only
      if the peasantry supports the workers can the problems of the
      revolution be solved. Compromise is an attempt on the part of
      the masses of workers, peasants and soldiers to get their needs
      satisfied by means of reforms, by concessions on the part of
      capital, without a socialist revolution. But it is impossible to
      give the people peace and land without overthrowing the
      bourgeoisie, without socialism. It is the duty of the revolution
      to put an end to compromise, and to put an end to compromise
      means taking the path of socialist revolution.

    
      Comrade Lenin went on to defend the instructions to the
      volost committees[2] and spoke of the necessity of breaking
      with the leading organs, such as the army committees, the
      Executive Committee of the Peasants' Deputies, etc. We adopted
      our law on the volost committees, he said, from the
      peasants. The peasants want land and the prohibition of hired
      labour; they want implements for the cultivation of the
      soil. And this cannot be obtained without defeating capital. You
      want land, we said to them, but the land is mortgaged and
      belongs to Russian and world capital. You are throwing down a
      challenge to capital, you are following a different path from
      ours; but we are at one with you in that we are marching, and
      must march, towards the social revolution. As for the
      Constituent Assembly, the speaker said that its work will depend
      on the mood in the country, but he added, trust in the mood, but
      don't forget your rifles.
    
      Comrade Lenin went on to deal with the question of the war. When
      he referred to the removal of Dukhonin and the appointment of
      Krylenko as Commander-in-Chief, there was laughter among the
      audience. It may be funny to you, he retorted, but the soldiers
      will condemn you for this laughter. If there are people here who
      think it funny that we removed a counter-revolutionary general
      and appointed Krylenko, who is against the general and has gone
      to conduct negotiations,[3]  we have nothing to say to them. We have
      nothing in common with those who do not recognise the need to
      fight the counter-revolutionary generals. Rather than have
      anything to do with such people we prefer to retire from power,
      go underground if necessary.
    
First Published in 1933 in Pravda No. 190
      28 November 1917
      Published according to the Pravda text

3
Draft Resolution

      The Peasants' Congress fully and in every way supports the law
      (decree) on land of October 26, 1917, approved by the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers'
      Deputies and published by the Council of People's Commissars as
      the provisional workers' and peasants' government of the Russian
      Republic. The Peasants' Congress declares its firm and
      unshakable resolve to ensure the implementation of this law,
      calls upon all peasants to support it unanimously and to carry
      it out themselves in the localities without delay, and also to
      elect to all and every responsible post and office only people
      who have proved not in word but in deed their complete devotion
      to the interests of the working and exploited peasants, their
      readiness and ability to uphold these interests against any
      resistance the landowners, capitalists, and their supporters or
      accomplices may offer.
    
      The Peasants' Congress also expresses its conviction that the
      full implementation of all the measures constituting the law on
      land is possible only if the workers' socialist revolution which
      began on October 25 is successful, for only the socialist
      revolution can ensure the transfer of the land to the working
      peasantry without compensation, the confiscation of the
      landowners' implements, full protection of the interests of
      agricultural wage-workers and the immediate commencement of the
      unconditional abolition of the entire system of capitalist
      wage-slavery, the proper and planned distribution of the
      products of both agriculture and industry among the various
      regions and the population of the country, control over the
      banks (without such control the people will not be masters of
      the land even though private property in land is abolished),
      all-round state assistance specifically to the working and
      exploited people, etc.
    
      Therefore the Peasants' Congress, fully supporting the
      Revolution of October 25, and supporting it precisely as a
      socialist revolution, declares its unswerving resolve to carry
      out, with due gradualness but without the slightest vacillation,
      measures aimed at the socialist transformation of the Russian
      Republic.
    
      A necessary condition for the victory of the socialist
      revolution, which alone can secure the lasting triumph and full
      implementation of the law on land, is the close alliance of the
      working and exploited peasantry with the working class—the
      proletariat—in all the advanced countries. In the Russian
      Republic the entire organisation and administration of the state
      from top to bottom must henceforth be based on such an
      alliance. Rejecting all and every attempt, direct and indirect,
      overt and covert, to return to a course that experience has
      rejected, to the course of conciliation with the bourgeoisie and
      the champions of bourgeois policy, this alliance alone can
      ensure the victory of socialism the world over.
    

      Written 14 November 1917
      First Published in Izvestia in  No. 226,
      28 November 1917
      Published according to the Izvestia text

4
Speech In Connection With The Statement
      Of A Vikzhel Spokesman
November 18 (December 1)
Newspaper Report

      Comrades, the Vikzhel statement is undoubtedly nothing but a
      misunderstanding. Can you imagine, for one moment, that troops,
      fully aware of their revolutionary duty and fighting for the
      people's interests, would approach Field Headquarters and begin
      smashing up everything and everyone, without making known their
      demands, without so much as explaining to the soldiers around
      II.Q. why they had come. You must realise, comrades, that that
      is impossible. A revolutionary army, conscious of what it is
      about, must make its demands known to those to whom it
      applies. When the demands were being made, much more was done;
      care was taken to make it quite clear that resistance meant
      resisting the people's will, that this was not a common but a
      moral crime against the people's freedom, interests and highest
      aspirations. A revolutionary army never fires the first shot,
      and acts in anger only against invaders and tyrants. Had it been
      otherwise, the word revolution would have lost its meaning. I
      feel I must draw your attention to the fact that while making
      its unverified charges, Vikzhel announces its "neutrality". That
      is something Vikzhel has no right to do. At. a time of
      revolutionary struggle, when every minute counts, when dissent
      and neutrality allow the enemy to put in his word, when he will
      certainly be heard, and when no haste is made to help the people
      in their struggle for their sacred rights. I cannot call such a
      stand neutrality; it is not neutrality; a revolutionary would
      call it incitement. (Applause.) By taking Such a stand you
      incite the generals to action; when you fail to support us, you
      oppose the people.

    
      To postpone the armistice is just what General Dukhonin
      wants. By assisting him you are sabotaging the armistice. Think
      of the grave responsibility that falls upon you, and consider
      what the people will say.
    
      Comrade Lenin went on to say that the telegraph services were
      being sabotaged in some areas. The government was left without
      information, while its opponents circulated absurd rumours. Take
      the allegation that the Polish battalions were opposing the
      government, although the Poles had repeatedly declared that they
      had not interfered and did not intend to interfere in Russian
      affairs; they have also informed us that they want an
      armistice.
 Published in   Izvestia No. 230
      19 November 1917
      Published according to theIzvestia text

5
Concluding Speech On The Agrarian Question
November 18 (December 1)Newspaper Report

      Comrade Lenin first showed that the accusation of anarchism made
      against the Bolsheviks by the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries had
      not been proved.

    
      In what way did socialists differ from anarchists? The
      anarchists did not recognise state power whereas the socialists,
      the Bolsheviks among them, did recognise it in the period of
      transition between the state of affairs then obtaining and the
      socialism towards which they were progressing.

    
      The Bolsheviks favoured a strong authority, but it must be a
      workers' and peasants' authority.
    
      All state power is compulsion, but until then it had always been
      the power of the minority, the power of the landowner and
      capitalist employed against the worker and peasant.
    
      He said that the Bolsheviks stood for the state power that would
      be a firm authority of the majority of the workers and peasants
      employed against the capitalists and landowners.
    
      Comrade Lenin then went on to show that the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries' resolution on the land had called the
      new government a people's socialist government, and dwelt on the
      points that could closely unite the Bolsheviks and Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries.
    
      The alliance of the peasants and workers was a basis for an
      agreement between the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
      Bolsheviks.
    
      It was an honest coalition, an honest alliance, but it would be
      an honest coalition at the summit too, between the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Bolsheviks, if the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries were more definite in stating
      their conviction that the revolution was a socialist
      revolution. It was a socialist revolution. The abolition of
      private property in land, the introduction of workers' control,
      the nationalisation of the banks—all these were measures
      that would lead to socialism. They were not socialism, but they
      were measures that would lead to socialism by gigantic
      strides. The Bolsheviks did not promise the workers and peasants
      milk and honey immediately, but they did say that a close
      alliance between the workers and the exploited peasantry, a
      firm, unwavering struggle for the power of the Soviets would
      lead to socialism, and any party that really wanted to be a
      people's party would have to state clearly and decisively that
      the revolution was a socialist revolution.
    
      And only in the event of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
      stating that clearly and unambiguously would the Bolsheviks'
      alliance with them grow and become stronger.
    
      It had been said that the Bolsheviks were against the
      socialisation of the land and could not, therefore, come to an
      agreement with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries.
    
      The Bolsheviks answered that they were indeed against the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries' socialisation of the land but that
      did not prevent an honest alliance with them.
    
      Today or tomorrow the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries would
      nominate their Minister of Agriculture, and the Bolsheviks would
      not vote against a law on the socialisation of the land if he
      proposed it; they would abstain from voting.
    
      In conclusion Comrade Lenin stressed that only an alliance of
      workers and peasants could acquire land and make peace.
    
      Among other things Comrade Lenin was asked what the Bolsheviks
      would do in the Constituent Assembly if the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries were there in a minority and proposed
      a bill on the socialisation of the land—would the
      Bolsheviks abstain from voting? Of course not. The Bolsheviks
      would vote for the bill hut would make the proviso that they
      were voting for it in order to support the peasants against
      their enemies.
    
Published  in Pravda No. 195
      4 December 1917
      Published according to the Pravda text

Footnotes

[1] Written
      in connect ion with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries'
      objections to the Bolshevik demand that Lenin should be invited
      to speak at the Congress in his capacity of Chairman of the
      Council of People's Commissars. They thought this would be
      prejudicial to the issue of power. On their motion, the Congress
      rejected the Bolshevik proposal, and Lenin addressed it as a
      member of the Bolshevik group. 

    

[2]
      The reference is to the instruction to the
      volost land committees approved by tire First
      All-Russia Congiess of Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers'
      Deputies on June 23 (July 6), 1917, and published as a law "On
      the volost Committees" on November 3 (16), 1917.

    

[3]
      The reference is to the start of the peace talks with Germany.
      Following the publication of the Decree on Peace, adopted by the
      Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets, the Soviet Government
      took practical steps to conclude a general democratic peace
      among the belligerents. On November 7 (20), 1917, it issued
      special directions to General Dukhonin, the Commander-in-Chief,
      ordering him to make an offer to the enemy command to stop
      military operations and open peace talks. The directions said
      the government deemed it necessary to make a formal proposal for
      an armistice between the belligerents without delay
      (Izvestia No. 221, November 10, 1917). But the
      counter-revolutionary top brass, who had contacts with the
      military in missions of the Entente, blocked the armistice in
      every possible way. On November 8 (21), the People's
      Commissariat for Foreign Affairs sent a note to the Allied
      ambassadors proposing an immediate cease-fire on all fronts and
      negotiations on peace. The Entente ambassadors met at the
      U.S. Embassy in Petrograd on November 9 (22) arid decided to
      ignore the Soviet government's note.
    

      The refusal of the Entente imperialists to support the Soviet
      Government's peace initiative and their active resistance to the
      conclusion of a peace, forced the Council of People's Commissars
      to start separate peace talks with Germany. On November 14 (27),
      word was received that the German High Command was prepared to
      start armistice talks. On the Soviet Government's proposal the
      talks postponed for five days to give the Allied Government
      another chance to make known their attitude on the peace
      proposal. On November 15 (28), the Soviet Government issued its
      appeal to the governments and peoples of all the belligerent
      countries urging them to join in the peace negotiations. There
      was no reply from the Allied powers.
    

      On November 19 (December 2), a Soviet peace delegation led by
      A. A. Joffe arrived in the neutral zone and proceeded to
      Best-Litovsk, where it met a delegation of the Austin-Hungarian
      bloc which included representatives of Bulgaria amid Turkey. A
      10-day cease-fire was arranged as a result of the talks of
      November 20-22 (December 3-5). The Soviet Government took the
      opportunity to try to turn the separate talks with Germany into
      negotiations for a general democratic peace. On November 24
      (December 7) it sent another note to the Entente ambassadors
      inviting them to join in the talks. This note was also
      ignored. On December 2 (15), the talks were resumed and that
      same day a 28-day cease-fire was agreed upon. It provided for a
      peace conference, which opened at Brest-Litovsk on December 9
      (22).
    


Collected Works Volume 26

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive








==========

## 
    Alliance Between the Workers and
    Exploited Peasants












Alliance Between the Workers and Exploited Peasants



Vladimir Lenin's

      Alliance Between the Workers and Exploited Peasants
    




Written: 

Published:
Source:
Translated:
Transcription\Markup:
Conal Tuohy
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2999).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.



      A letter to Pravda
    

      Today, Saturday, November 18, in the course of a speech I made
      at the Peasants' Congress, I was publicly asked a question to
      which I forthwith replied.  It is essential that this question
      and my reply should immediately be made known to all the reading
      public, for while formally speaking only in my own name, I was
      actually speaking in the name of the whole Bolshevik Party.
    
The matter was the following.
    
Touching on the question of an alliance between the Bolshevik
      workers and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, whom many
      peasants at present trust, I argued in my speech that this
      alliance can be an "honest coalition", an honest
      alliance, for there is no radical divergence of
      interests between the wage-workers and the working and exploited
      peasants.  Socialism is fully able to meet the
      interests of both. Only socialism can meet their
      interests. Hence the possibility and necessity for an "honest
      coalition" between the proletarians and the working and
      exploited peasantry. On the contrary, a "coalition" (alliance)
      between the working and exploited classes, on the one hand, and
      the bourgeoisie, on the other, cannot be an "honest
      coalition" because of the radical divergence of interests
      between these classes.
    
Imagine, I said, that there is a majority of Bolsheviks and a
      minority of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries in the government, or
      even, let us assume, only one Left Socialist-Revolutionary--the
      Commissar of Agriculture. Could the Bolsheviks practise an
      honest coalition under such circumstances?
    
They could; for, while they are irreconcilable in their fight
      against the counter-revolutionary elements (including the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionary and the defencist elements), the
      Bolsheviks would be obliged to abstain from voting on
      questions which concern purely Socialist-Revolutionary points in
      the land programme approved by the Second All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets.  Such, for instance, would be the point on equal land
      tenure and the redistribution of land among the small holders.
    
By abstaining from voting on such a point the Bolsheviks would not be
      changing their programme in the slightest.
      For, given the victory of socialism (workers' control over the
      factories, to be followed by their expropriation, the
      nationalisation of the banks, and the creation of a Supreme
      Economic Council for the regulation of the entire economic life
      of the country)--given that the workers would be obliged to
      agree to the transitional measures proposed by the small
      working and exploited peasants, provided such measures were
      not detrimental to the cause of socialism. Even
      Kautsky, when he was still a Marxist (1899-l909), frequently
      admitted--l said --that the measures of transition to socialism
      cannot be identical in countries with large-scale and those with
      small-scale farming.
    
We Bolsheviks would be obliged to abstain from voting when such
      a point was being decided in the Council of People's Commissars
      or in the Central Executive Committee, for if the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries (as well as the peasants who support
      them) agreed to workers' control, to the nationalisation of the
      banks, etc., equal land tenure would be only one of the measures
      of transition to full socialism. For the proletariat to
      impose such transitional measures would be absurd; it
      is obliged, in the interests of the victory of socialism, to
      yield to the small working and exploited peasants in
      the choice of these transitional measures, for they could do
      no harm to the cause of socialism.
    
Thereupon, a Left Socialist-Revolutionary (it was Comrade Feofilaktov,
      if I am not mistaken) asked me the following question:
    

      "How would the Bolsheviks act if in the Constituent Assembly
      the peasants wanted to pass a law on equal land tenure, while the bourgeoisie
      were opposed to the peasants and the decision depended on the Bolsheviks?"
    

      I replied: under such circumstances, when the cause of socialism
      would be ensured by the introduction of workers' control, the
      nationalisation of the banks, etc., the alliance between the
      workers and the working and exploited peasants would make it
      obligatory for the party of the proletariat to vote for the
      peasants and against the bourgeoisie. The Bolsheviks, in my
      opinion, would be entitled when the vote was being taken to make
      a declaration of dissent, to place on record their
      non-agreement, etc., but to abstain from voting under such
      circumstances would be to betray their allies in the fight
      for socialism because of a difference with them on a
      partial issue. The Bolsheviks would never betray the peasants in
      such a situation.  Equal land tenure and like measures
      cannot prejudice socialism if the power is in the hands
      of a workers' and peasants' government, if workers' control has
      been introduced, the banks nationalised, a workers' and
      peasants' supreme economic body set up to direct (regulate) the
      entire economic life of the country, and so forth.
    
Such was my reply.
    

      N. Lenin
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Decree on the Right of
    Recall







Draft Decree On The Right Of Recall







V. I. Lenin
Draft Decree On The Right Of Recall[1]


Written: 19 November, 1917
      
First Published: In the Minutes of
      the Central Executive Committee of Soviets of Workers’,
      soldiers’, Peasants’ and Cossack,’ Deputies,
      second Convocation, Moscow, 1918

      
      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 336-337

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      No elective institution or representative assembly can be
      regarded as being truly democratic and really representative of
      the people’s will unless the electors’ right to recall
      those elected is accepted and exercised. This fundamental
      principle of true democracy applies to all representative
      assemblies without exception, including the Constituent
      Assembly.

    
      Because the system of proportional representation is more
      democratic than the majority system, it demands more complex
      measures for the exercise of the right of recall, that is, the
      actual subordination of the elected to the people. But it would
      be betraying democracy and abdicating the basic principles and
      tasks of the socialist revolution, which has begun in Russia, to
      refuse, on that ground, to practise the right of recall, or to
      hamper or restrict its exercise in any way. What proportional
      representation demands is not a curtailment of the right of
      recall but a mere change of form.

    
      Since the system of proportional representation is based on
      acceptance of the party system and the conduct of elections by
      organised parties, any major change in the balance of class
      forces and the relation of classes to parties, especially in the
      event of splits within major parties, necessarily produces the
      need for a re-election in any electoral district where there is
      a clear and obvious discrepancy between the will of the various
      classes and their strength, on the one hand, and the party
      composition of those elected, on the other. True democracy makes
      it imperative that the appointment of re-elections should not
      depend only on the institution to be re-elected, that is, that
      the desire on the part of those elected to retain their seats
      should not work against the exercise of the people’s will
      to recall its representatives.

    
      In view of this, the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of
      the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies, resolves:

    
      The Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies and the
      Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies of each electoral district
      shall have the right to appoint re-elections to all city,
      Zemstvo and all other representative institutions in general,
      not excluding the Constituent Assembly. The Soviets shall also
      have the right to set the date for the re-elections, which shall
      be held in the usual manner, in strict conformity with the
      principles of the system of proportional representation.

    
Footnotes

[1]
      
      Placed before the All—Russia Central Executive Committee on
      November 21 (December 4), 1917, by the Bolshevik group. The need
      for such a decree was substantiated by Lenin (see
      pp. 338-40). The right of recall was in principle upheld by a
      majority of the Committee; two members voted against, arid one
      abstained. The draft was referred to a Co-ordinating Committee
      with the participation of Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. It
      introduced amendments to Lenin's draft, in which the right to
      appoint elections was vested in congresses of Soviets of
      Workers', Soldiers' amid Peasants Deputies (instead of the
      Soviets themselves), while the Soviets were empowered to appoint
      elections upon the demand of more than half the electorate in a
      given electoral district. The draft worked out by the
      Co-ordinating Committee was unanimously adopted by the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee and published in Invests
      No. 233 on November 23 (December 6).

    

      Under it, several peasants' and army congresses passed decisions
      recalling deputies from the Constituent Assembly. They were
      Cadets, Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and
      Mensheviks. including Avksemrtyev, Gots, Milyukov, and others.


    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Report on the Right of Recall at a
    Meeting of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee November 21 (December 4),
    1917







Report on the Right of Recall at a Meeting of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee







V. I. Lenin
Report on the Right of Recall at a Meeting of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee
November 21 (December 4), 1917


Written: 21 November, 1917
      
First Published: Pravda
      no. 196, 5 December, 1917, and Soldatskaya Pravda
      No. 87, 24 November, 1917 Published here according to the
      Soldatskaya Pravda text.

      Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 338-340

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      The question of re-election is one of actually implementing the
      democratic principle. ft is the accepted practice in all leading
      countries that only the elected are entitled to speak in the
      language of state legislation. But having allowed the right of
      summons for the conduct of affairs of state, the bourgeoisie
      intentionally withheld the right of recall—the right of
      actual control.

    
      In all revolutionary periods in history, a prominent feature in
      the struggle for constitutional changes has been the fight for
      the right of recall.

    
      Democratic representation exists and is accepted under all
      parliamentary systems, but this right of representation is
      curtailed by the fact that the people have the right to cast
      their votes once in every two years, and while it often turns
      out that their votes have installed those who help to oppress
      them, they are deprived of the democratic right to put a stop to
      that by removing these men.

    
      But this democratic right of recall has survived in countries
      with old democratic traditions, for instance, in some cantons of
      Switzerland and some states of America.

    
      Any great revolution clearly confronts the people not only with
      the use of existing statutes but also with the framing of
      appropriate new statutes. It is necessary, therefore, in view of
      the impending convocation of the Constituent Assembly, to review
      the new electoral statutes.

    
      The Soviets have been created by the working people themselves,
      by their revolutionary energy and initiative, and that is the
      only guarantee of their working entirely to promote the
      interests of the masses. The truly popular nature of the Soviets
      is evident in the fact that every peasant sends his
      representatives to the Soviet and is also entitled to recall
      them.

    
      Various parties in this country have been in power. The last
      time power passed from one party to another there was a
      revolution, a rather stormy revolution, but if we had had the
      right of recall, a simple vote would have sufficed.

    
      There is this word freedom. In the old days it meant freedom for
      the bourgeoisie to manipulate its millions for swindling,
      freedom to use its forces through such swindling. We have done
      with the bourgeoisie and that kind of freedom. The state is an
      institution for coercion. In the old days, it was the coercion
      of the whole people by a handful of money-bags. We want to turn
      the state into an institution enforcing the will of the
      people. We want to institute coercion in the working
      people’s interests.

    
      Failure to grant the right of recall from the Constituent
      Assembly is failure to elicit the revolutionary will of the
      people, it is usurpation of the people’s rights. We do have
      proportional representation, which is indeed the most
      democratic. Under this system it may be somewhat difficult to
      introduce the right of recall but the difficulties entailed are
      purely technical and are fairly easy to overcome. In any case
      there is no contradiction between proportional representation
      and the right of recall.

    
      The people do not cast their votes for individuals but for
      parties. The party spirit is rather strong in Russia, and as far
      as the people are concerned each party has a definite political
      character. That is why any party split must bring confusion
      unless the right of recall is provided for. The
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party enjoyed great influence. But a
      split occurred after the election lists had been put out. The
      lists cannot be altered, nor can the convocation of the
      Constituent Assembly be postponed. As a result, the people
      actually voted for a party which had ceased to exist. This was
      proved by the Left-wing Second Peasant
      Congress.  It turned out that the peasants were not misled
      by individuals but by the party split. This state of things
      needs to be set right. The direct, consistent and immediate
      democratic principle, namely, the right of recall, must be
      introduced.

    
      One thing we should be wary of is being faced with an
      unrepresentative election. Given a high level of mass
      consciousness—compare the revolutions of 1905 and
      1917—there is nothing to fear from introducing the right of
      re-election.

    
      The people were told that the Soviet is a plenipotentiary organ:
      they believed it and acted upon that belief. The process of
      democratisation must be carried forward and the right of recall
      introduced.

    
      The right of recall should be given to the Soviets, as the best
      embodiment of the idea of state power, of coercion. The transfer
      of power from one party to another may then take place
      peacefully, by mere re-election. 

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

##  
    Speech at the First All-Russia
    Congress of the Navy, November 22 (December
    5), 1917.







Speech At The First All-Russia Congress Of The Navy November 22 (December 5), 1917







V. I. Lenin
Speech At The First All-Russia Congress Of The
      Navy[1]
November 22 (December 5), 1917
Minutes


Delivered: 22 November, 1917
      
First Published: In December 1917, in
      the pamphlet, N. Lenin, Material on the Agrarian
      Question, Priboi Publishers, Petersburg.. 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 341-346

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      On behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars Comrade
      Lenin greeted the army of sailors, assembled in congress, who
      have proved themselves to be dedicated fighters for the
      liberation of the working classes.

    
      Lenin went on to analyse the current situation. He said the
      Kerensky government’s collapse had been inevitable in view
      of its policy of conciliation, which was not aimed at satisfying
      the needs of the broad masses, and was based on the principle of
      safeguarding all the interests of the bourgeoisie, the oppressor
      class. He continued:

    
      “But alongside the Provisional Government were the Soviets
      of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, which were
      produced by the revolutionary initiative of the insurgent
      people, and which, as time goes on, are rallying ever wider
      sections of the working masses. In Russia the people have
      produced and given support to a truly popular government,
      something no other European revolution has achieved, and the
      credit for this accrues to the Soviets alone. The oppressed
      masses were confronted with a highly difficult task, that of
      building a new state on their own. You can see how much effort
      the bourgeoisie has thrown into its resistance to us, how
      attempts are being made to sabotage our activity, and what a
      flood of lies and slander is being poured on us in and out of
      season.

    
      “Accusations of terrorism and violence are being heaped on
      us, but we take these in our stride. We say we are not
      anarchists, and are committed to establishing a state. However,
      the capitalist state has to be smashed and the power of the
      capitalists destroyed. It is our task to build a new socialist
      state. We shall be working tirelessly towards that goal, and we
      shall be neither intimidated nor deterred by any
      obstacles. Evidence of this is to be seen in the new
      Government’s first steps. But the transition to a new
      system is an extremely involved process and requires a firm
      government to make it easier. Until recently, power has been in
      the hands of monarchs and the henchmen of the bourgeoisie. All
      their efforts and policies have served the purpose of coercing
      the masses. By contrast we say: there must be firm power,
      coercion is necessary, but we shall direct it against the
      handful of capitalists, the bourgeois class. We shall always
      retaliate with coercion against any attempts—hopeless and
      mad attempts they must be—to resist Soviet power. In every
      case, responsibility for this will fall upon those who resist.”

    
      Comrade Lenin then discussed the establishment of a state
      machine which, in the interests of the people, should be free
      from red tape and should leave a lot of room for the operation
      of the nation’s creative forces. He went on:

    
      “The bourgeoisie and bourgeois intellectual sections of the
      population are subverting the people’s power in every
      possible way. The working masses have no one to look to but
      themselves. There is no doubt that the great tasks, facing the
      people are tremendously difficult. But there is need for
      self-assurance, there is need for all the elements awakened
      among the people and capable of action to join existing
      organisations and those that will be set up by the working
      masses. Divided the masses are helpless; united they are
      strong. They have gained self-assurance and, refusing to be put
      out by the bourgeoisie’s badgering, they have set about
      running the state on their own. Difficulties may crop up at the
      start, due to inadequate training. But the art of practical
      government, which has been monopolised by the bourgeoisie, must
      be mastered. In this respect the Navy has shown itself to be
      well to the fore, offering a brilliant example of the creative
      capacity latent in the working masses.”

    
      Comrade Lenin then went on to discuss in detail the major
      questions of the current situation: land, workers’ policy,
      the nationalities problem, and peace.

    
      The Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and
      Soldiers’ Deputies adopted the Decree on Land, in which the
      Bolsheviks reproduced the principles stated in the peasant
      mandates in their entirety. This was a departure from the
      Social-Democratic programme, for the mandates were drawn up in
      the spirit of the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ programme, but
      this was proof that the people’s power had no intention of
      imposing its will on the people but tried to meet them half-way.

    
      Whatever the solution of the land problem, whatever the
      programme serving as a basis for the transfer of the land to the
      peasants, it would in no way hamper the strong alliance of the
      workers and peasants. The important thing was that if the
      peasants had pressed for the abolition of landownership for
      ages, it had to be abolished.

    
      The speaker emphasised the tremendous importance of having a
      strong alliance of workers and peasants, for the question of
      land was closely bound up with that of industry, and the
      agrarian revolution had to go hand in hand with a ploughing up
      of Capitalist relations.

    
      The onward march of the Russian revolution had shown that the
      slavish policy of conciliating the landowners and capitalists
      had been a soap bubble. The will of the majority would be
      uppermost; it would be carried out by a working people’s
      alliance, an honest alliance of workers and peasants on the
      basis of their common interests. Parties came and went, but the
      working people remained, and the speaker urged dedication to the
      strengthening of this alliance.

    
      Let the Navy, he said, dedicate itself to keeping this alliance
      as the foundation of state affairs; if it remained sound,
      nothing could frustrate the cause of transition to socialism.

    
      Turning to the nationalities question, Lenin said, we should
      take note of Russia’s highly patchy national composition,
      with the Russians making up only about 40 per cent, and the
      majority consisting of other nationalities. National oppression
      under the tsars, unmatched in savagery and absurdity, turned the
      rightless nationalities into great reservoirs of fierce hatred
      for the monarchs. It was not surprising that all Russians had
      been included in their hatred for those who went to the extent
      of prohibiting the use of the mother tongue, and doomed masses
      of people to illiteracy. It was assumed that the privileged
      Russians would try to retain
      the advantages which had been so assiduously preserved for them by
      Nicholas II and Kerensky.

    
      “We are told that Russia will disintegrate and split up
      into separate republics but we have no reason to fear this. We
      have nothing to fear, whatever the number of independent
      republics. The important thing for us is not where the state
      border runs, but whether or not the working people of all
      nations remain allied in their struggle against the bourgeoisie,
      irrespective of nationality.(Stormy applause.)

      “If the Finnish bourgeoisie are buying arms from the
      Germans in order to use them against their workers, we offer the
      latter an alliance with the Russian working people. Let the
      bourgeoisie start their filthy petty squabbles and their trading
      over frontiers, the workers of all countries and nationalities
      will not fall out over that sort of thing. (Stormy
      applause.)

      “We are now ’conquering’ Finland—this is
      using a nasty word—but not the way the robber barons of
      international capitalism conquered it. We are winning Finland
      over by giving her complete freedom to live in alliance with us
      or with others, guaranteeing full support for the working people
      of all nationalities against the bourgeoisie of all
      countries. It is not an alliance based on treaties, but on the
      solidarity of the exploited against the exploiters.

    
      “We now see a national movement in the Ukraine and we say
      that we stand unconditionally for the Ukrainian people’s
      complete and unlimited freedom. We have to wipe out that old
      bloodstained and dirty past when the Russia of the capitalist
      oppressors acted as the executioner of other peoples. We are
      determined to wipe out that past, and leave no trace of
      it. (Stormy applause.)

      “We are going to tell the Ukrainians that as Ukrainians
      they can go ahead and arrange their life as they see fit.
      But we are going to stretch out a fraternal hand to the
      Ukrainian workers and tell them that together with them we are
      going to fight against their bourgeoisie and ours. Only a
      socialist alliance of the working people of all countries can
      remove all ground for national persecution and
      strife. (Stormy applause.)

      “I shall now touch on the question of war. We have started
      a resolute struggle against the war brought on by the clash of
      robbers over their spoils. Until now all parties have spoken of
      this struggle but have not gone beyond words and hypocrisy. Now
      the struggle for peace is on. It is a difficult struggle. It is
      highly naive to think that peace can be easily attained, and
      that the bourgeoisie will hand it -to us on a platter as soon as
      we mention it. Those who ascribed this view to the Bolsheviks
      were cheating. The capitalists are embroiled in a life and death
      struggle over the share-out of the booty. One thing is clear: to
      kill war is to defeat capital and Soviet power has started the
      struggle to that end. We have published and will continue to
      publish secret treaties. We are not going to be deterred in this
      by anyone’s anger or slander. The bourgeois gentlemen are
      beside themselves because the people see why they have been
      driven to the slaughter. They threaten Russia with the prospect
      of another war, in which she will find herself isolated. But we
      are not going to be deterred by the bourgeoisie’s fierce
      hatred for us and for our peace movement. It will be quite
      futile for them to try to incite the peoples against each other
      in this fourth year of the war. They are sure to fail. It is not
      only in this country, but in all the belligerent countries that
      the struggle against the imperialist government at home is
      welling up. There has been an open mutiny in the navy even in
      Germany, which the imperialists tried for decades to turn into
      an armed camp with the entire government machine geared to
      stamping out the slightest sign of popular discontent. To
      understand the significance of this mutiny, one has to be aware
      that police reprisals in Germany are unparalleled. But
      revolution is not made to order; it results from an outburst of
      mass indignation. Whereas it was quite easy to drive out a band
      of nitwits, like Romanov and Rasputin,’31 it is immensely
      more difficult to fight against the organised and strong clique
      of German imperialists, both crowned and uncrowned. But we can
      and have to work hand in hand with the revolutionary class of
      working people in all countries. That is the path the Soviet
      Government has taken by making public the secret treaties and
      showing that the rulers of all countries are brigands. That is
      not propaganda by word but by deed.—(Stormy
      applause.)

      In conclusion the speaker dealt with the question of the peace
      talks and said:

    
      “When the Germans gave an evasive reply to
      our demand not to transfer any troops to the Western and Italian
      fronts, we broke off the talks and shall resume them in a little
      while. And when we do tell this to the world, no German worker
      will remain ignorant of the fact that the peace talks had been
      broken off through no fault of ours. In the hypothetical case of
      the German working class siding with their government of
      imperialist plunderers and confronting us with the need to
      continue the war, the Russian people—who have always shed
      blood without a murmur, and have done the will of an oppressive
      government when quite ignorant of its aims and
      purposes—will undoubtedly throw their weight into the
      struggle with so much more courage and vigour when it came to
      fighting for socialism and freedom threatened with the bayonets
      of the world bourgeoisie. But we put our trust in the
      international solidarity of the working masses, who will
      surmount every obstacle and barrier in the struggle for
      socialism.— (Stormy applause.)

Footnotes

[1]
      
      The First All-Russia Congress of tire Navy was held at Petrograd
      from November 18 to 25 (December 1 to 8), 1917. On its agenda
      were the following items: the current situation arid the
      question of power; the activity of the Central Committee of the
      Navy; reforms in the Navy Department, etc. It was addressed by
      Lenin, who spoke on tire current situation. It discussed the
      activity of Tsentroflot which had betrayed its electors, and
      endorsed the activity of the Revolutionary Naval Committee which
      had dissolved Tsentroflot. It approved the organisational scheme
      for the administration of the Navy Department. and elected 20
      men to the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of the Soviets
      of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies. The Congress sent
      a message of greetings to the Council of People's Commissars and
      an appeal to the whole of Russia.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Foreword to the Pamphlet, Material
      On the Agrarian Question







Foreword To The Pamphlet, Material On The Agrarian Question







V. I. Lenin
Foreword To The Pamphlet,
Material On The Agrarian Question


Written: 27 November, 1917
      
First Published: December, 1917, in
      the pamphlet. N. Lenin,

      Material on the Agrarian Question, Priboi Publishers, Petersburg
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 347-348

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

    


      The present pamphlet is a collection (made on the initiative of
      one of the Bolsheviks and not the author's) of my most important
      articles and speeches on the land question which are suitable
      for popular reading. They date from the end of April to the end
      of October 1917, and are supplemented by the

      Resolution of the April Conference of the
      R.S.D.L.P.(Bolsheviks),

      and the
      Decree on Land, adopted by the Second All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies on October 26,
      1917.[1] I
      wrote the original texts (that is, the drafts) of both
      these documents.

    
      Taken together, these documents and articles give an accurate
      picture of how Bolshevik views developed over the six months of
      the revolution and how these views were applied in. practice.

    
      I also refer the reader to my article,
      "From a Publicist's
      Diary. Peasants and Workers", in the newspaper Rabochy
      (Petersburg, September 11 (August 29), 1917, No. 6).
      It gives a
      detailed analysis of the summarised peasants' Mandate which
      appeared in Izvestia Vserossiiskogo Soveta Krestyanskikh
      Deputatov No. 88, of August 19, and which was incorporated
      in the Decree on Land of October 26, 1917. Two months before the
      October 25 revolution, this article explained that it was
      necessary for the workers "to change the basic line pursued by
      the worker in addressing the peasant".
    
N. Lenin
    

      Petersburg.
      November 27, 1917.
    

Footnotes

[1]

      See section Decree on Land from the
      Second All Congress of
      Soviets—Transcriber
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Outline Programme For Peace
    Negotiations 







Outline Programme For Peace Negotiations







V. I. Lenin
Outline Programme
      For Peace Negotiations[1]



Written: 27 November, 1917
      
First Published: 1929 in Lenin
      Miscellany XI. Published according to the manuscript. 

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 349-350

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      (1) The talks shall be political and economic.
    (2) The main theme of the political talks
    and the basic principle shall be: “No annexations or
    indemnities”.

    (3) Concept of annexation:

    (a) non-acceptability of the definition of
    annexation as lands integrated after the proclamation of the
    present war.[The definition of annexation
    under which only lands integrated after the proclamation of the
    war are regarded as annexed is rejected.]
(b) any territory shall be deemed to be
    annexed whose population, over the last few decades (since the
    second half of the 19th century), has expressed dissatisfaction
    with the integration of their territory into another state, or its
    status in the state, regardless of whether such dissatisfaction
    has been expressed in writings, decisions of meetings, assemblies,
    municipal councils and similar institutions, in state and
    diplomatic acts, arising from the national movement in these
    territories, in national friction, clashes, disturbances, etc.133

    (1) Official recognition for each
    (non-sovereign) nation, which is part of a given belligerent
    country, of the right to free self-determination, including
    secession and formation of an independent state; (2) the right to
    self-determination shall be realised through a referendum of the
    whole population of the territory seeking self-determination; (3)
    the geographical boundaries of the territory seeking
    self-determination shall be established by democratically elected
    representatives of the territory and contiguous territories; (4)
    preliminary conditions guaranteeing the exercise of the right of
    nations to free self-determination:

    (a) withdrawal of troops from the
    territory seeking self-determination;

    (b) return to the territory of refugees
    and inhabitants expelled by the authorities since the outbreak of
    war;

    (c) establishment in the given territory
    of a caretaker administration consisting of democratically elected
    representatives of the nation seeking self-determination, with the
    right (among others) of implementing Clause (b);

    (d) establishment under the caretaker
    administration of commissions of the contracting parties with the
    right of reciprocal control;

    (e) the expenditure on implementing
    Clauses (b) and (c) shall be covered from a special fund set up by
    the occupying party.

    
Footnotes

[1]

      Written , it would appear, in connection with the discussion by
      the Soviet Government on November 27 (December 10), 1917, of
      instructions to the Soviet delegation empowered to negotiate a
      peace with Germany at the peace conference at Brest-Litovsk. The
      government decision on this question said: 'Instruction on the
      Talks, on the Basis of the Decree on Peace."

    The peace conference opened on December 9 (22),
    1917, and was attended by the Soviet delegation and those of the
    Quadruple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria and
    Turkey). At the first sitting tire Soviet delegation read out a
    declaration on the peace terms. The other side appeared to agree
    to conduct the talks on these terms, but in fact this preliminary
    period already revealed Germany's annexationist intentions. On
    January 5 (18), the delegates of the Quadruple Alliance made known
    their govern-merits' territorial claims to the Soviet
    delegation. This included a part of Russia which was to be ceded
    to Germany and Austria-Hungary (a territory of more than 150,000
    square kilometers):

      Poland, Lithuania , a part of Estonia and Latvia, and also
      sizable areas inhabited by Ukrainians and Byelorussians. 

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Decree on the Arrest of the Leaders of
    the Civil War Against the Revolution
  







Decree On The Arrest Of The Leaders Of The Civil War Against The Revolution







V. I. Lenin
Decree On The Arrest Of The Leaders
      Of The Civil War Against
      The Revolution


Written: 28 November, 1917
      
First Published: 29 November, 1917, in
      Pravda No. 23 (evening edition) and Izvestia,
      No. 239 29 November, 1917. Published according to the
      manuscript. 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1972,
      pp. 351

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Members of leading bodies of the Cadet Party, as a party of
      enemies of the people, are liable to arrest and trial by
      revolutionary tribunal.  Local Soviets are ordered to
      exercise special surveillance over the Cadet Party in view of
      its connection with the Kornilov-Kaledin civil war against the
      revolution.  
This decree enters into effect from the time
      of signing.  
V. Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of People's Commissar
    

      Petrograd, November 28, 1917,
      10.30 p.m.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    The Tasks of the Public Library In
    Petrograd 







The Tasks Of The Public Library In Petrograd







V. I. Lenin
The Tasks Of The Public Library
      In Petrograd


Written: x November, 1917
      
First Published: 1933 in Lenin
      Miscellany XII. Published according to the
      manuscript. Published according to the manuscript. 

      
Source: Lenin's Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1972,
      pp. 351

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters
      
      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      It takes knowledge to participate in the revolution with
      intelligence, purpose and success.

    
      Because tsarism had played havoc with public education over a
      period of many years, the library service in Petrograd is in a
      very bad state.

    
      The following changes, based on principles long practised in the
      free countries of the West, especially Switzerland and the
      United States, must be made immediately and unconditionally:

    
      (1) The public library (the former Imperial Library) must
      immediately start an exchange of books with all public and state
      libraries in Petrograd and the provinces and with foreign
      libraries (in Finland, Sweden, etc.).

    
      (2) The forwarding of books from one library to
      another must be made post-free by law.

    
      (3) The library’s reading-room must be open, as is
      the practice with private libraries and reading-rooms for the
      rich in civilised countries,

    
      from 8.00 a.m. to 11.00 p.m. daily, not excluding Sundays and holidays.

    
      (4) The required personnel must be immediately transferred to
      the Public Library from the various offices of the Ministry of
      Education (with more women, in view of the military demand for
      men), where nine-tenths of the staff are engaged not merely in
      useless, but in downright harmful work.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee, December 1(14),
    1917







Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, December 1(14), 1917







V. I. Lenin
Meeting Of The All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee
December 1(14), 1917


Delivered: 1 December, 1917
      
First Published: 19 December, 1917,
      Pravda No. 207. 

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1972,
      pp. 351

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
1.
Speech On The Constituent Assembly

      Considered apart from the circumstances of the class war, which
      has developed into civil war, we so far do not know of a more
      perfect institution for determining the will of the people than
      the Constituent Assembly. But we must not indulge in
      fancies. The Constituent Assembly will have to function under
      civil war conditions; the Kaledinite bourgeois elements have
      started a civil war.

    
      After attempting to drag out the insurrection in Moscow, after
      the unsuccessful attempt on the part of Kerensky to bring troops
      against Petrograd, after the fruitless attempt to organise the
      counter-revolutionary high-ranking officers of the army, these
      elements are now endeavouring to organise an uprising on the
      Don. The attempt is hopeless, since the working Cossacks are
      opposed to the Kaledinites.

    
      Replying to the charge of persecuting the Cadet Party, Comrade
      Lenin said: “The class struggle must not be regarded
      separately from one’s political opponents. When it is sald
      that the Cadet Party is not a strong group, it is not true. The
      Cadet Central Committee is the political general staff of the
      bourgeois class. The Cadets have absorbed all propertied
      classes; they have been joined by elements that stood to the
      right of the Cadets. They all support the Cadet
      Party.

    
      “We are being called upon to convene the Constituent
      Assembly in the form in which it was first planned. Under no
      circumstances. It was planned against the interests of the
      people. We made the revolution so as to have guarantees that the
      Constituent Assembly would not be used against the people, and
      in order that the guarantees would be in the
      hands of the government. Our decree states clearly and
      unambiguously when the Constituent Assembly will be convened.ise
      It contains an exact answer to that question. Do not try any
      thought-readingÃwe are concealing nothing. We said that we shall
      convene the Constituent Assembly as soon as four hundred
      deputies have arrived. We are not to blame that the elections
      took place later than appointed. In certain localities the
      Soviets themselves appointed later election dates. Since the
      elections were held on various dates, it was necessary to
      determine how many deputies are required in order to open the
      Constituent Assembly. An attempt to convene it irrespective of
      the number of deputies present has been made, taking advantage
      of the fact that the number is not indicated in the law. What
      would be the position of a government that permitted such a
      thing? The Soviet government did the right thing in decreeing
      the number of deputies necessary for the Constituent Assembly to
      be deemed properly constituted. That is what the Soviet
      government did. Those who are not in agreement should criticise
      the decree. But if we hear insinuations and guesses instead of
      criticism, we brush them aside.

    
      “When a revolutionary class is fighting the propertied
      classes that offer resistance, the resistance must be
      crushed. And we shall crush the resistance of the propertied
      classes, using the same means as they used to crush the
      proletariat—no other means have been invented.

    
      “You said the bourgeoisie must be isolated. But the Cadets
      are actually starting civil war under cover of a formally
      democratic demand, the demand for a Constituent Assembly. They
      say they want, to sit in the Constituent Assembly and organise
      civil war at the same time. And you reply to that by talk about
      isolation.

    
      “We are not merely persecuting non-observers of
      formalities, we are levelling direct political accusations
      against a political party. The French revolutionaries acted in
      this way. This is our reply to those peasants who elected
      without realising whom they were electing. Let the people know
      that the Constituent Assembly is being summoned in a way
      somewhat different from what Kerensky intended. We have
      introduced the right of recall, and the Constituent Assembly
      will not be quite the thing the bourgeoisie planned. Although
      only a few days remain before the Constituent Assembly is
      summoned, the bourgeoisie are organising civil war, intensifying
      sabotage and undermining the armistice. We shall not let
      ourselves be deceived by formal slogans. The bourgeoisie would
      like to sit in the Constituent Assembly and at the same time
      organise civil war. Let them examine the substance of our
      accusation against the Cadet Party; let them prove that the
      Cadet Party is not the general staff of the civil war, an
      obviously hopeless war that is drenching the country in
      blood. Comrade Steinberg has not attempted to prove that. He has
      forgotten all that has been revealed about the contacts between
      the Cadets and Kornilov; it was not we, but Chernov, our
      political opponent, who revealed those contacts. It is proposed
      that we catch the little men, but we shall not hunt for
      particular individuals in order to hide our political accusation
      against the general staff of a whole class.”

    
      Comrade Lenin then dealt with the remark that the Bolsheviks had
      also been proclaimed enemies of the people.

    

      “They threatened to proclaim us enemies of the
      people,” he said, “but they did not do so. They did
      not dare. We said to them at that time, ÃWell, try it, if you
      can; try to tell the people that the Bolshevik Party, as a
      party, as a trend, is the enemy of the people’. They did
      not dare; they hunted down individuals, they resorted to
      slander. We said, ‘You cannot proclaim us enemies of the
      people; you have not a single objection in principle to bring
      against the Bolsheviks; all you can do is to spread
      calumnies.’ Our accusation against the Cadet Party puts an
      end to petty manoeuvrcs in the political struggle. We shall tell
      the people the truth. We shall tell the people that their
      interests are superior to the interests of a democratic
      institution. We must not return to the old prejudices, which
      subordinate the inter~ ests of the people to formal
      democracy. The Cadets cry, All Power to the Constituent
      Assembly. But what they mean in fact is, All Power to
      Kaledin. The people must be told that, and the people will
      approve our action.”
    
2
Resolution On The Decree
      Concerning The Cadet Party

      Having heard the explanations by spokesmen of the Council of
      People’s Commissars concerning the Decree declaring the
      Cadets a party of enemies of the people and ordering the arrest
      of the members of that Party’s governing bodies, and
      surveillance by the Soviets over the party as a whole, the
      Central Executive Committee reaffirms the need to press forward
      the most vigorous struggle against bourgeois counter-revolution,
      which is led by the Cadet Party, and which has started a fierce
      civil war against the very foundations of the workers’ and
      peasants’ revolution.

    
      The Central Executive Committee assures the Council of
      People’s Commissars of its continued support in this matter
      and rejects the protests of political groups whose vacillation
      has been undermining the dictatorship of the proletariat and the
      poor peasants.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech Delivered at the Second
    All-Russia Congress of Soviets of
    Peasants’ Deputies, December 2 (15),
    1917








Speech Delivered At The Second All-Russia
Congress Of Soviets Of Peasants' Deputies






 V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At The
Second All-Russia Congress Of Soviets Of Peasants’ Deputies
December 2 (15), 1917 
Delivered: 2(15) December, 1917
First Published: Izvestia, No. 244, December 6, 1917;
Published according the typewritten copy of the Minutes. Source: Lenin's Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pp. 357-360 Translated: Yuri
Sdobnikov and George Hanna, Edited by George Hanna Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles Farrell and David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive December, 2000 
Comrades, at the last Extraordinary Congress of Peasants’ Deputies I
spoke as a member of the Bolshevik group and not as a member of the Council of
People’s Commissars, I am speaking in the same capacity today, for I consider it
important that the opinion of the Party of the Bolsheviks should be known to this
Congress of Peasants’ Deputies.
When I arrived here I heard part of the speech of the last speaker, who, turning to
me, told you that I wanted to disperse you at the point of the bayonet. Comrades, Russia
has grown too mature to suffer anyone to rule her. You know that from the moment the army
turned their weapons to win freedom, from the moment it became possible for the peasant
in uniform to meet and arrange matters with the peasant not in uniform, from that moment
there has been no fcre,e that can break the will of the people, the will of the peasants
and workers.
Comrades, I want to tell you how we understand the Revolution of October 25. Comrades,
it has been said here that a new wave of revolution may sweep the Soviets away. I say
“No”. I am firmly convinced that the Soviets will never perish; the
Revolution of October 25 proved that. The Soviets will never perish, for they were formed
as far back as the first revolution of 1905; they were formed after the February
revolution, and they were not formed on the initiative of any individual, but from below,
by the will of the masses. There can be no restrictions and no red tape, for they have
been formed by the will of the people, and the people are free to recall their
representatives at any moment. The Soviets are superior to any parliament, they are
superior to any constituent assembly, (Commotion and cries: That’s a lie!)
The Party of the Bolsheviks has always declared that the supreme body is the Soviets.
That cannot be called a lie, because the revolutioris in Europe that overthrew monarchies
formed bourgeois republics with the help of constituent assemblies, There has never
before been a revolution such as ours anywhere in the world, It is said that the
Revolution of October 25 created only “a Bolshevik government”. I might say
that there are not only Bolsheviks in the Council of People’s COMhnissars. Those of
you who remember the First Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’
Deputies will know that the Bolsheviks were then in the minority; but, having learned the
meaning of the policy of compromise from experience, the Second Congress of
Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, whieh represented the people, gave a
majority to the Bolshevik Party. When they tell me that bayonets may be directed against
the Soviets and shout it from the columns of the hostile press, I simply laugh. The
bayonets are in the hands of the workers, the soldiers and the peasants, and as long as
they are they will never be directed against the Soviets. Let the counter-revolution turn
its bayonets on the Soviets, it will not scare them.
Passing to the question of the Constituent Assembly, I must say that the Constituent
Assembly can help only if the people themselves are free to develop and build up a new
life. And I ask you: Is that the case?
I am telling you what you all know: “The sabbath was made for man and not man
for the sabbath”, Comrades, you know how the Constituent Assembly was elected. It
was elected by one of the most progressive election methods, for it is not individuals
who were elected, but representatives of parties. This is a step forward, for revolutions
are made by parties and not by individuals. When the elections to the Constituent
Assembly took place there was only oiie party of Socialist-Revolutionaries, the party
which has the majority in the Constituent Assembly. But that is not the case now.

You will perhaps say that the Bolsheviks also breught that about, Ne, cornrades, that
is a universal law, Always and everywhere, the people are slowly and painfully dividing
into two camps-that ef the dispossessed and downtrodden, of those who are fighting for a
brighter future for all working people, and that of those who in one way or another
support the landowriers and capitalists, When the elections took place the peeple did not
elect those who expressed their will and their desires, You say that we have declared the
whele Cadet Party enemies ef the people, Yes, we have. And thereby we expressed the will
of the Second Cejigress of Seviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, And
now that we are on the threshold of peace and the cessation ef the terrible slaughter
that has lasted three years, we are cenvinced that this is the demand ef all the working
people in all eountries, The everthrew of imperialism in Europe is proceeding slowly and
paiiiftilly, and imperialists in all countries will now see that the people are strong,
and in their strength will overthrow all whe stand in their way. We shall not be deterred
when people who are organising revolt against the workers and peasants, against the
Soviets, with the other hand show u their credentials to the Constituent Assembly, In
July we were told that we sheuld be proclaimed enemies of the people, And we answered,
“Try it”. If the bourgeeis gentlemen and their fellowers had enly tried to
say that to the peeple epenly! But they did not; they reserted to insinuation, slander
and mud-slinging When the bourgeoisie began the civil war (we witiiessed it), they
incited the efficer cadets te revolt, And we, the victors, were merciful to them, the
vanquished. More than that, we even spared their military honour, And now, when the
Constituent Assembly is being cenvened, we say: W shall open the Constituent Assembly as
seon as four hundre of its members arrive, We see that the conspiracy of th Cadets is
continuing, we see that they are organising revolt against the Soviets in the interests
of the money-bags of greed and riches, and we publicly proclaim them enemie of the
people, At a time when the terms of peace will shortl be known, when we are about to have
an armistice, when th members of the land committees will be immune from arrest when the
landed estates are being confiscated, and wlhe control will be established over the
factories-at such a time they are conspiring against us, against the Soviets. We
therefore declare that the party of the Cadets is a party of the bourgeoisie, that they
are enemies of the people, and that we shall fight them. 

Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 

==========

## 
    Manifesto to the Ukrainian People With
    An Ultimatum to the Ukrainian
    Rada







Manifesto To The Ukrainian People With An Ultimatum To The Ukrainian Rada







V. I. Lenin
Manifesto To The Ukrainian People
With An Ultimatum To The Ukrainian Rada[1]


Written: 3 December, 1917
      
First Published: 18 December, 1917 in
      Pravda No. 206; on 6 December, 1917 in
      Izvestia No. 244.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 361-363

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna
      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
    Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  


      Proceeding from the interests of the unity and fraternal
      alliance of factory workers and the working and exploited masses
      in the struggle for socialism, and also from the recognition of
      these principles by numerous decisions of the organs of
      revolutionary democracy, the Soviets, and especially the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets, the Council of People’s
      Commissars—the Socialist government of
      Russia—reaffirms that the right to self-determination
      belongs to all nations oppressed by tsarism and the Great
      Russian bourgeoisie, up to and including the right of these
      nations to secede from Russia.

    
      Accordingly we, the Council of People’s Commissars,
      recognise the People’s Ukrainian Republic, and its right to
      secede from Russia or enter into a treaty with the Russian
      Republic on federal or similar relations between them.

    
      We, the Council of People’s Commissars, recognise at once,
      unconditionally and without reservations everything that
      pertains to the Ukrainian people’s national rights and
      national independence.

    
      We have not taken a single step, in the sense of restricting the
      Finnish people’s national rights or national independence,
      against the bourgeois Finnish Republic, which still remains
      bourgeois, nor shall we take any steps restricting the national
      independence of any nation which had been—or desires to
      be—a part of the Russian Republic.

    
      We accuse the Rada of conducting, behind a screen of national
      phrases, a double-dealing bourgeois policy, which has long been
      expressed in the Bada’s non-recognition of the Soviets and
      of Soviet power in the Ukraine (incidentally, the Rada has
      refused to convoke a territorial congress of the Ukrainian
      Soviets immediately, as the Soviets of the Ukraine had
      demanded). This ambiguous policy, which has made it impossible
      for us to recognise the Rada as a plenipotentiary representative
      of the working and exploited masses of the Ukrainian Republic,
      has lately led the Rada to steps which preclude all possibility
      of agreement.

    
      These, firstly, were steps to disorganise the front.

    
      The Rada has issued unilateral orders moving Ukrainian
      units and withdrawing them from the front, thereby breaking up
      the common united front before any demarcation, which
      can be carried out only through a formal agreement between the
      governments of the two republics.

    
      Secondly, the Rada has started to disarm the Soviet troops
      stationed in the Ukraine.

    
      Thirdly, the Rada has been extending support to the
      Cadet-Kaledin plot and revolt against Soviet power. On the
      patently false plea of “the Don and the Kuban” having
      autonomous rights, a plea that serves to cover up Kaledin’s
      counter-revolutionary moves, which clash with the interests and
      demands of the vast majority of the working Cossacks, the Rada
      has allowed its territory to be crossed by troops on their way
      to Kaledin, but has refused transit to any anti-Kaledin
      troops.

      Even if the Rada had received full formal recognition as the
      uncontested organ of supreme state power of an independent
      bourgeois Ukrainian republic, we would have been forced to
      declare war on it without any hesitation, because of its
      attitude of unexampled betrayal of the revolution and support of
      the Cadets and the Kaledinites—the bitterest enemies of the
      national independence of the peoples of Russia, the enemies of
      Soviet power and of the working and exploited masses.

    
      At the present time, in view of the circumstances set forth
      above, the Council of People’s Commissars, with the full
      cognisance of the peoples of the Ukrainian and Russian
      Republics, asks the Rada’[2] to answer the following questions:

    
      1. Will the Rada undertake to give up its attempts to
      disorganise the common front?

    
      2.Will the Rada undertake to refuse transit to any army
      units on their way to the Don, the Urals or elsewhere, unless it
      has the sanction of the Commander-in-Chief?

    
      3.Will the Rada undertake to assist the revolutionary
      troops in their struggle against the counter-revolutionary
      Cadet-Kaledin revolt?

    
      4.Will the Rada undertake to stop attempts to disarm the
      Soviet regiments and the workers’ Red Guard in the Ukraine
      and immediately return arms to those who had been deprived of
      them?

    
      In the event no satisfactory answer is received to these
      questions within 48 hours, the Council of People’s
      Commissars will deem the Rada to be in a state of open war with
      Soviet power in Russia and the Ukraine.

    

Footnotes

[1]
      The Ukranian Central Rada was a counter-revolutionary
      bourgeois-nationalist organisation set up at the All-Ukraine
      National Congress in Kiev in April 1917 by a bloc of Ukrainian
      bourgeois and petty-bourgeois nationalist parties arid
      groups. The ideologist of the Ukrainian bourgeoisie,
      M. S. Grushovksy. was its chairman, and V. K. Vinnichenko, his
      deputy. The Rada had a social base of urban and rural
      bourgeoisie, and petty-bourgeois nationalist-minded
      intellectuals. It tried to build up the power of the Ukrainian
      business class and landowners and set up a Ukrainian capitalist
      state with the aid of the national liberation movement in the
      Ukraine. It waved the banner of national independence in an
      effort to lead the Ukrainian masses away from the all-Russia
      revolutionary movement, subordinate them to the Ukrainian
      bourgeoisie and prevent the socialist revolution from winning
      out in the Ukraine. It supported the Provisional Government in
      spite of contradictionis over the issue of Ukrainian autonomy.

    
      After the Great October Socialist Revolution, the Rada
      proclaimed itself the supreme organ of the. I.Ikrainian
      People’s Republic and launched an open struggle against
      Soviet power. It was one of tbe centres of the
      counter-revolution.

    
      The First All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets, held in Kharkov in
      December 4917, proclaimed the l~kraine a Soviet republic. The
      Congress declared the Central Rada overthrown. The Council of
      People’s Commissars of the R.S.F.S.R. recognised the
      Ukrainian Soviet Government as the sole legitimate government of
      the Ukraine and decided to give it immediate help in fighting
      tire counter-revolutionary Rada. Armed uprisings against the
      Central Rada for the re-establishment of Soviet power took place
      all over the country in December 1917 and January 4918. In
      January 1918, Soviet troops in the Ukraine launched an offensive
      and on January 26 (February 8) occupied Kiev. The  Rada was
      overthrown.

    
      Defeated and ousted from the territory of the Soviet Ukraine,
      deprived of any support among the working people, the Central
      Rada joined the German imperialists in an alliance to overthrow
      Soviet power and restore the rule of the bourgeoisie in the
      Ukraine. It sent a delegation to Brest-Litovsk and secretly
      concluded a separate peace giving Germany the Ukraine’s
      corn, coal, raw materials in return for military aid in the
      fight against Soviet power. In March 1918, the Rada returned to
      Kiev as the puppet of the Austro-German armies who dispersed it
      in late April when they realised that it was absolutely
      incapable of suppressing the revolutionary movement in the
      Ukraine and delivering the goods.


[2] The
      rest of the text was written by L. D. Trotsky and edited by
      Lenin and Stalin. 


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Report on the Economic Condition of
    Petrograd of Petrograd Workers and the Tasks
    of the Working Class Delivered at a Meeting
    of the Workers' Section of the Petrograd
    Soviet of Workers' and Soldiers' Deputies
    December 4 







Report On The Economic Condition Of Petrograd Workers And The Tasks Of The Working Class







V. I. Lenin
Report On The Economic Condition Of Petrograd Workers And The
      Tasks Of The Working Class
Delivered At A Meeting
      Of The Workers’ Section
      Of The Petrograd Soviet Of Workers’
      And Soldiers’ Deputies
      December 4 (17), 1917
Newspaper Report


Written: 4 December, 1917
      
First Published: 20 December, 1917 in
      Pravda No. 208; on 14 December, 1917 in Soldatskaya
      Pravda No. 104.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 364-366

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  


      The Revolution of October 25 had shown the exceptional political
      maturity of the proletariat and its ability to stand firm in
      opposition to the bourgeoisie, said the speaker. The complete
      victory of socialism, however, would require a tremendous
      organisational effort filled with the knowledge that the
      proletariat must become the ruling class.

    
      The proletariat was faced with the tasks of transforming the
      state system on socialist lines, for no matter how easy it would
      be to cite arguments in favour of a middle course such a course
      would be insignificant, the country’s economic situation
      having reached a state that would rule out any middle
      course. There was no place left for half-measures in the
      gigantic struggle against imperialism and capitalism.

    
      The point at issue was—win or lose.

    
      The workers should and did understand this; this was obvious
      because they had rejected half-way, compromise decisions. The
      more profound the revolution, the greater the number of active
      workers required to accomplish the replacement of capitalism by
      a socialist machinery. Even if there were no sabotage, the
      forces of the petty bourgeoisie would be inadequate. The task
      was one that could be accomplished only by drawing on the
      masses, only by the independent activity of the masses. The
      proletariat, therefore, should not think of improving its
      position at the moment, but should think of becoming the ruling
      class. It could not be expected that the rural proletariat would
      be clearly and firmly conscious of its own interests. Only the
      working class could be, and every proletarian, conscious of the
      great prospects, should feel himself to be a leader and carry
      the masses with him.

    
      The proletariat should become the ruling class in the sense of
      being the leader of all who work; it should be the ruling class
      politically.

    
      The illusion that only the bourgeoisie could run the state must
      be fought against. The proletariat must take the rule of the
      state upon itself.

    
      The capitalists were doing everything they could to complicate
      the tasks of the working class. And all working-class
      organisations—trade unions, factory committees and
      others—would have to conduct a determined struggle in the
      economic sphere. The bourgeoisie was spoiling everything,
      sabotaging everything, in order to wreck the working-class
      revolution. And the tasks of organising production devolved
      entirely on the working class. They should do away, once and for
      all, with the illusion that state affairs or the management of
      banks and factories were beyond the power of the workers. All
      this could be solved only by tremendous day-to-day
      organisational work.

    
      It was essential to organise the exchange of products and
      introduce regular accounting and control—these were tasks
      for the working class, and the knowledge necessary for their
      accomplishment had been provided by factory life.

    
      Every factory committee should concern itself not only with the
      affairs of its own factory, but should also be an organisation
      nucleus helping arrange the life of the state as a whole.

    
      It was easy to issue a decree on the abolition of private
      property, but it must and could be implemented only by the
      workers themselves. Let there be mistakes—they would be the
      mistakes of a new class creating a new way of life.

    
      There was not and could not be a definite plan for the
      organisation of economic life.

    
      Nobody could provide one. But it could be done from below, by
      the masses, through their experience. Instructions would, of
      course, be given and ways would be indicated, but it was
      necessary to begin simultaneously from above and from below.

    
      The Soviets would have to become bodies regulating all
      production in Russia, but in order that they should not become
      staff headquarters without troops, work in the lower echelons
      was needed.... [Several illegible words were
      omitted—Editor]

      The working-class masses must set about the organisation of
      control and production on a country-wide scale. Not the
      organisation of individuals, but the organisation of all the
      working people, would be a guarantee of success; if they
      achieved that, if they organised economic life, everything
      opposing them would disappear of its own accord.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    On the Opening of the Constituent
    Assembly







On The Opening Of The Constituent Assembly







V. I. Lenin
On The Opening Of The Constituent Assembly


Written: 19 December, 1917
      
First Published: 19 December, 1917 in
      Pravda No. 207
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 367

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    


      In view of the delay in the elections to the Constituent
      Assembly, mainly due to the fault of the former All-Russia
      Electoral Commission, and in view of the formation by
      counter-revolutionary groups of a special Constituent Assembly
      Commission in opposition to the Commissariat set up by Soviet
      power, rumours have been circulated that the Constituent
      Assembly, as at present constituted, would not be convened at
      all. The Council of People’s Commissars deems it necessary
      to declare that these are absolutely false rumours, deliberately
      and maliciously spread by the enemies of the Soviets of
      Peasants’, Workers’ and Soldiers’
      Deputies. According to the decree of the Council of
      People’s Commissars, which has been approved by the Central
      Executive Committee of the Soviets, the Constituent Assembly is
      to meet as soon as one-half of its members, namely 400 deputies,
      are duly registered at the Taurida Palace chancellory.
    
Vl.Ulyanov (Lenin),
      Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft of a Manifesto to the Peasantry
    From The Second All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets of Peasants’
    Deputies







Draft Of A Manifesto To The Peasantry







V. I. Lenin
Draft Of A Manifesto To The Peasantry
From The Second All-Russia Congress Of Soviets Of
      Peasants’ Deputies[1]


Written: 6 December, 1917
      
First Published: 1925 in Lenin
      Miscellany IV.
      Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 368-373

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  


      The Second All-Russia Peasants’ Congress ardently appeals
      to the peasantry of all the nationalities and peoples of Russia
      to devote mind and will, and the power of their numbers and
      their energy to arousing the slumberers and encouraging the
      irresolute, and from every corner of the country, from every
      village and every quarter of the large cities, to utter aloud so
      that all may hear, their weighty and decisive word at this,
      perhaps the most serious and most responsible, moment of the
      great Russian revolution.

     
      Peasant comrades, we constitute the overwhelming majority of the
      population of our country, the vast mass of the working and
      exploited people. We are the vast mass that champions the lawful
      and just demands of the working people—first and foremost
      the demand for land—we fight all forms of oppression and
      exploitation by the landowners and capitalists.

     
      Peasant comrades, we are the main body of our army, those who
      have suffered most the inhuman torments of more than three years
      of the war instigated by kings and capitalists; it has also
      fallen to our lot to undertake the difficult but thankful and
      honourable role of vanguard fighters— together with the
      workers—for freedom, land and peace, and for the complete
      emancipation of the working people from all oppression and
      exploitation.

     
      Peasant comrades, consider our appeal, this manifesto issued by
      peasant deputies to the peasants of all nationalities in
      Russia. Make known our appeal in every village and in every
      cottage; discuss it at every meeting and village assembly and in
      every peasant body without exception, and make your own firm and
      unshakable decisions in the localities. For it is chiefly on
      your decisions, on the decisions of the majority of the people,
      the decisions of the peasants themselves, that the fate of our
      native land depends.

     
      The fateful hour is approaching. The last fight is at hand. The
      whole country and all the nations of our republic are divided
      into two great camps.

     
      One is the camp of the landowners and capitalists, the rich and
      their servitors, the state dignitaries and their friends, the
      bosses of the nation and the champions of the war.

     
      The other is the camp of the factory workers and the working and
      exploited peasants, the poor people and their friends, the
      rank-and-file soldiers and the champions of peace, the advocates
      of a heroic, decisive and bold revolutionary struggle for peace,
      a struggle in which no mercy will be shown to the oppressors of
      the people.

     
      The struggle between these two camps has in some parts of the
      country already assumed the acute form of open and direct civil
      war, a war of the Soviet armies against a small handful of those
      who are relying on the power of wealth and who desire to
      overthrow Soviet power, the power and government of the Soviets
      of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies.

     
      Peasant comrades, on your weighty, firm and unshakable word much
      now depends; on it depends the cessation of this civil war; on
      it depends the possibility in Russia of peacefully transferring
      all the land to the working people without compensation; on it
      depends the possibility of a peaceful transition to
      socialism. Peasant comrades, rise to a man; give voice to your
      demands; draw up your mandates in every village. You
      can make yourselves heard; you can make everyone listen to you!

     
      Peasant comrades, you must in the first place roundly condemn
      those deputies to the Second All-Russia Peasants’ Congress
      who split away from the Congress. Condemn the
      splitters. Condemn those who are smashing the unity of the
      peasants, the unity of the working people, the unity of the
      peasants and workers. These splitters, these breakers of peasant
      unity, these deserters to the camp of the rich, to the camp of
      the landowners and capitalists have committed an outrageous
      crime. These people call themselves Socialist-Revolutionaries of
      the Right wing and the Centre, followers of Avksentyev and
      Chernov. They have betrayed the whole doctrine and programme of
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries; they have deserted to the enemies
      of socialism, to the suppressors of the revolution. They have
      broken with the faithful custodians of the doctrine, programme
      and demands of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the party of the
      internationalist Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who have
      remained loyal to the interests of the working peasantry. These
      followers of Avksentyev and Chernov have quit the Second
      All-Russia Peasants’ Congress and refused to submit to the
      decision of the majority of the peasants in order to carry out
      the will of the wealthy and the capitalists against the
      peasants, in order to hinder the cause of peace, in order to
      prevent the immediate transfer of all the land, without
      compensation, to the working people, and in order to protect the
      policy of Avksentyev, Chernov, Maslov and their like, a policy
      fatal to the peasants.

     
      Condemn these traitors to the peasant cause. By condemning them,
      you will save many of the weak and wavering, and you will save
      Russia from insane attempts at civil war— insane, because,
      apart from shedding rivers of blood in vain, they will change
      nothing; nothing in the world can shatter the unanimous decision
      of the workers, soldiers and peasants, the decision of the
      Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and
      Soldiers’ Deputies and of the Second All-Russia Congress of
      Peasants’ Deputies.

     
      Condemn these traitors to the peasant cause. Let every village
      express its confidence in the decisions of the two congresses,
      the Congress of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Soviets and the
      Congress of Peasants’ Soviets. Let every village
      recall from the Constituent Assembly those deputies
      from the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, or from the
      Peasants’ Soviets and institutions, who have not loudly
      proclaimed, and proved in practice, their wholehearted
      acceptance of these decisions.

     
      Peasant comrades, you all know that opponents of the decisions
      of the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’
      and Soldiers’ Deputies and of the Second All-
      Russia Congress of Peasants Deputies could be elected and did
      get elected to the Constituent Assembly as peasant
      representatives, only by fraud. These people, who often
      call themselves Socialist-Revolutionaries, actually duped the
      peasants, who did not yet know the truth about the policy of
      Avksentyev, Chernov and Maslov, a policy of making concessions
      to the landowners, compromising with the capitalists, and
      arresting members of the local peasants’ land
      committees. These Avksentyevs, Maslovs and Chernovs deceived the
      peasants, since the general lists of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Party were colnpiled before October 17, whereas the truth was
      revealed to the whole of Russia only after October 17.

     
      The truth was revealed to the whole of Russia by the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and
      Soldiers’ Deputies, held on October 25 and 26, 1917. The
      truth was further revealed by Soviet power, the Soviet
      Government, which was the first to publish the shameful secret
      treaties, the first to start a really revolutionary struggle for
      peace, the first to show in practice what that struggle
      should be; and it has already achieved its first success: an
      armistice on one of the fronts.

     
      The truth was revealed by the Soviet Government when it passed
      the Decree on Land, thereby unconditionally siding with the
      peasants and eliminating all possibility of outside interference
      in the full power of the peasants in the localities.

     
      The truth was revealed by the Second All-Russia Peasants’
      Congress, which was the first to expose to the peasants, in a
      special and detailed resolution, the shameful role played by the
      Avksentyev-Chernov Executive Committee. The congress will close
      on December 8, having begun  on November 30, 1917.

     
      You thus see, peasant comrades, that when the lists were drawn
      up on October 17, and during the elections to the Constituent
      Assembly on November 12, the peasants still could not
      have known the truth about land and peace, and still could
      not distinguish their friends from their enemies, from the
      wolves in sheep’s clothing. You see that those
      Socialist-Revolutionaries who oppose the decisions of the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies
      and of the Second All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies
      can speak in the name of the peasants only by fraud.
 
      Peasant comrades, do not allow blood to be shed because of
      this fraud! Raise your voices in determined protest against
      those who quitted the Second All-Russia Congress of
      Peasants’ Deputies. Draw up your mandates in every
      gubernia, in every uyezd, in every volost and in every village;
      protest against those who withdrew from the congress;
      publish the names of the peasant deputies to the
      Constituent Assembly from your localities who have not accepted
      the decisions of these congresses, and demand the
      resignation of these deputies from the Constituent
      Assembly; for it is only by deceiving the people that they can
      pretend to have been elected by them.

     
      Peasant comrades, the Constituent Assembly must express the will
      of the people. Those who quitted the Second All-Russia Congress
      of Peasants’ Deputies, who thwarted its will, who caused a
      split among the peasants and who deserted the peasants for the
      rich, are not the representatives of the people. They are
      traitors, and there is no place for them in the Constituent
      Assembly. They do not bring peace or land to the working people,
      they bring the people the senseless and criminal rebellion of
      the rich against Soviet power. The people will not tolerate
      fraud. The people will not allow their will to be thwarted. The
      people will not hand Soviet power over to the rich. The people
      will not allow the rich to ruin the cause of peace they
      uphold, or disrupt the transfer of the land to the
      working people, immediately, without exception and without
      compensation.

     
      The country is faced with only this alternative:

     
      Either a civil war of the Kaledinites, the Cadets, the
      Kornilovites (and their concealed allies, the followers of
      Avksentyev, Chernov and Maslov) against Soviet power, a bloody
      war, a hopeless war for its initiators, a war t4iat will not
      deprive the Soviets of power but will only result in greater
      bitterness, greater sacrifice, greater bloodshed, greater delay
      in carrying through the great socialist reforms, and greater
      famine in the gubernias where there is no grain, or—

    
      the
      honest recognition of the obvious truth that the opponents of
      the decisions of the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of
      Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies and of the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies could have got
      the peasants to elect them to the Constituent Assembly only by
      fraud, and that there must be new elections for such
      deputies.

     
      There is no third path. Either the bloody extermination to the
      rich, the followers of Avksentyev, Chernov and Masby, or their
      consent to new elections of peasants’ deputies of the
      Constituent Assembly as soon as the opponents of the decisions
      of the two Soviet congresses, the Second All-Russia Congress of
      Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies and the
      Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Peas. ants’
      Deputies, come out in the name of the peasants in the
      Constituent Assembly.

     
      It is for you to say, peasant comrades!

     
      It is for you to decide!

     
      The resolute word of all peasants, the peasant
      mandates from all the localities, can bring peace to the
      whole country, to all the nationalities of Russia, can stop the
      civil war, can guarantee a true and genuine and not a sham
      Constituent Assembly, can expedite and facilitate the
      termination of the war by a just peace and accelerate the
      transfer of the land to the working people, can strengthen the
      alliance between the peasants and the workers and hasten the
      triumph of socialism.

     
      It is for you to decide, peasant comrades! Long live the
      transfer of the land to the working people! Long live peace!
      Long live socialism!
    
The Second All-Russia Congress
      of Peasants’ Deputies
    

Footnotes

[1] 
      Written on December 6-7 (19-20), 1917. After the members of the
      presidium of the Congress had seen the Manifesto it was read out
      on their behalf at the evening sitting of December 8 (24). At
      the insistence of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries the wording
      was toned down and in that form adopted by the Congress. On
      behalf of the Executive Committee of the All-Russia Soviet of
      Peasants’ Deputies the Manifesto was published in the
      newspaper Colos Trudovogo Krestyanstva (Voice of the
      Labouring Peasantry) No. 22 of December 15 (28) under the title,
      “To the Labouring Peasants”.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Note to Fe. Dzerzhinsky With a Draft
    of a Decree on Fighting
    Counter-Revolutionaries and
    Saboteurs







Note To F. E. Dzerzhinsky, With A Draft Of A Decree On Fighting Counter-Revolutionaries And Saboteurs







V. I. Lenin
Note To F. E. Dzerzhinsky
With A Draft Of A Decree On Fighting Counter-Revolutionaries
      And Saboteurs[1]


Written: 7 December, 1917
      
First Published: 1924 in Krasny
      Arkhiv No. 5.
      Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 374-376

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      To Comrade Dzerzhinsky,

     Further to your report today on measures for
      fighting saboteurs and counter-revolutionaries,

    
      would it not be
      possible to submit a decree like the
following?
On Fighting Counter-Revolutionaries
and Saboteurs

      The bourgeoisie, the landowners and all the rich classes are
      making desperate efforts to undermine the revolution, the aim of
      which is to safeguard the interests of the workers, the working
      and exploited masses.
      
    
      The bourgeoisie are prepared to commit the most heinous crimes;
      they are bribing the outcast and degraded elements of society and
      plying them with drink to use them in riots. The supporters of the
      bourgeoisie, particularly among the higher clerical staff, bank
      officials, and so on, are sabotaging their work, and are
      organising strikes to thwart the government's measures for the
      realisation of socialist reforms. They have even gone so far as to
      sabotage food distribution, thereby menacing millions of people
      with famine.
      
    
      Urgent measures are necessary to fight the counter-revolutionaries
      and saboteurs. In virtue of this, the Council of People's
      Commissars decrees:
      
    
      (1) Persons belonging to the wealthy classes (i.e., with incomes
      of 500 rubles or more per month, and owners of urban real estate,
      stocks and shares, or money amounting to over 1,000 rubles), and
      also all employees of banks, joint-stock companies, state and
      public institutions, shall within three days
[2] present to their house
      committees written statements in three copies over their own
      signatures and indicating their address, income, place of
      employment and their occupation.
      
    
      (2) The house committees shall countersign these statements,
    retain one copy and send one copy to the municipality and another
      to the People's Commissariat for Internal Affairs
      (address:. ...[3]).
      
  
    (3) Persons guilty of contravening the present law (failing to
    submit statements, giving false information, etc.) and members of
    house committees infringing the regulations governing the
    collection, filing and presentation of these statements to the
    institutions mentioned above shall be liable to a fine of up to
    5,000 rubles for each infringement, or to imprisonment up to one
    year, or shall be sent to the front, depending on the nature of
    the offence.

  
    (4) Persons sabotaging the work of, or declining to work in,
    banks, state and public institutions, joint-stock companies,
    railways, etc., shall be liable to similar punishment.

    
      (5) As a first step towards universal labour conscription, it is
      decreed that the persons referred to in Â§ I shall be obliged,
      first, constantly to carry with them a copy of the above-mentioned
      statement certified by the house committees and by their chiefs or
      elected officials (factory committees, food committees, railway
      committees, employees' trade unions, etc.); the certificates must
      indicate what public service or work is being performed by the
      individual in question, or whether he is living with his family as
      a disabled member thereof, etc.

    
      (6) Secondly, such persons shall be obliged to acquire, within one
      week from the promulgation of the present law, worker-consumer
      books (specimen attached), in which their weekly income and
      expenditures shall be entered, together with the public duties
      performed by the individual in question, certified by the
      proper committees or institutions.
      
    
      (7) Persons who do not come under § l shall present to their
      house committees a statement in one copy of their income and place
      of employment and shall carry another copy of this statement
      certified by the house committee.
    

Footnotes

[1] 
      Lenin raised the question of fighting the internal
      counter-revolution and sabotage before the Council of
      People’s Commissars on December 6 (19), 1917, in view of the
      fierce resistance to the measures of the Soviet Government and a
      possible strike by senior civil servants. Dzerzhinsky was asked to
      form a commission to inquire into ways of fighting the
      sabotage. On December 7 (20), the government heard his report, in
      connection with which Lenin appears to have written his draft
      decree. At the same sitting the government formed the All-Russia
      Extraordinary Commission (Cheka) to Combat Counter-Revolution and
      Sabotage. Dzerzinisky was appointed its chairman.

    

[2] In the
      manuscript Lenin wrote within 24 hours above the words
      “within three days”-Ed.

    

[3]In the
    manuscript Lenin left a space for the address.-ed.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive












==========

## 
    Speech at a Meeting of the Central
    Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.), December
    11(24), 1917. Minutes







Speech At A Meeting Of The Central Committee Of The
      R.S.D.L.P.(B.) December 11(24), 1917







V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Meeting
      Of The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
December 11(24), 1917[1]
Minutes


Delivered: 11 December, 1917
      
First Published: 1929 in Minutes
      of the CC R.S.D.L.P(B.), August 1917-February 1918

      Published according to the Minutes
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 377

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Comrade Lenin proposes (1) to dismiss the bureau of the
      Constituent Assembly group; (2) to explain our attitude towards
      the Constituent Assembly to the group in the form of theses; (3)
      to draw up an address to the group in which it should be
      mentioned that the Party Rules prescribe the subordination of
      all representative institutions to the Central Committee; (4) to
      appoint a member of the Central Committee to lead the group; (5)
      to draw up rules for the group.
      
    

Footnotes

[1] 

      On December 11 (24), 1917, the Contra1 Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P.(13.) discussed one question—the stand taken by
      the Bolshevik group in the Constituent Assembly. It was raised
      in view of the fact that “right-wing sentiments have
      prevailed in the group, whose views differ from those of the
      Central Committee” (Minutes of the Central Committee of
      the R.S.D.L.P.(B.)  August, 1917 to February 1918, (in
      Russian, Moscow, 1958, p. 100).

    
      The provisional bureau of the group opposed the C.C. line on the
      Constituent Assembly. It took a bourgeois-democratic approach to
      the Assembly and held that its convocation was the final stage
      of the revolution . It proposed that control over its
      convocation should be abandoned. The Central Committee resolved
      to work out theses on the Constituent Assembly and set a meeting
      of members of the group in Smolny at 4.00 p.m. on December 12
      (25) to discuss a CC. report and theses and to re-elect the
      bureau of the group. Lenin read out his “Theses on the Constituent Assernbly”,
      which he had written at the Central Cornmittee’s
      request. After a prolonged debate, they were unanimously adopted
      by the group. On December 13 (26) they were published by
      Pravda.



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Resolution on the Provisional
    Bureau of the Bolshevik Group In the
    Constituent Assembly







Draft Resolution On The Provisional Bureau Of The Bolshevik Group In The Constituent Assembly







V. I. Lenin
Draft Resolution On The Provisional Bureau
      Of The Bolshevik Group In The Constituent Assembly


Written: 11 or 12 of December, 1917
      
First Published: For the Collected
      Works.
      Published according to the Minutes
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 378

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      In view of the fact that the Provisional Bureau of the
      Social-Democratic group of Bolsheviks in the Constituent
      Assembly has taken no action in respect of its chief task, that
      of working out a principled resolution on our Party's attitude
      to the Constituent Assembly; and

    

      that the numerous individual
      statements, proposals and votes have shown that the majority of
      (or all?) the members of the Provisional Bureau hold views that
      are absolutely un-Social-Democratic and reveal a
      bourgeois-democratic attitude to the Constituent Assembly
      ignoring the real conditions of the class struggle and civil
      war,

    

      the group resolves that the Provisional Bureau shall be
      dissolved and a new one elected.

     
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Theses on the Constituent Assembly







Theses On The Constituent Assembly







V. I. Lenin
Theses On The Constituent Assembly
    


Written: 11 or 12 of December, 1917
      
First Published: 26 December, 1917 in
      Prava No. 213

      Published according to the manuscript verified with a
      typewritten copy bearying Lenin's corrections.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 379-383

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
 
      1.The demand for the convocation of a Constituent
      Assembly was a perfectly legitimate part of the programme of
      revolutionary Social-Democracy, because in a bourgeois republic
      the Constituent Assembly represents the highest form of
      democracy and because, in setting up a Pre-parliament, the
      imperialist republic headed by Kerensky was preparing to rig the
      elections and violate democracy in a number of ways.

    
      2.While demanding the convocation of a Constituent
      Assembly, revolutionary Social-Democracy has ever since the
      beginning of the Revolution of 1917 repeatedly emphasised that a
      republic of Soviets is a higher form of democracy than the usual
      bourgeois republic with a Constituent Assembly.
    
      3.For the transition from the bourgeois to the socialist
      system, for the dictatorship of the proletariat, the Republic of
      Soviets (of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies) is not only a higher type of democratic institution
      (as compared with the usual bourgeois republic crowned by a
      Constituent Assembly), but is the only form capable of securing
      the most painless transition to socialism.
    
      4.The convocation of the Constituent Assembly in our
      revolution on the basis of lists submitted in the middle of
      October 1917 is taking place under conditions which preclude the
      possibility of the elections to this Constituent Assembly
      faithfully expressing the will of the people in general and of
      the working people in particular.
    
      5.Firstly, proportional representation results in a
      faithful expression of the will of the people only when the
      party lists correspond to the real division of the people
      according to the party groupings reflected in those lists. In
      our case, however, as is well known, the party which from May to
      October had the largest number of followers among the people,
      and especially among the peasants—the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party—came out with united election
      lists for the Constituent Assembly in the middle of October
      1917, but split in November 1917, after the elections and before
      the Assembly met.
    
      For this reason, there is not, nor can there be, even a formal
      correspondence between the will of the mass of the electors and
      the composition of the elected Constituent Assembly.
    
      6.Secondly, a still more important, not a formal nor
      legal, but a socio-economic, class source of the discrepancy
      between the will of the people, and especially the will of the
      working classes, on the one hand, and the composition of the
      Constituent Assembly, on the other, is due to the elections to
      the Constituent Assembly having taken place at a time when the
      overwhelming majority of tile people could not yet know the full
      scope and significance of the October, Soviet,
      proletarian-peasant revolution, which began on October 25, 1917,
      i.e., after the lists of candidates for the Constituent Assembly
      had been submitted.
    
      7.The October Revolution is passing through successive
      stages of development before our very eyes, winning power for
      the Soviets and wresting political rule from the bourgeoisie and
      transferring it to the proletariat and poor peasantry.
    
      8.It began with the victory of October 24-25 in the
      capital, when the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of
      Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, the vanguard of the
      proletarians and of the most politically active section of the
      peasants, gave a majority to the Bo!shevik Party and put it in
      power.
    
      9.Then, in the course of November and December, the
      revolution spread to the entire army and peasants, this being
      expressed first of all in the deposition of the old leading
      bodies (army committees, gubernia peasant committees,
      the Central Executive Committee of the All-Russia Soviet of
      Peasants’ Deputies, etc.)—which expressed the
      superseded, compromising phase of the revolution, its bourgeois,
      and not proletarian, phase, and which were therefore inevitably
      bound to disappear under the pressure of the deeper and broader
      masses of the people—and in the election of new leading
      bodies in their place.
    
      10.This mighty movement of the exploited people for the
      reconstruction of the leading bodies of their organisations has
      not ended even now, in the middle of December 1917, and the
      Railwaymen’s Congress, which is still in session,
      represents one of its stages.
    
      11.Consequently, the grouping of the class forces in
      Russia in the course of their class struggle is in fact
      assuming, in November and December 1917, a form differing in
      principle from the one that the party lists of candidates for
      the Constituent Assembly compiled in the middle of October 1917
      could have reflected.
    
      12.Recent events in the Ukraine (partly also in Finland
      and Byelorussia, as well as in the Caucasus) point similarly to
      a regrouping of class forces which is taking place in the
      process of the struggle between the bourgeois nationalism of the
      Ukrainian Bada, the Finnish Diet, etc., on the one hand, and
      Soviet power, the proletarian-peasant revolution in each of
      these national republics, on the other.
    
      13.Lastly, the civil war which was started by the
      Cadet-Kaledin counter-revolutionary revolt against the Soviet
      authorities, against the workers’ and peasants’
      government, has finally brought the class struggle to a head and
      has destroyed every chance of setting in a formally democratic
      way the very acute problems with which history has confronted
      the peoples of Russia, and in the first place her working class
      and peasants.
    
      14.Only the complete victory of the workers and peasants
      over the bourgeois and landowner revolt (as expressed in the
      Cadet-Kaledin movement), only the ruthless military suppression
      of this revolt of the slave-owners can really safeguard the
      proletarian-peasant revolution. The course of events and the
      development of the class struggle in the revolution have
      resulted in the slogan "All Power to the Constituent
      Assembly!"—which disregards the gains of the workers’
      and peasants’ revolution, which disregards Soviet power,
      which disregards the decisions of the Second All-Russia Congress
      of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, of the
      Second All-Russia Congress of Peasants’ Deputies,
      etc.—becoming in fact the slogan of the Cadets and
      the Kaledinites and of their helpers. The entire people are now
      fully aware that the Constituent Assembly, if it parted ways
      with Soviet power, would inevitably be doomed to political
      extinction.
    
      15.One of the particularly acute problems of national
      life is the problem of peace. A really revolutionary struggle
      for peace began in Russia only after the victory of the October
      25 Revolution, and the first fruits of this victory were the
      publication of the secret treaties, the conclusion of an
      armistice, and the beginning of open negotiations for a general
      peace without annexations and indemnities.
    
      Only now are the broad sections of the people actually receiving
      a chance fully and openly to observe the policy of revolutionary
      struggle for peace and to study its results.
    
      At the time of the elections to the Constituent Assembly the
      mass of the people had no such chance.
    
      It is clear that the discrepancy between the composition of the
      elected Constituent Assembly and the actual will of the people
      on the question of terminating the war is inevitable from this
      point of view too.
    
      16.The result of all the above-mentioned circumstances
      taken together is that the Constituent Assembly, summoned on the
      basis of the election lists of the parties existing prior to the
      proletarian-peasant revolution under the rule of the
      bourgeoisie, must inevitably clash with the will and interests
      of the working and exploited classes which on October 25 began
      the socialist revolution against the bourgeoisie. Naturally, the
      interests of this revolution stand higher than the formal rights
      of the Constituent Assembly, even if those formal rights were
      not undermined by the absence in the law on the Constituent
      Assembly of a provision recognising the right of the people to
      recall their deputies and hold new elections at any moment.
    
      17.Every direct or indirect attempt to consider the
      question of the Constituent Assembly from a formal, legal point
      of view, within the framework of ordinary bourgeois democracy
      and disregarding the class struggle and civil war, would be a
      betrayal of the proletariat’s cause, and the adoption of
      the bourgeois standpoint. The revolutionary Social-Democrats are
      duty bound to warn all and sundry against this error, into which
      a few Bolshevik leaders, who have been unable to appreciate the
      significance of the October uprising and the tasks of the
      dictatorship of the proletariat, have strayed.
    
      18.The only chance of securing a painless solution to the
      crisis which has arisen owing to the divergence between the
      elections to the Constituent Assembly, on the one hand, and the
      will of the people and the interests of the working and
      exploited classes, on the other, is for the people to exercise
      as broadly and as rapidly as possible the right to elect the
      members of the Constituent Assembly anew, and for the
      Constituent Assembly to accept the law of the Central Executive
      Committee on these new elections, to proclaim that it
      unreservedly recognises Soviet power, the Soviet revolution, and
      its policy on the questions of peace, the land and workers’
      control, and to resolutely join the camp of the enemies of the
      Cadet-Kaledin counter-revolution.
    
      19.Unless these conditions are fulfilled, the crisis in
      connection with the Constituent Assembly can be settled only in
      a revolutionary way, by Soviet power adopting the most
      energetic, speedy, firm and determined revolutionary measures
      against the Cadet-Kaledin counter-revolution, no matter behind
      what slogans and institutions (even participation in the
      Constituent Assembly) this counter-revolution may hide. Any
      attempt to tie the hands of Soviet power in this struggle would
      be tantamount to aiding counterrevolution.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech at the Extraordinary All-Russia
    Congress of Railwaymen, December 13(26),
    1917







Speech At The Extraordinary All-Russia Congress Of Railwaymen







V. I. Lenin
Speech At The Extraordinary All-Russia Congress Of
      Railwaymen
December 13 (26), 1917


Delivered: 13 of December, 1917
      
First Published: 27 December, 1917 in
      Prava No. 214 and Izvestia No. 251.

      Published according to Izvestia text. 
      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 384-385

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters
      
      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      Allow me to greet the Congress on behalf of the Council of
      People's Commissars and to express the hope that the
      organisation of the railwaymen will be conducted on the same
      lines as the vast majority of workers and peasants in
      Russia. There is no doubt at all that the October Revolution,
      carried out by the workers, peasants and soldiers, is a
      socialist one. It is opposed by all the forces of the
      bourgeoisie and the top salaried sections, who have grown
      accustomed to the old order and cannot understand that the
      revolution is going to remake the old system from top to
      bottom. Listen to their loud cries that Soviet power is
      repudiated by the majority in Russia. You know the worth of all
      this clamour. There is a flood of telegrams saying that troops
      are moving on Petrograd, against the gains of the October
      Revolution. We throw them into the waste-paper basket, being
      fully aware that we shall not have to wait long for a
      refutation. The top-drawer organisations of the First Peasant
      Congress, as represented by the Avksentyevs, said on behalf of
      the peasant mass that they were opposed to the rule of tyrants
      and usurpers. What we said was: “Let them curse, we shall
      see what the peasants have to say when we start confiscating the
      landed estates and giving them to the peasants.” As you
      see, the Second Peasant Congress has brought victory to Soviet
      power. We have established close contacts with the Second Soviet
      of Peasants' Deputies. It is with them that we have organised
      the Soviet power of workers, soldiers and peasants. We shall
      surely find the same attitude among the mass of railwaymen. You
      are aware that disruption of railway communications-aggravated
      by sabotage on the part of senior officials-is telling on the
      country. You are aware that a breakdown of railway
      communications makes impossible any balanced exchange between
      town and country, which is so vital to normal food
      supplies. Comrades, we need your help to get the railways
      going. Only by joining efforts with you can we overcome the
      disorder and strengthen the power of the workers, soldiers and
      peasants. Soviet power has no other support than that of the
      broad working masses. We are sure that the present Railwaymen's
      Congress will consolidate the power of the People's Gommissars
      by setting up an organisation that will help us in the struggle
      for land and peace. In conclusion, comrades, I extend to you
      once again our greetings and best wishes of fruitful
      work. (As Comrade Lenin leaves the hall, almost the entire
      audience joins in a burst of applause. To general applause, the
      Congress elects him honorary chairman.)


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    For Bread and Peace







For Bread And Peace







V. I. Lenin
For Bread And Peace


Written: 14 of December, 1917
      
First Published: In German in May
      1918in the newspaper Jugend-Internationale No. 11 and
      signed W. Lenin.  First Published in Russian
      (translated from the German) in 1927 in the book
      Transactions of the Lenin Institute, Volume
      II. Facsimile of the 1st paragraph of the MS published in 1919
      in Det roda Ryssland 1917 7/11 1919, Stockholm.

    
Source: Lenin’s Collected
    Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
    pp. 386-387

    
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
    Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

    
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
    Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      Two questions now take precedence over all other political
      questions—the question of bread and the question of
      peace. The imperialist war, the war between the biggest and
      richest banking firms, Britain and Germany, that is being waged
      for world domination, the division of the spoils, for the
      plunder of small and weak nations; this horrible, criminal war
      has ruined all countries, exhausted all peoples, and confronted
      mankind with the alternative—either sacrifice all
      civilisation and perish or throw off the capitalist yoke in the
      revolutionary way, do away with the rule of the bourgeoisie and
      win socialism and durable peace.

    
      If socialism is not victorious, peace between the capitalist
      States will be only a truce, an interlude, a time of preparation
      for a fresh slaughter of the peoples. Peace and bread are the
      basic demands of the workers and the exploited. The war has made
      these demands extremely urgent. The war has brought hunger to
      the most civilised countries, to those most culturally
      developed. On the other hand, the war, as a tremendous
      historical process, has accelerated social development to an
      unheard-of degree. Capitalism had developed into imperialism,
      i.e., into monopoly capitalism, and under the influence of the
      war it has become state monopoly capitalism. We have now reached
      the stage of world economy that is the immediate stepping stone
      to socialism.

    
      The socialist revolution that has begun in Russia is, therefore,
      only the beginning of the world socialist revolution. Peace and
      bread, the overthrow of the bourgeoisie, revolutionary means for
      the healing of war wounds, the complete victory of
      socialism—such are the aims of the struggle.

    
      Petrograd, December 14, 1917.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech On the Nationalisation of the
    Banks Delivered at a Meeting of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee,
    December 14(27), 1917. Minutes








Speech On The Nationalisation Of The Banks







V. I. Lenin
Speech On The Nationalisation Of The Banks
Delivered At A Meeting Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee
    December 14(27), 1917[1]
Minutes

Delivered: 14 December,
    1917
First Published: Pravda No. 216, 29
    December, 1917 and Izvestia No. 253, 16 December, 1917. Published
    according to the Minutes of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee
    of the Soveits of Workers', Soldiers', peasants', and
    Conssacks', Deputies, Second Convocation,, Moscow, 1918.
Source:Lenin's Collected Works,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pp. 388-390
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George Hanna,
    Edited by George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup: Charles Farrell and
    David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000

 
The last speaker tried to intimidate us by asserting that we
    are heading towards an abyss, towards certain destruction. There is,
    however, nothing new for us in this intimidation. Novaya Zhizn,
    the newspaper that expresses the views of the group to which the speaker
    belongs, said before the October days that our revolution wou!d bring
    nothing but disorders and anarchic riots. Talk about our travelling the
    wrong road is, therefore, a reflection of bourgeois psychology that even
    disinterested people cannot get rid of. (Voice from among the
    internalionalists: Demagogy!") No, that is not demagogy, it is your
    constant talk of the axe that is real demagogy.
The measures proposed in the decree are only an effective way of
    ensuring control.
You speak of the intricacy of the machinery, of its fragility and of the
    involved nature of the problem—these are elementary truths that
    everybody is aware of. But if these truths are merely used to put a brake
    on all socialist undertakings, we say that anyone who takes that line is a
    demagogue, and a dangerous demagogue at that.
We want to begin an inventory of the vaults, but the learned specialists
    tell us there is nothing in them but documents and securities. Then what is
    there bad about representatives of the people checking them?
If what they say is true, why do those same learned specialists who
    criticise us not come out with it openly? Whenever the Council makes
    decisions they declare that they agree with us, but only in principle. This
    is the way of the bourgeois intelligentsia, of all conciliators, who ruin
    everything with their constant agreement in principle and disagreement in
    practice.
If you know so much about all these things and have the experience, why
    don't you help us. why do we meet with nothing but sabotage from you in our
    difficult task?
You proceed from a correct scientific theory, but for us theory forms
    the basis of actions to be undertaken, it gives us confidence in those
    actions and does not scare the life out of us. Of course it is difficult to
    make a beginning and we often come up against fragile things; nevertheless
    we have coped with them, are coping with them and shall continue to cope
    with them.
If book-learning were to serve no other purpose than that of hampering
    every new step and instilling eternal fear of the new, it would be
    useless.
Nobody, with the exception of the utopian socialists, has ever asserted
    that victory is possible without resistance, without the dictatorship of
    the proletariat and without seizing the old world in an iron grip.
You accepted this dictatorship in principle, but when that word is
    translated into Russian, called an “iron grip ” and applied in
    practice, you warn us of the fragility and involved nature of the
    matter.
You stubbornly refuse to see that the iron hand that destroys also
    creates. It is an undoubted advantage to us to go over from principles to
    deeds.
To effect control we have called upon the bankers and together with them
    have elaborated measures that they agreed to, so that loans could be
    obtained under full control and properly accounted for. But there are
    people among the bank employees who have the interests of the people at
    heart and who have told us:“They are deceiving you, make haste and
    check their criminal activity that is directly harmful to you“ And we
    did make haste.
We realise that this is an involved measure. None of us, even those who
    are trained economists, will undertake to carry it out. We shall invite the
    specialists who are engaged in that work, but only when we have the keys in
    our own hands. Then we shall even be able to draw advisers from the former
    millionaires. We invite anybody who wants to work as long as he does not
    try to reduce every revolutionary enterprise to mere words; that is
    something we shall not stand for. We use the words "dictatorship of the
    proletariat" in all seriousness and we shall effect that dictatorship.
We wanted to take the line or agreement with the banks, we gave them
    loans to finance factories, but they carried out sabotage on an
    unprecedented scale, and practical experience has forced us to adopt other
    measures of control.
A comrade from the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries has said that in
    principle they would vote for the immediate nationalisation of the banks
    and afterwards work out practical measures in the shortest possible time.
    But he was wrong in that, because our draft does not contain anything but
    principles. The Supreme Economic Council is waiting to discuss them, but if
    the decree is not approved the banks will immediately do everything to
    further disrupt the economy.
The adoption of the decree is urgent, otherwise opposition and sabotage
    will ruin us. (Stormy applause.)
Footnotes
[1] Delivered to the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee on December 14 (27), 1917, in connection with a discussion of the
    decree nationalising the banks.
Work on practical measures for the nationalisation of the
    banks was started as soon as the socialist revolution won out. The State
    Bank was seized on October 25 (November 7), 1917. Having overcome the
    sabotage of the bourgeois officials, Soviet power soon established
    practical control of the State Bank and set up control over private banks
    as a transitional measure to their nationalisation. However, because of
    sabotage by the bankers, the Soviet Government speeded up the
    nationalisation of private banks. On the morning of December 14 (27), the
    Government ordered workers' detachments and fled Guard units to seize
    all banks and credit institutions in Petrograd. That same day, the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee adopted decrees “On the
    Nationalisation of the Banks” and “On the Inspection of Steel
    Safes in Banks”.
Both decrees were published in Izvestia No. 252 on December15
    (28).

Collected Works Volume
    26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 
 







==========

## 
    Draft Decree on the Nationalisation of
    the Banks









Draft Decree on the Nationalisation of the Banks and on Measures Necessary for its Implementation



Vladimir Lenin

      Draft decree on the nationalisation of the banks and on measures
      necessary for its implementation
    


Written: Not earlier than December 14 (27), 1917
      
Source: Collected Works, Volume 26
      
Publisher: Progress Publishers
      
First Published: In the magazine Narodnoye

Khozyaistvo (The National Economy); No 11 for November 1918
      
Online Version: marx.org 1997; marxists.org
      1999
Transcribed: Conal
Tuohy, 1997 
      
HTML Markup:  Brian Baggins and David Walters



      The Draft Decree was tabled by Lenin for the approval
      of the Supreme Economic Council in mid-December 1917
 
The critical food
      situation and the threat of famine caused by the profiteering
      and sabotage of the capitalists and officials, as well as by the
      general economic ruin, make it imperative to adopt extraordinary
      revolutionary measures to combat this evil.
    
To enable all citizens of the state, and in the first place all
      the working classes to undertake this struggle under the
      leadership of their Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants'
      Deputies, and normalise the country's economic life immediately
      and comprehensively, stopping at nothing and acting in the most
      revolutionary manner, the following regulations are decreed:
    

      1. All joint-stock companies are proclaimed the property of the
         state.
    

      2. Members of boards and directors of joint-stock companies, as
      well as all shareholders belonging to the wealthy classes (i.e.,
      possessing property to the value of over 5,000 rubles or an
      income exceeding 500 rubles per month), shall be obliged to
      continue to conduct the affairs of these enterprises in good
      order, observing the law on workers' control, presenting all
      shares to the State Bank and submitting to the local Soviets of
      Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies weekly reports on
      their activities.
    

      3. State loans, foreign and domestic, are annulled
         (abrogated).
    

      4. The interests of small holders of bonds and all kinds of
      shares, i.e., holders belonging to the working classes of the
      population, shall be fully guaranteed.
    

      5. Universal labour conscription is introduced. All citizens of
      both sexes between the ages of sixteen and fifty-five shall be
      obliged to perform work assigned to them by the local Soviets of
      Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies, or by other bodies
      of Soviet power.
    

      6. As a first step towards the introduction of universal labour
      conscription, it is decreed that members of the wealthy classes
      (see point 2) shall be obliged to keep, and have entries
      properly made in, consumer-worker books, or worker budget books,
      which must be presented to the appropriate workers'
      organisations or to the local Soviets and their bodies for
      weekly recording of the performance of work undertaken by
      each.
    

      7. For the purpose of proper accounting and distribution of food
      and other necessities, every citizen of the state shall be
      obliged to join a consumers' society. The food boards,
      committees of supplies and other similar organisations, as well
      as the railway and transport unions, shall, under the direction
      of the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers' and Peasants' Deputies,
      establish supervision to ensure the observance of the present
      law. Members of the wealthy classes, in particular, shall be
      obliged to perform the work to be assigned to them by the
      Soviets in the sphere of organising and conducting the affairs
      of the consumers' societies.
    

      8. The railway workers' and employees' unions shall he obliged
      urgently to draw up and immediately begin to carry into effect
      emergency measures for the better organisation of transport,
      particularly as regards the delivery of food, fuel and other
      prime necessities, and shall be guided in the first place by the
      instructions and orders of the Soviets of Workers', Soldiers'
      and Peasants' Deputies and then of the bodies authorised by the
      latter, and of the Supreme Economic Council.
    
Similarly, the railway unions, working in
      conjunction with the local Soviets, shall be responsible for
      most vigorously combating speculation in food and mercilessly
      suppressing all profiteering, not hesitating to adopt
      revolutionary measures.
    

      9. Workers' organisations, unions of office employees and local
      Soviets shall be obliged immediately to set about switching
      enterprises which are closing down or are to be demobilised, and
      also unemployed workers to useful work and the production of
      necessities, and to search for orders, raw materials and
      fuel. While under no circumstances postponing either this work
      or the beginning of the exchange of farm produce for industrial
      goods pending receipt of special instructions from higher
      bodies, the local unions and Soviets shall be strictly guided by
      the orders and instructions of the Supreme Economic Council.
    

      10. Members of the wealthy classes shall be obliged to keep all
      their monetary possessions in the State Bank and its branches,
      or in the savings-banks, and shall be entitled to withdraw not
      more than 100-l25 rubles a week (as shall be established by the
      local Soviets) for living expenses; withdrawals for the needs of
      production and trade shall be made only on presentation of
      written certificates of the organs of workers' control.
    
To supervise the due observance of the present
      law, regulations will be introduced providing for the exchange
      of existing currency notes for new currency notes. All the
      property of persons guilty of deceiving the state and the people
      shall be confiscated.
    

      11. All offenders against the present law, saboteurs and
      government officials who go on strike, as well as profiteers,
      shall be liable to a similar penalty, and also to imprisonment,
      dispatch to the front, or hard labour. The local Soviets and
      bodies under their jurisdiction shall urgently decide upon the
      most revolutionary measures to combat these real enemies of the
      people.
    

      12. The trade unions and other organisations of the working
      people, in conjunction with the local Soviets, and with the
      collaboration of the most reliable persons recommended by Party
      and other organisations, shall form mobile groups of inspectors
      to supervise the implementation of the present law, to verify
      the quantity and quality of work performed and to bring to trial
      before the revolutionary courts persons guilty of violating or
      evading the law.
    
The workers and office employees of the nationalised
      enterprises must exert every effort and adopt extraordinary
      measures to improve the organisation of the work, strengthen
      discipline and raise the productivity of labour. The organs of
      workers' control are to present to the Supreme Economic Council
      weekly reports on the results achieved in this respect.  Those
      found guilty of shortcomings and neglect are to be brought
      before revolutionary courts. [The last
      paragraph comes from the magazine and was published for the
      first time in Collected Works.]



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Questions to Delegates to the Army
    Congress On the Demobilisation of the Army
  







Questions To Delegates To The Army Congress On The Demobilisation Of The Army







V. I. Lenin
Questions To Delegates To The Army Congress On The
      Demobilisation Of The
      Army[1]


Delivered: 17 December, 1917
      
First Published: 1927 in
      Transactions of the Lenin Institue, Volume II

Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 388-390

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 

      (1) Is the likelihood of the Germans starting an offensive
      in the near future great or small—

    (a) from the viewpoint of the physical and technical
      possibility of a winter offensive;

    (b) from the viewpoint of the mood of the mass of the
      German soldiers; is that mood capable of preventing an
      offensive, or at least of retarding it?

    (2) Can it be assumed that the Germans, if
      we immediately break off peace negotiations, and if their troops
      immediately take the offensive, are capable of inflicting a
      decisive defeat upon us? Will they be able to take Petrograd?

    (3) Is it to be feared that the news of
      the peace negotiations having been broken off will result in
      widespread anarchist sentiments in the army and in desertions from
      the front, or may we be confident that the army will staunchly
      hold the front even after the receipt of such news?
      
    (4) Would our army be capable, from the
      military viewpoint, of resisting a German offensive, if it began
      on January 1? If not, when would our army be in a position to
      resist a German offensive?
      
    (5) In the event of a swift German
      advance, could our army retire in good order and preserve its
      artillery, and if so. could the Germans’ advance into the
      heart of Russia be held up for long?

    (6) General conclusion: from the point of
      view of the state of the army, should we strive to drag out the
      peace negotiations, or would it be preferable to break them off
      immediately in revolutionary fashion, because of the Germans
      annexationist policy and as a decisive and firm step which would
      prepare the ground for a possible revolutionary war?

    (7) Should we at once undertake intensive
      agitation against the Germans’ annexationist policy and for a
      revolutionary war?

    (8) Would it be possible at very short
      notice (5-10 days, say) to arrange a canvass of fairly wide
      sections of the army at the front with a view to obtaining fuller
      replies to the above questions in more suitable form?

    (9) Is it to be hoped that the dissensions
      with the Ukrainians will weaken, or even yield place to a firm
      consolidation of forces when they hear of the Germans’
      annexationist demands, or it may be expected that the Ukrainians
      will take advantage of the Great Hussians’ greater
      difficulties to step up the struggle against them?

    (10) If the army could vote would it be in
      favour of immediate peace on annexationist (loss of the occupied
      regions) and economically very harsh terms for Russia, or would it
      favour the maximum effort for a revolutionary war, i.e.,
      resistance to the Germans?
    
Footnotes

[1]
      The questions were raised by Lenin on December 17 (30), 1917. at
      a conference of delegates to the Army Congress on the
      Demobilisation of the Army whom the Congress had elected to
      participate in a Commission for the Demobilisation of the Army
      under the People’s Commissariat for the Army. No answers or
      summaries of answers have been discovered in the archives. It
      would appear that the answers helped Lenin to arrive at the firm
      conviction that it would be impossible to continue the war with
      the Germans, and were taken into account in working out the
      Party’s tactics at the peace talks with Germany. The
      results of the questionnaire were discussed by the government on
      December 18 (31) after a report given by N. V. Krylenko on the
      situation at the front and the morale of the army. The
      government resolved to recognise the results of the
      questionnaire as being exhaustive and adopted a resolution
      drafted by Lenin.

    
      The manuscript of Lenin’s questionnaire has not come down
      to us; the text published here was given in a letter from a man
      who was present at the conference, D. S. Vitebsky, to the Lenin
      Institute in 1924.

    
      The Army Congress on the Demobilisation of the Army was held in
      Petrograd from December 15 (28), 1917, to January 3 (16),
      1918. It was attended by delegates from the Soviets of
      Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies front-line arid corps
      committees, engineers, artillery units and brigades, staffs,
      etc. When the Congress opened there were 234 delegates, 119 of
      them Bolsheviks and 45 Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. The
      Mensheviks and the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries appeared to
      have formed the so-called extra-factional group. The number of
      delegates subsequently increased to 272. The task of the
      Congress was to control the spontaneous demobilisation of the
      army and to discuss the creation of a new army of the socialist
      state. The Congress was for all purposes a caretaker organ to
      guide the army demobilisation and did a great deal of work to
      that effect.

    
      On December 28, 1917 (January 10, 1918), the Congress discussed
      the organisation of a socialist army, and the Bolshevik group
      motioned a project for the formation of a workers’ and
      peasants’ army. It was opposed by the Mensheviks and Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. After some hesitation the
      Left-wingers supported the Bolsheviks. The project was adopted
      by 153 to 40 with 13 abstentions.

    
      Lenin was expected to speak at the Congress but was unable to do
      so because of pressure of work. On January 3 (16), the closing
      day, he sent a message of greetings to the delegates.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Resolution of the Council of
    People’s Commissars
  







Draft Resolution Of The Council Of People's Commissars







V. I. Lenin
Draft Resolution Of The Council Of People’s
      Commissars[1]


Delivered: 18 December, 1917
      
First Published: 1929 in Lenin
      Miscellany XI

Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 397

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      1. Intensified agitation against the annexationist policy of the
      Germans.
    

      2. Allocation of additional funds for this agitation.
    

      3. Transfer of peace negotiations to Stockholm.
    

      4. Continuation of peace negotiations and resistance to their
        speed-up by the Germans.
    

      5. Greater efforts to reorganise the army, reducing its strength
        and enhancing its defence potential.
    

      6. Urgent measures for defence in the event of a breakthrough to
        Petrograd.
    

      7. Propaganda and agitation on the necessity for a revolutionary
         war.
    
Footnotes

[1]
      Adopted by the Council of PeopleÃs Commissars on December 18
      (31), 1917.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Resolution of the Council of
    People’s Commissars On Negotiations
    With the Rada 







Resolution Of The Council Of People's Commissars On Negotiations With The Rada







V. I. Lenin
Resolution Of The Council Of People’s Commissars
      On Negotiations With The Rada


Delivered: 19 December, 1917
      
First Published: 21 December, 1917 in
      Pravda No. 220. And Izvestia No. 257.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 398-399

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      Having heard the report of Comrade Proshyan, who, as a delegate
      to the Peasants’ Congress, had a talk with Vinnichenko,
      Grushevsky, Porsh and others, in their capacity of official
      representatives of the Rada; 

    
      and considering that these official representatives of the Rada
      have expressed their readiness in principle to negotiate an
      agreement with the Council of People’s Commissars on the
      basis of recognition by the Council of People’s Commissars
      of the independence of the peop!e’s Ukrainian republic, and
      the Rada’s recognition of the counter-revolutionary nature
      of Kaledin and his accomplices;

    
      considering further that the Council of People’s Commissars
      has always unconditionally recognised the right of every nation,
      including the Ukrainian, to exist as an independent state;

    
      that any attempt to avoid war with the Rada, provided the Rada
      recognised Kaledin’s counter-revolutionary nature and did
      not hamper the war against him, was undoubtedly desirable;

    
      expressing its conviction that only the Soviets of the Ukrainian
      poor peasants, workers and soldiers could set up a power in the
      Ukraine under which clashes between fraternal peoples would be
      impossible,

    
      the Council of People’s Commissars, deeming it appropriate
      at the same time to open effective negotiations with the Rada
      with the aim of stopping the clashes caused by the Rada’s
      policy in respect of the common front and Kaledin’s
      counterrevolutionary revolt, resolves:

    
      to invite the Rada to negotiate an agreement on the
      above-mentioned principles and to designate the town of Smolensk
      or Vitebsk as being probably the most convenient place for the
      negotiations.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Fear of the Collapse of the Old and the Fight For the New
  








Fear Of The Collapse Of Tile Old And The Fight For Tile New







V. I. Lenin
Fear Of The Collapse Of Tile Old
     And The Fight For Tile New

Delivered: 24-27 December,
    1917
First Published: January 22, 1929 in
    Pravda No. 18
Source:Lenin’s Collected Works,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pp. 400-403
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George Hanna,
    Edited by George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: Charles Farrell and
    David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000

The capitalists and their supporters, witting and unwitting,
    are thinking, saying and writing: “The Bolsheviks have now been in     power for two months, but instead of a socialist paradise we find the hell     of chaos, civil war and even greater dislocation.”
We reply: the Bolsheviks have been in power for only two months, but a     tremendous step towards socialism has already been made. This is not     evident only to those who do not wish to see or are unable to analyse the     chain of historical events. They refuse to see that in a matter of weeks     the undemocratic institutions in the army, the countryside and industry     have been almost completely destroyed. There is no other way—there     can be no other way—to socialism save through such destruction. They     refuse to see that in a few weeks, the lying imperialist foreign policy,     which dragged out the war and covered up plunder and seizure through secret     treaties, has been replaced by a truly revolutionary-democratic policy     working for a really democratic peace, a policy which has already produced     such a great practical success as the armistice and has increased the     propaganda power of our revolution a hundredfold. They refuse to see that     workers’ control and the nationalisation of the banks are being put     into practice, and these are the first steps towards socialism.
Those tyrannised by capitalist routine, shocked by the thundering crash     of the old world, and the blast, rumble, and “chaos” (apparent     chaos) as the age-old structures of tsarism and the bourgeoisie break up     and cave in cannot see the historical prospects; nor can those who are     scared by the class struggle at its highest pitch when it turns into civil     war, the only war that is legitimate, just and sacred—not in the     clerical but in the human sense—the sacred war of the oppressed to     overthrow the oppressors and liberate the working people from all     oppression. Actually all these tyrannised, shocked and scared bourgeois,     petty bourgeois and
“those in the service of the bourgeoisie” are frequently     guided, without realising it, by that old, absurd, sentimental and vulgar     intellectualist idea of “introducing socialism”, which they have     acquired from hearsay and scraps of socialist theory, repeating the     distortions of this theory produced by ignoramuses and half-scholars, and     attributing to us Marxists the idea, and even the plan, to     “introduce” socialism.
To us Marxists these notions, to say nothing of the plans, are alien. We     have always known, said and emphasised that socialism cannot be     “introduced”, that it takes shape in the course of the most     intense, the most acute class struggle—which reaches heights of     frenzy and desperation—. and civil war; we have always said that a     long period of “birth-pangs” lies between capitalism and     socialism; that violence is always the midwife of the old society; that a     special state (that is, a special system of organised coercion of a     definite class) corresponds to the transitional period between the     bourgeois and the socialist society, namely, the dictatorship of the     proletariat. What dictatorship implies and means is a state of simmering     war, a state of military measures of struggle against the enemies of the     proletarian power. The Commune was a dictatorship of the proletariat, and     Marx and Engels reproached it for what they considered to be one of the     causes of its downfall, namely, that the Commune had not used its armed     force with sufficient vigour to suppress the resistance of the     exploiters.150
These intellectualist howls about the suppression of capitalist     resistance are actually nothing but an echo of the old     “conciliation”, to put it in a “genteel” manner.     Putting it with proletarian bluntness, this means: continued kowtowing to     the money-bags is what lies behind the howls against the present     working-class coercion now being applied (unfortunately, with insufficient     pressure or vigour) against the bourgeoisie, the saboteurs and     counter-revolutionaries. The kind Pesbekbonov, one of the conciliating     ministers, proclaimed in June 1917: “The resistance of the capitalists     has been broken.’ This kind soul had no inkling of the fact that their     resistance must really be broken, and it will be broken,     and that the scientific name for this breaking-up operation is dictatorship     of the proletariat; that an entire historical period is marked by the     suppression of capitalist resistance, and, consequently, by systematic     application of coercion to an entire class (the bourgeoisie) and     its accomplices.
The grasping, malicious, frenzied filthy avidity of the money-bags, the     cowed servility of their hangers-on is the true social source of the     present wail raised by the spineless intellectuals—from those of     Rech to those of Novaya Zhizn— against violence on     the part of the proletariat and the revolutionary peasants. Such is the     objective meaning of their howls, their pathetic speeches, their clownish     cries of “freedom” (freedom for the capitalists to oppress the     people), etc. They would be “prepared” to recognise socialism, if     mankind could Jump straight into it in one spectacular leap, without any of     the friction, the struggles, the exploiters’ gnashing of teeth, or     their diverse attempts to preserve the old order, or smuggle it back     through the window, without the revolutionary proletariat responding to     each attempt in a violent manner. These spineless hangers-on of the     bourgeoisie with intellectualist pretensions are quite “prepared”     to wade into the water provided they do not get their feet wet.
The drooping intellectuals are terrified when the bourgeoisie and the     civil servants, employees, doctors, engineers, etc., who have grown     accustomed to serving the bourgeoisie, go to extremes in their resistance.     They tremble and utter even shriller cries about the need for a return to     “conciliation”. Like all true friends of the oppressed class, we     can only derive satisfaction from the exploiters’ extreme measures of     resistance, because we do not expect the proletariat to mature for power in     an atmosphere of cajoling and persuasion, in a school of mealy sermons or     didactic declamations, but in the school of life and struggle. To become     the ruling class and defeat the bourgeoisie for good the proletariat must     be schooled, because the skill this implies does not come     ready-made. The proletariat must do its learning in the struggle, and     stubborn, desperate struggle in earnest is the only meal teacher. The     greater the extremes of the exploiters’ resistance, the more     vigorously, firmly, ruthlessly and successfully will they be suppressed by     the exploited. The more varied the exploiters’ attempts to uphold the     old, the sooner will the proletariat learn to ferret out its enemies from     their last nook and corner, to pull up the roots of their domination, and     cut the very ground which could (and had to) breed wage-slavery, mass     poverty and the profiteering and effrontery of the money-bags.
The strength of the proletariat and the peasantry allied to it grows     with the resistance of the bourgeoisie and its retainers. As their enemies,     the exploiters, step up their resistance, the exploited mature and gain in     strength; they grow and learn and they cast out the “old Adam” of     wage-slavery. Victory will be on the side of the exploited, for on their     side is life, numerical strength, the strength of the mass, the strength of     the inexhaustible sources of all that is selfless, dedicated and honest,     all that is surging forward and awakening to the building of the new, all     the vast reserves of energy and talent latent in the so-called “common     people”, the workers and peasants. Victory will be theirs.
Lenin

Collected Works Volume
    26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 
 







==========

## 
    How to Organise Competition?








How to Organise Competition?





Vladimir Lenin
How to Organise Competition?


Written: December 24-27, 1917
Source: Collected Works, Volume 26, p.
    404-15
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: Pravda No. 17, January 20,
    1929.
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George Hanna
Online Version: marx.org 1997; marxists.org 1999
Transcribed: Robert Cymbala
HTML Markup: Brian
    Baggins and David Walters

 
Bourgeois authors have been using
    up reams of paper praising competition, private enterprise, and all the
    other magnificent virtues and blessings of the capitalists and the
    capitalist system. Socialists have been accused of refusing to understand
    the importance of these virtues, and of ignoring "human nature". As a
    matter of fact, however, capitalism long ago replaced small, independent
    commodity production, under which competition could develop enterprise,
    energy and bold initiative to any considerable extent, by large-
    and very large-scale factory production, joint-stock companies, syndicates
    and other monopolies. Under such capitalism, competition means the
    incredibly brutal suppression of the enterprise, energy and bold initiative
    of the mass of the population, of its overwhelming majority, of
    ninety-nine out of every hundred toilers; it also means that competition is
    replaced by financial fraud, nepotism, servility on the upper rungs of the
    social ladder.
Far from extinguishing competition, socialism, on the contrary, for the
    first time creates the opportunity for employing it on a really
    wide and on a really mass scale, for actually drawing the
    majority of working people into a field of labour in which they can display
    their abilities, develop the capacities, and reveal those talents, so
    abundant among the people whom capitalism crushed, suppressed and strangled
    in thousands and millions.
Now that a socialist government is in power our task is to organise
    competition.
The hangers-on and spongers on the bourgeoisie described socialism as a
    uniform, routine, monotonous and drab barrack system. The lackeys of the
    money-bags, the lickspittles of the exploiters, the bourgeois intellectual
    gentlemen used socialism as a bogey to "frighten" the people, who, under
    capitalism, were doomed to the penal servitude and the barrack-like
    discipline of arduous, monotonous toil, to a life of dire poverty and
    semi-starvation. The first step towards the emancipation of the people from
    this penal servitude is the confiscation of the landed estates, the
    introduction of workers’ control and the nationalisation of the banks. The
    next steps will be the nationalisation of the factories, the compulsory
    organisation of the whole population in consumers’ societies, which are at
    the same time societies for the sale of products, and the state monopoly of
    the trade in grain and other necessities.




Only now is the opportunity created for the truly mass display of
    enterprise, competition and bold initiative. Every factory from which the
    capitalist has been ejected, or in which he has at least been curbed by
    genuine workers’ control, every village from which the landowning exploiter
    has been smoked out and his land confiscated has only now become a field in
    which the working man can reveal his talents, unbend his back a little,
    rise to his full height, and feel that he is a human being. For the first
    time after centuries of working for others, of forced labour for the
    exploiter, it has become possible to work for oneself and moreover
    to employ all the achievements of modern technology and culture in one’s
    work.
Of course, this greatest change in human history from working under
    compulsion to working for oneself cannot take place without friction,
    difficulties, conflicts and violence against the inveterate parasites and
    their hangers-on. No worker has any illusions on that score. The workers
    and poor peasants, hardened by dire want and by many long years of slave
    labour for the exploiters, by their countless insults and acts of violence,
    realise that it will take time to break the resistance of those
    exploiters. The workers and peasants are not in the least infected with the
    sentimental illusions of the intellectual gentlemen, of the Novaya
    Zhizn crowd and other slush, who "shouted" themselves hoarse
    "denouncing" the capitalists and "gesticulated" against them, only to burst
    into tears and to behave like whipped puppies when it came to
    deeds, to putting threats into action, to carrying out in practice
    the work of removing the capitalists.
The great change from working under compulsion to working for oneself,
    to labour planned and organised on a gigantic, national (and to a certain
    extent international, world) scale, also requires—in addition to
    "military" measures for the suppression of the exploiters’
    resistance—tremendous organisational, organising effort on the
    part of the proletariat and the poor peasants. The organisational task is
    interwoven to form a single whole with the task of ruthlessly suppressing
    by military methods yesterday’s slave-owners (capitalists) and their packs
    of lackeys—the bourgeois intellectual gentlemen. Yesterday’s
    slave-owners and their "intellectual" stooges say and think, "We have
    always been organisers and chiefs. We have commanded, and we want to
    continue doing so. We shall refuse to obey the ’common people’, the workers
    and peasants. We shall not submit to them. We shall convert knowledge into
    a weapon for the defence of the privileges of the money-bags and of the
    rule of capital over the people."
That is what the bourgeoisie and the bourgeois intellectuals say, think,
    and do. From the point of view of self-interest their behaviour is
    comprehensible. The hangers-on and spongers on the feudal landowners, the
    priests, the scribes, the bureaucrats as Gogol depicted them, and the
    "intellectuals" who hated Belinsky, also found it "hard" to part with
    serfdom. But the cause of the exploiters and of their "intellectual"
    menials is hopeless. The workers and peasants are beginning to break down
    their resistance—unfortunately, not yet firmly, resolutely and
    ruthlessly enough—and break it down they will.
"They" think that the "common people", the "common" workers and poor
    peasants, will be unable to cope with the great, truly heroic, in the
    world-historic sense of the word, organisational tasks which the socialist
    revolution has imposed upon the working people. The intellectuals who are
    accustomed to serving the capitalists and the capitalist state say in order
    to console themselves: "You cannot do without us." But their insolent
    assumption has no truth in it; educated men are already making their
    appearance on the side of the people, on the side of the working people,
    and are helping to break the resistance of the servants of capital. There
    are a great many talented organisers among the peasants and the working
    class, and they are only just beginning to become aware of themselves, to
    awaken, to stretch out towards great, vital, creative work, to tackle with
    their own forces the task of building socialist society.
One of the most important tasks today, if not the most important, is to
    develop this independent initiative of the workers, and of all the working
    and exploited people generally, develop it as widely as possible in
    creative organisational work. At all costs we must break the old,
    absurd, savage, despicable and disgusting prejudice that only the
    so-called "upper classes", only the rich, and those who have gone through
    the school of the rich, are capable of administering the state and
    directing the organisational development of socialist society.
This is a prejudice fostered by rotten routine, by petrified views,
    slavish habits, and still more by the sordid selfishness of the
    capitalists, in whose interest it is to administer while plundering and to
    plunder while administering. The workers will not forget for a moment that
    they need the power of knowledge. The extraordinary striving after
    knowledge which the workers reveal, particularly now, shows that mistaken
    ideas about this do not and cannot exist among the proletariat. But every
    rank-and-file worker and peasant who can read and write, who can
    judge people and has practical experience, is capable of
    organisational work. Among the "common people", of whom the
    bourgeois intellectuals speak with such haughtiness and contempt, there are
    many such men and women. This sort of talent among the working
    class and the peasants is a rich and still untapped source.
The workers and peasants are still "timid", they have not yet become
    accustomed to the idea that they are now the ruling
    class; they are not yet resolute enough. The revolution could not at
    one stroke instill these qualities into millions and millions of
    people who all their lives had been compelled by want and hunger to work
    under the threat of the stick. But the Revolution of October 1917 is
    strong, viable and invincible because it awakens these qualities,
    breaks down the old impediments, removes the worn-out shackles, and leads
    the working people on to the road of the independent creation of a
    new life.
Accounting and control--this is the main economic task of every
    Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasant’ Deputies, of every consumers’
    society, of every union or committee of supplies, of every factory
    committee or organ of workers’ control in general.
We must fight against the old habit of regarding the measure of labour
    and the means of production from the point of view of the slave whose sole
    aim is to lighten the burden of labour or to obtain at least some little
    bit from the bourgeoisie. The advanced, class-conscious workers
    have already started this fight, and they are offering determined
    resistance to the newcomers who flocked to the factory world in
    particularly large numbers during the war and who now would like to treat
    the people’s factory, the factory that has come into the
    possession of the people, in the old way, with the sole aim of "snatching
    the biggest possible piece of the pie and clearing out". All the
    class-conscious, honest and thinking peasants and working people will take
    their place in this fight by the side of the advanced workers.
Accounting and control, if carried on by the Soviets of
    Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies as the supreme state power, or
    on the instructions, on the authority, of this power --
    widespread, general, universal accounting and control, the accounting and
    control of the amount of labour performed and of the distribution of
    products—is the essence of socialist transformation, once the
    political rule of the proletariat has been established and secured.
The accounting and control essential for the transition to socialism can
    be exercised only by the people. Only the voluntary and conscientious
    co-operation of the mass of the workers and peasants in accounting
    and controlling the rich, the rogues, the idlers and the rowdies,
    a co-operation marked by revolutionary enthusiasm, can conquer these
    survivals of accursed capitalist society, these dregs of humanity, these
    hopelessly decayed and atrophied limbs, this contagion, this plague, this
    ulcer that socialism has inherited from capitalism.
Workers and peasants, working and exploited people! The land, the banks
    and the factories have now become the property of the entire people! You
    yourselves must set to work to take account of and control the
    production and distribution of products—this, and this alone is
    the road to the victory of socialism, the only guarantee of its victory,
    the guarantee of victory over all exploitation, over all poverty and want!
    For there is enough bread, iron, timber, wool, cotton and flax in Russia to
    satisfy the needs of everyone, if only labour and its products are properly
    distributed, if only a business-like, practical control over this
    distribution by the entire people is established, provided only we can
    defeat the enemies of the people: the rich and their hangers-on, and the
    rogues, the idlers and the rowdies, not only in politics, but also
    in everyday economic life.
No mercy for these enemies of the people, the enemies of socialism, the
    enemies of the working people! War to the death against the rich and their
    hangers-on, the bourgeois intellectuals; war on the rogues, the idlers and
    the rowdies! All of them are of the same brood—the spawn of capitalism,
    the offspring of aristocratic and bourgeois society; the society in which a
    handful of men robbed and insulted the people; the society in which poverty
    and want forced thousands and thousands on to the path of rowdyism,
    corruption and roguery, and caused them to lose all human semblance; the
    society which inevitably cultivated in the working man the desire to escape
    exploitation even by means of deception, to wriggle out of it, to escape,
    if only for a moment, from loathsome labour, to procure at least a crust of
    bread by any possible means, at any cost, so as not to starve, so as to
    subdue the pangs of hunger suffered by himself and by his near ones.
The rich and the rogues are two sides of the same coin, they are the two
    principal categories of parasites which capitalism fostered; they
    are the principal enemies of socialism. These enemies must be placed under
    the special surveillance of the entire people; they must be ruthlessly
    punished for the slightest violation of the laws and regulations of
    socialist society. Any display of weakness, hesitation or sentimentality in
    this respect would be an immense crime against socialism.
In order to render these parasites harmless to socialist society we must
    organise the accounting and control of the amount of work done and of
    production and distribution by the entire people, by millions and millions
    of workers and peasants, participating voluntarily, energetically and with
    revolutionary enthusiasm. And in order to organise this accounting and
    control, which is fully within the ability of every honest,
    intelligent and efficient worker and peasant, we must rouse their
    organising talent, the talent that is to be found in their midst; we must
    rouse among them—and organise on a national scale --
    competition in the sphere of organisational achievement; the
    workers and peasants must be brought to see clearly the difference between
    the necessary advice of an educated man and the necessary control by the
    "common" worker and peasant of the slovenliness that is so usual
    among the "educated".
This slovenliness, this carelessness, untidiness, unpunctuality, nervous
    haste, the inclination to substitute discussion for action, talk for work,
    the inclination to undertake everything under the sun without finishing
    anything, are characteristics of the "educated"; and this is not due to the
    fact that they are bad by nature, still less is it due to their evil will;
    it is due to all their habits of life, the conditions of their work, to
    fatigue, to the abnormal separation of mental from manual labor, and so on,
    and so forth.
Among the mistakes, shortcomings and defects of our revolution a by no
    means unimportant place is occupied by the mistakes, etc., which are due to
    these deplorable—but at present inevitable—characteristics of the
    intellectuals in our midst, and to the lack of sufficient
    supervision by the workers over the organisational work
    of the intellectuals.
The workers and peasants are still "timid"; they must get rid of this
    timidity, and they certainty will get rid of it. We cannot
    dispense with the advice, the instruction of educated people, of
    intellectuals and specialists. Every sensible worker and peasant
    understands this perfectly well, and the intellectuals in our midst cannot
    complain of a lack of attention and comradely respect on the part of the
    workers and peasants. Advice and instruction, however, is one thing, and
    the organisation of practical accounting and control is another.
    Very often the intellectuals give excellent advice and instruction, but
    they prove to be ridiculously, absurdly, shamefully "unhandy" and
    incapable of carrying out this advice and instruction, of
    exercising practical control over the translation of words into
    deeds.
In this very respect it is utterly impossible to dispense with the help
    and the leading role of the practical organisers from among the
    "people", from among the factory workers and working peasants. "It is not
    the gods who make pots"—this is the truth that the workers and peasants
    should get well drilled into their minds. They must understand that the
    whole thing now is practical work; that the historical moment has
    arrived when theory is being transformed into practice, vitalised by
    practice, corrected by practice, tested by practice; when the words of
    Marx, "Every step of real movement is more important than a dozen
    programmes", become particularly true—every step in really curbing in
    practice, restricting, fully registering the rich and the rogues and
    keeping them under control is worth more than a dozen excellent arguments
    about socialism. For, "theory, my friend, is grey, but green is the eternal
    tree of life".
Competition must be arranged between practical organisers from among the
    workers and peasants. Every attempt to establish stereotyped forms and to
    impose uniformity from above, as intellectuals are so inclined to do, must
    be combated. Stereotyped forms and uniformity imposed from above have
    nothing in common with democratic and socialist centralism. The unity of
    essentials, of fundamentals, of the substance, is not disturbed but ensured
    by variety in details, in specific local features, in methods of
    approach, in methods of exercising control, in
    ways of exterminating and rendering harmless the parasites (the
    rich and the rogues, slovenly and hysterical intellectuals, etc.,
    etc.).
The Paris Commune gave a great example of how to combine initiative,
    independence, freedom of action and vigour from below with voluntary
    centralism free from stereotyped forms. Our Soviets are following the same
    road. But they are still "timid"; they have not yet got into their stride,
    have not yet "bitten into" their new, great, creative task of building the
    socialist system. The Soviets must set to work more boldly and display
    greater initiative. All "communes"—factories, villages, consumers’
    societies, and committees of supplies—must compete with each
    other as practical organisers of accounting and control of labour and
    distribution of products. The programme of this accounting and control is
    simple, clear and intelligible to all—everyone to have bread; everyone
    to have sound footwear and good clothing; everyone to have warm dwellings;
    everyone to work conscientiously; not a single rogue (including those who
    shirk their work) to be allowed to be at liberty, but kept in prison, or
    serve his sentence of compulsory labour of the hardest kind; not a single
    rich man who violates the laws and regulations of socialism to be allowed
    to escape the fate of the rogue, which should, in justice, be the fate of
    the rich man. "He who does not work, neither shall he eat"—this is the
    practical commandment of socialism. This is how things should be
    organised practically. These are the practical successes
    our "communes" and our worker and peasant organisers should be proud of.
    And this applies particularly to the organisers among the intellectuals
    (particularly, because they are too much, far too much in
    the habit of being proud of their general instructions and
    resolutions).
Thousands of practical forms and methods of accounting and controlling
    the rich, the rogues and the idlers must be devised and put to a practical
    test by the communes themselves, by small units in town and country.
    Variety is a guarantee of effectiveness here, a pledge of success in
    achieving the single common aim—to clean the land of Russia of
    all vermin, of fleas—the rogues, of bugs—the rich, and so on and so
    forth. In one place half a score of rich, a dozen rogues, half a dozen
    workers who shirk their work (in the manner of rowdies, the manner in which
    many compositors in Petrograd, particularly in the Party printing-shops,
    shirk their work) will be put in prison. In another place they will be put
    to cleaning latrines. In a third place they will be provided with "yellow
    tickets" after they have served their time, so that everyone shall keep an
    eye on them, as harmful persons, until they reform. In a fourth
    place, one out of every ten idlers will be shot on the spot. In a fifth
    place mixed methods may be adopted, and by probational release, for
    example, the rich, the bourgeois intellectuals, the rogues and rowdies who
    are corrigible will be given an opportunity to reform quickly. The more
    variety there will be, the better and richer will be our general
    experience, the more certain and rapid will be the success of socialism,
    and the easier will it be for practice to devise—for only practice can
    devise—the best methods and means of struggle.
In what commune, in what district of a large town, in what factory and
    in what village are there no starving people, no
    unemployed, no idle rich, no despicable lackeys of the
    bourgeoisie, saboteurs who call themselves intellectuals? Where has most
    been done to raise the productivity of labour, to build good new houses for
    the poor, to put the poor in the houses of the rich, to regularly provide a
    bottle of milk for every child of every poor family? It is on these points
    that competition should develop between the communes, communities,
    producer-consumers’ societies and associations, and Soviets of Workers’,
    Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies. This is the work in which talented
    organisers should come to the fore in practice and be
    promoted to work in state administration. There is a great deal of talent
    among the people. It is merely suppressed. It must be given an opportunity
    to display itself. It and it alone, with the support of the
    people, can save Russia and save the cause of socialism.
Vl. Ilyin

Collected Works Volume
    26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive








==========

## 
    Draft Decree on Consumers’
    Communes







Draft Decree On Consumers' Communes







V. I. Lenin
Draft Decree On Consumers’ Communes[1]


Written: 24-27 December, 1917
      
First Published: 22 January, 1929 in
      Izvestia No. 18.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 416-417

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
    2000

  

 

      The war, brought about by the conflict between capitalists for
      the division of the spoils of depredation, has resulted in
      untold ruin. This is intensified by criminal speculation and
      profiteering, particularly among the wealthy classes, which have
      brought the tortures of hunger and unemployment to hundreds of
      thousands and even millions of people. The need to adopt
      extraordinary measures to aid the starving and to wage merciless
      war on speculators has induced the workers’ and
      peasants’ government to enact the following regulations as
      a law of the Russian Republic:

    
      Every citizen of the state shall belong to a local (village,
      volost, hamlet, section of a town, section of a street,
      etc.) consumers society.

    
      The grouping of families in the consumers’ societies shall
      be voluntary, except for the proviso that not less than
      two-thirds of the number of families in each society must belong
      to the non-affluent classes (i.e., workers, peasants not
      employing hired labour, and so on).

    
      Apart from the purchase and distribution of products, every
      consumers’ society shall engage in the sale of local
      products. The boards of the consumers’ societies shall set
      up committees of supplies, and no transport of products
      shall be permitted without the written sanction of the
      appropriate committee of supplies.

    
      Existing consumers’ societies are hereby nationalised and
      shall be obliged to admit to membership the whole population of
      the localities in which they are situated, without exception.

    
      If they so desire private individuals may purchase products in
      the central stores and not in their local shops, but only on
      condition that the relevant entry is made in the book of the
      local consumers’ society.

    
      The transport, purchase and sale of products without a permit
      from the committees of supplies shall he punishable by the
      confiscation of the whole of the property of the offender, by
      imprisonment for a period of not less than six months and by
      senteuce to compulsory labour.

    
      Permits for the transport or the purchase and sale of products
      shall be (Irawn up in duplicate and signed by not less than
      three members of the board of the committee of supplies
      concerned, one copy being filed by the board.

    
      Each permit must state from which and to which consinners’
      society the products are being consigned.

    
      Telegraph offices shall give priority to the telegrams of the
      committees of supplies.

    
      All committees of supplies shall act under the control and in
      accordance with the instructions of the local Soviets of
      Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants Deputies.

    
      Every individual shall be entitled to acquire at his
      consumers’ society any product, without any restrictions
      whatsoever, except for such regulations as may be established to
      limit the import of products from abroad.

    
      Products produced for sale must be delivered to the local
      committee of supplies at uncontrolled prices, except in cases
      when fixed prices are established by law. Money received for
      products sold shall be entered to the account of the owners in
      the local (village, volost, city, factory or other)
      branch of the People’s Bank.

    
      Every Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies must appoint a group of inspectors, auditors and
      instructors to assist the population to establish consumers
      societies (committees of supplies) and check their accounts and
      all their business.

    
      Instructions on keeping the accounts and on the correspondence
      of the committees of supplies will be issued separately.

 
Footnotes

[1]
      Written December 25-28, 1917 (January 7-10, 1918). Lenin said in
      his Preliminary Theses that in writing the draft he had made use
      of the following documents: Directive of the People’s
      Commissariat for Food to the local Soviets of December 22, 1917
      (January 4, 1918), on organising the food supply machinery; the
      Commissariat’s project for a Commissariat for Supply, and
      also the Supreme Economic Council’s project for district
      economic councils.


    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Resolution of the Council of
    People’s Commissars On the Rada’s
    Reply to the C.P.C







Resolution Of The Council Of People's Commissars On
      The Rada's Reply To The C.P.C.







V. I. Lenin
Resolution Of The Council Of People's Commissars On The
      Rada's Reply To The C.P.C.


Written: 30 December, 1917
      
First Published: 31 December, 1917 in
      Pravda No. 264.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 418-419

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The Council of People’s Commissars regards the Rada’s
      reply as so indefinite and evasive as to verge on mockery. The
      main source of difference with the Rada was the fact clearly
      indicated by the Council of People’s Commissars in its first message to the Rada containing the
      proposal for peace talks. The message said that we regarded the
      Rada’s direct or indirect support of the Kaledinites as
      unconditional ground for military operations against the
      Rada. Counterrevolutionary elements of landowners and the
      bourgeoisie from every part of Russia have rallied round
      Kaledin. He has against him a clear majority of the peasants and
      working Cossacks even in the Don area. It is obvious to everyone
      that Soviet power has been accepted by the majority of the
      population of Russia, above all by the working masses of all
      nations. The revolutionary movement of the Ukrainian working
      classes for the transfer of all power to the Soviets is assuming
      ever greater proportions in the Ukraine itself and holds out the
      prospect of an early victory over the Ukrainian bourgeoisie.

    
      The Rada’s evasion of the question of whether it is
      prepared to stop giving direct and indirect support to the
      Kaledinites has wrecked the peace talks we had started and makes
      the Rada fully responsible for the continued civil war which the
      bourgeois classes of the various nations have launched and which
      is absolutely hopeless, because the over-whelming majority of
      the workers, peasants and soldiers have come down solidly on the
      side of the Soviet Socialist Republic.

    
      As for the national demands of the Ukrainians, the independence
      of their people’s republic, and its right to federate,
      these are all recognised by the Council of People’s
      Commissars and are not in dispute at all.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
  Speech at the Send-Off of the
  Socialist Army’s First Troop
  Trains. January 1 (14), 1918. Newspaper
    Report







Speech At The Send-Off Of The Socialist Army’s First Troop Trains







V. I. Lenin
Speech At The Send-Off
      Of The Socialist Army’s First Troop Trains
January 1(14), 1918[1]
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 1 January, 1918
      
First Published: January 17, 1929 in
      Pravda No. 3 (evening edition).

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 420

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

  
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive
  November, 2000

    

 

      Comrades, I greet you as the living embodiment of the Russian
      proletariat’s determination to fight for the triumph of the
      Russian revolution, for the triumph of its great slogans not
      only in this country, but also among the peoples of the whole
      world. I greet you as the first heroic volunteers of the
      socialist army, who are to build up a mighty revolutionary
      army. This army is called upon to safeguard the gains of the
      revolution and our people’s power, the Soviets of
      Soldiers’, Workers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, the
      whole of this new and truly democratic system, against the
      attacks of all the enemies of the people, who are bending all
      efforts to destroy the revolution. These enemies are the world
      capitalists who are now organising a crusade against the Russian
      revolution, which holds out the prospect of liberation to all
      working people. We must show that we are a force capable of
      overcoming every obstacle on the way to world revolution. Let
      the example of the comrades going into the trenches buoy up the
      weak, steady the hesitant and rouse the weary. The peoples hear
      our revolution’s clarion call and are awakening; our
      army’s ranks will soon be swelled by the proletarian forces
      of other countries and we shall no longer be alone. (Comrade
      Lenin’s words were drowned in shouts of greetings and
      prolonged applause. The volunteers of the socialist army
      accompanied Comrade Lenin to his car to the strains of the
      Internationale.)






Footnotes

[1]
      The send-off took place in Mikhailovsky Manège on January 1
      (14), 1918. As Lenin was returning to the Smolny an attempt was
      made on his life: a bullet went through the windscreen and
      passed over his head. The Swiss Communist, Fritz Platten, who
      was with Lenin, was wounded.


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Declaration of Rights of the Working
    and Exploited People
  







Declaration Of Rights Of The Working And Exploited People







V. I. Lenin
Declaration Of Rights
      Of The Working And Exploited People[1]


Written: 3 January, 1918

      
First Published: 4 January, 1929 in
      Pravda No. 2 and Izvestia No. 2.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 423-425

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The Constituent Assembly resolves:

      I. 1. Russia is hereby proclaimed a Republic of Soviets
      of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies. All power, centrally and locally, is vested in these
      Soviets.

    
      2. The Russian Soviet Republic is established on the
        principle of a free union of free nations, as a federation of
        Soviet national republics.

    
      II. Its fundamental aim being to abolish all exploitation
      of man by man, to completely eliminate the division of society
      into classes, to mercilessly crush the resistance of the
      exploiters, to establish a socialist organisation of society and
      to achieve the victory of socialism in all countries, the
      Constituent Assembly further resolves:

      1. Private ownership of land is hereby abolished. All
        land together with all buildings, farm implements and other
        appurtenances of agricultural production, is proclaimed the
        property of the entire working people.

      2. The Soviet laws on workers’ control and on the
        Supreme Economic Council are hereby confirmed for the purpose
        of guaranteeing the power of the working people over the
        exploiters and as a first step towards the complete conversion
        of the factories, mines, railways, and other means of
        production and transport into the property of the
        workers’ and peasants’ state.

      3. The conversion of all banks into the property of the
        workers’ and peasants’ state is hereby confirmed as
        one of the conditions for the emancipation of the working
        people from the yoke of capital.

      4. For the purpose of abolishing the parasitic sections
        of society, universal labour conscription is hereby
        instituted.

      5. To ensure the sovereign power of the working people,
        and to eliminate all possibility of the restoration of the
        power of the exploiters, the arming of the working people, the
        creation of a socialist Red Army of workers and peasants and
        the complete disarming of the propertied classes are hereby
        decreed.

    
      III. 1. Expressing its firm determination
      to wrest mankind from the clutches of finance capital and
      imperialism, which have in this most criminal of wars drenched the
      world in blood, the Constituent Assembly whole-heartedly endorses
      the policy pursued by Soviet power of denouncing the secret
      treaties, organising most extensive fraternisation with the
      workers and peasants of the armies in the war, and achieving at
      all costs, by revolutionary means, a democratic peace between the
      nations, without annexations and indemnities and on the basis of
      the free self-determination of nations.

      2. With the same end in view, the Constituent Assembly
        insists on a complete break with the barbarous policy of
        bourgeois civilisation, which has built the prosperity of the
        exploiters belonging to a few chosen nations on the
        enslavement of hundreds of millions of working people in Asia,
        in the colonies in general, and in the small countries.

    
      The Constituent Assembly welcomes the policy of the Council of
      People’s Commissars in proclaiming the complete
      independence of Finland, commencing the evacuation of troops
      from Persia, and proclaiming freedom of self-determination for
      Armenia.[2]

      3. The Constituent Assembly regards the Soviet law on the
         cancellation of the loans contracted by the governments of
         the tsar, the landowners and the bourgeoisie as a first blow
         struck at international banking, finance capital, and
         expresses the conviction that Soviet power will firmly pursue
         this path until the international workers’ uprising
         against the yoke of capital has completely triumphed.
    

      IV. Having been elected on the basis of party
      lists drawn up prior to the October Revolution, when the people
      were not yet in a position to rise en masse against the
      exploiters, had not yet experienced the full strength of
      resistance of the latter in defence of their class privileges, and
      had not yet applied themselves in practice to the task of building
      socialist society, the Constituent Assembly considers that it
      would be fundamentally wrong, even formally, to put itself in
      opposition to Soviet power.

    In essence the Constituent Assembly considers that now,
      when the people are waging the last fight against their
      exploiters, there can be no place for exploiters in any government
      body. Power must be vested wholly and entirely in the working
      people and their authorised representatives—the Soviets of
      Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies.

    

      Supporting Soviet power and the decrees of the Council of
      People’s Commissars, the Constituent Assembly considers
      that its own task is confined to establishing the fundamental
      principles of the socialist reconstruction of society.

    At the same time, endeavouring to create a really free and
      voluntary, and therefore all the more firm and stable, union of
      the working classes of all the nations of Russia, the Constituent
      Assembly confines its own task to setting up the fundamental
      principles of a federation of Soviet Republics of Russia, while
      leaving it to the workers and peasants of each nation to decide
      independently at their own authoritative Congress of Soviets
      whether they wish to participate in the federal government and in
      the other federal Soviet institutions, and on what terms.
    

Footnotes

[1]
      The draft of the declaration was placed before the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee on January 3 (16), 1918, and adopted
      as a basis by a majority with two against and one abstention. It
      was referred to a Co-ordinating Commission for final
      drafting. The declaration was adopted by the All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee and published in Izvestia on
      January 4 (17). On behalf of the Committee it was read out by
      Sverdlov at the first sitting of the Constituent Assembly on
      January 5 (18) and motioned for approval. The
      counter-revolutionary majority of the Assembly rejected the
      motion to discuss it. On January 12 (25), it was approved by the
      Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets and subsequently formed the
      basis of the Soviet Constitution.

    
      Paragraph 2 of Lenin’s manuscript was altered by
      Stalin. The paragraph beginning with the words “In essence
      the Constituent Assembly considers...“ was written by
      Bukharin and edited
      by Lenin.
    

[2]
      On December 6 (19), 1917, the Finnish Diet adopted a declaration
      of Finland’s independence. In accordance with the
      nationalities policy of the Soviet state, the Council of Peoples
      Commissars, on December 18 (31), 1917, issued a decree on
      Finland’s independence. At the meeting of the government,
      Lenin personally handed the text of the decree to Prime Minister
      Svinhufvud, who led a Finnish Government delegation. On December
      22, 1917 (January 4, 1918), the decree on Finland’s
      independence was approved by the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee.

    
      On December 19, 1917 (January 1, 1918), in conformity with a
      treaty concluded between Russia and Germany, Austria-Hungary,
      Turkey and Bulgaria at Brest-Litovsk on December 2 (15), the
      Soviet Government proposed to the Persian Government to
      elaborate a common plan for the withdrawal of Russian troops
      from Persia.

    
      On December 29, 1917 (January 11, 1918), the government issued
      the Decree on Turkish Armenia, which was published in
      Pravda No. 227 on December 31, 1917 (January 13,
      1918).
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Letter to the Army Congress On the
    Demobilisation of the Army
  







Letter To The Army Congress On The Demobilisation Of The Army







V. I. Lenin
Letter To The Army Congress
On The Demobilisation Of The Army


Written: 3 January, 1918

      
First Published: 6 January, 1918 the
      newspaper Aarmia I Flot Rabochei I Krestyanskoi rossii
      No. 4

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 426

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

Dear comrades,

      Comrade Podvoisky has told me of your proposal and I ask you not
      to take amiss the fact that I am forced to confine myself to
      writing a letter to you. I whole-heartedly welcome your
      confidence that you will succeed in the great task of
      building a socialist army—in view of all the present
      difficulties and in spite of them. We may be in one of the
      critical periods of the revolution, when Soviet power is
      threatened both by an external foe—the German and other
      imperialists—and an internal one—the
      counter-revolutionaries hiding behind the slogan of “All
      Power to the Constituent Assembly”.

    

      We shall overcome this crisis as well. There is not the least
      doubt about it. The Soviets will retain the power they have
      won. The socialist revolution has begun. It will go on to
      victory in Russia and the whole world.

    
      With best wishes of success and courage in your work.

    
      Yours,
      Lenin

(The reading of the letter was met with loud, prolonged applause.)



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Direct-Line Conversation With
    L. D. Trotsky, Chairman of the Soviet Peace
    Delegation At Brest-Litovsk, January 3(16),
    1918







Direct-Line Conversation With L. D. Trotsky Chairman Of The Soviet Peace Delegation







V. I. Lenin
Direct-Line Conversation With L. D. Trotsky
Chairman Of The Soviet Peace Delegation
      At Brest-Litovsk
January 3 (16), 1918


Written: 3 January, 1918
      
First Published: 1929 in the magazine
      Proletarskaya Revolutsia No. 5. Publshished according
      to the telegraph tape.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 427

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000
    

 
1

      Lenin here. I have just received your special letter. Stalin is
      away and I have not yet been able to show it to him. I think
      your plan is worth discussing. Can its final implementation be
      somewhat deferred, and the final decision taken after a special
      Central Executive Committee meeting over here? I shall show the
      letter to Stalin as soon as he returns.
      
    Lenin.
2

      I should like to consult Stalin before replying to your
      question. A delegation of the Kharkov Ukrainian Central
      Executive Committee, which has assured me that the Kiev Rada is
      on its last legs, is leaving today to join you.

    Lenin.
3

      Stalin has just arrived, I shall discuss it with him, and will
      shortly let you know our joint reply.

    Lenin.
4

      Please inform Trotsky. Request arrange adjournment
      and return to Petrograd.

    Lenin. Stalin.


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Resolution of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee, January 3(16). 1918
  







Resolution Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee January 3 (16), 1918







V. I. Lenin
Resolution Of The All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee
January 3 (16), 1918


Written: 3 January, 1918

      
First Published: 4 January in
      Pravda No. 3 and Izvestia No. 2. Published
      according to the Pravda text.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 427

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      On the basis of all the achievements of the October Revolution,
      and in accordance with the Declaration of the Working and
      Exploited People adopted at the meeting of the Central Executive
      Committee of January 3, 1918, all power in the Russian Republic
      belongs to the Soviets and the Soviet institutions. Accordingly,
      any attempt by any person or institution whatsoever to usurp any
      of the functions of state power will be regarded as a
      counter-revolutionary act. All such attempts will be suppressed
      by every means at the disposal of the Soviet power, including
      the use of armed force.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Declaration of the
    R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks) Group At The
    Constituent Assembly Meeting, January
    1918







Declaration Of The R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks)
      Group At The Constituent Assembly Meeting January 5 (18), 1918







V. I. Lenin
Declaration Of The R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks)
      Group At The Constituent Assembly Meeting
January 5 (18), 1918[1]



Written: 5 January, 1918

      
First Published: 19 January, 1918 in
      Pravda No. 5.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 429-430

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      The vast majority of working Russia—workers, peasants and
      soldiers—have demanded that the Constituent Assembly should
      recognise the gains of the Great October Revolution, the Soviet
      decrees on land, peace and workers’ control, and above all
      the power of the Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
      Peasants’ Deputies. The All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee, fulfilling the will of the vast majority of the
      working classes of Russia, has proposed that the Constituent
      Assembly should declare itself bound by t.his will. However, the
      majority of the Constituent Assembly—in line with the
      pretensions of the bourgeoisie, has rejected this proposal,
      thereby challenging the whole of working Russia.

    
      The majority in the Constituent Assembly went to the Party of
      the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, the party of Kerensky,
      Avksentyev and Chernov. This party, which calls itself socialist
      and revolutionary, is leading the fight of the bourgeois
      elements against the workers’ and peasants’ revolution
      and is in fact a bourgeois and counter-revolutionary party.

    
      The Constituent Assembly, as at present constituted, is the
      result of the balance of forces obtaining before the Great
      October Revolution. The present counter-revolutionary majority
      of the Constituent Assembly elected on outdated party lists, is
      a reflection of an earlier period of the revolution and is
      trying to throw up a roadblock in the way of the workers’
      and peasants’ movement.

    
      The day-long debate has shown that the Party of Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries continues, as it did under Kerensky,
      to lavish the people with promises of all manner of things;
      actually it has decided In light against the power of the
      workers’, peasants’ and soldiers’ Soviets,
      against the socialist measures, the transfer of land and all
      implements to the peasants without compensation, the
      nationalisation of banks, and the repudiation of the state debt.

    
      Refusing for a single moment to cover up the crimes of the
      enemies of the people, we make this announcement of our
      withdrawal from the Constituent Assembly, leaving it to Soviet
      power to take the final decision on the attitude to the
      counter-revolutionary section of the Constituent Assembly. 

      
    
Footnotes

[1]
      When the counter-revolutionary majority of the Constituent
      Assembly refused to discuss the §Declaration of Rights of
      the Working and Exploited People”, the Bolshevik and Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary groups demanded an adjournment to allow
      the groups to confer. Lenin made a short speech at the meeting
      of the Bolshevik group (no record of it remains). He proposed
      that his declaration of the Bolshevik group should be read out
      in the Assembly, after which the Bolsheviks would walk out. His
      proposal was adopted by the group.
    
 When the Bolsheviks left, the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, whose attitude to the Constituent
    Assembly was uncertain, motioned an immediate vote on the attitude
    to the policy of peace conducted by Soviet power. When this
    proposal was rejected by the Right wing, the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries walked out as well.
    
 Shortly after, P. E. Dybenko, People’s
    Commissar for the Navy; who was in charge of security in the
    Taurida Palace, ordered the guard to close the sitting of the
    Constituent Assembly. When Lenin heard of this, he issued the
    following instructions: “The comrades soldiers and sailors on
    guard duty in the Taurida Palace must refrain from any acts of
    violence in respect of the counterrevolutionary section of the
    Constituent Assembly, freely allowing everyone to leave the
    Taurida Palace, but allowing no one in without a special
    pass. Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars,
    V. Ulyanov (Lenin). (Lenin Miliscellany XVIII,
    p. 46. Published in Russian.) The Constituent Assembly adjourned
    at 4:40 am, on January 6 (49), 1918.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    People From Another World







Declaration Of The R.S.D.L.P. (Bolsheviks)
      Group At The Constituent Assembly Meeting January 5 (18), 1918







V. I. Lenin
People From Another World


Written: 6 January, 1918

      
First Published: 21 January, 1918 in
      Pravda No. 17.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 431-433

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      "Friends, I have lost a day," says an old Latin tag. One cannot
      help but recall it when one remembers how the fifth of January
      was lost. 

    
      After real, lively, Soviet work among workers and peasants
      engaged on real tasks, clearing the forest and
      uprooting the stumps of landowner and capitalist exploitation,
      we were suddenly transported to "another world", to arrivals
      from another world, from the camp of the bourgeoisie with its
      willing or unwilling, conscious or unconscious champions, with
      its hangers-on, servants and advocates. Out of the world in
      which the working people and their Soviet organisation were
      conducting the struggle against the exploiters we were
      transported to the world of saccharine phrases, of slick, empty
      declamations, of promises and more promises based, as before, on
      conciliation with the capitalists. 

    
      It is as though history had accidentally, or by mistake, turned
      its clock back, and January 1918 for a single day became May or
      June 1917!  

    
      It was terrible! To be transported from the world of living
      people into the company of corpses, to breathe the odour of the
      dead, to hear those mummies with their empty "social" Louis
      Blanc phrases, to hear Chernov and Tsereteli, was simply
      intolerable. 

    
      Comrade Skvortsov was right when he rapped out to the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries these two or three brief phrases,
      simple, calm and at the same time ruthlessly cutting: "Between
      us everything is over. We are carrying the October Revolution
      against the bourgeoisie to its culmination. We and you are on
      different sides of the barricades." 

      
    
      In reply to that came a torrent of over-smooth, empty phrases
      from Chernov and Tsereteli that carefully avoided only (only!)
      one question—that of Soviet power, of the October
      Revolution. "Let there be no civil war, let there be no
      sabotage," said Chernov, invoking the revolution in the name of
      the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. And the latter who for six
      months, from June 1917 to January 1918, had been sleeping like
      corpses in their coffins, stood up and clapped furiously and
      persistently. It is really so easy and so pleasant to settle the
      problems of the revolution by an incantation. "Let there be no
      civil war, let there be no sabotage, let everybody recognise the
      Constituent Assembly." In what way does that differ, in essence,
      from the invocation: "Let the workers and capitalists make
      peace"? Not in any way. The Kaledins and Ryabushinskys together
      with their imperialist friends in all countries will not
      disappear or change their policy because of the invocations of
      the mealy-mouthed Chernov or because of Tsereteli's boring
      precepts that seem to have been taken from a misunderstood,
      poorly read and misinterpreted book. 

    
      Either conquer the Kaledins and Ryabushinskys or give up the
      revolution. Either victory over the exploiters in the civil war,
      or the collapse of the revolution. Such has been the issue in
      all revolutions, in the English revolution in the
      seventeenth century, in the French in the eighteenth century and
      in the German in the nineteenth century. How could it be thought
      that the Russian revolution in the twentieth century would
      not face that issue? How can wolves become lambs? 

    
      Tsereteli and Chernov do not show a grain of an idea, not the
      slightest desire to accept the fact of the class struggle that
      has become civil war, not by chance, not suddenly, not because
      of somebody's caprice or ill will, but inevitably, in the long
      process of revolutionary development. 

    
      It was a hard, boring and irksome day in the elegant rooms of
      the Taurida Palace, whose very aspect differs from that of
      Smolny approximately in the same way as elegant, but moribund
      bourgeois parliamentarism differs from the plain, proletarian
      Soviet apparatus that is in many ways still disorderly and
      imperfect but is living and vital. There, in that old world of
      bourgeois parliamentarism, the leaders of hostile classes and
      hostile groups of the bourgeoisie did their fencing.
      Here, in the new world of the proletarian and peasant, socialist
      state, the oppressed classes are making clumsy,
      inefficient. . . .[manuscript breaks off at
      this point—Editor]



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Decree on the Dissolution of the
    Constituent Assembly
  







Draft Decree On The Dissolution Of The Constituent
    Assembly







V. I. Lenin
Draft Decree On The Dissolution
      Of The Constituent Assembly[1]


Written: 6 January, 1918

      
First Published: 7 January,
      Izvestia No. 5. Published according to the manuscript.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 434-482

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 

      At its very inception, the Russian revolution produced the
      Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’
      Deputies as the only mass organisation of all the working and
      exploited classes capable of leading the struggle of these
      classes for their complete political and economic emancipation.

    
      During the whole of the initial period of the Russian Revolution
      the Soviets multiplied in number, grew and gained strength and
      were taught by their own experience to discard the illusions of
      compromise with the bourgeoisie and to realise the deceptive
      nature of the forms of the bourgeois-democratic parliamentary
      system; they arrived by practical experience at the conclusion
      that the emancipation of the oppressed classes was impossible
      unless they broke with these forms and with every kind of
      compromise. The break came with the October Revolution, which
      transferred the entire power to the Soviets.

    
      The Constituent Assembly, elected on the basis of electoral
      lists drawn up prior to the October Revolution, was an
      expression of the old relation of political forces which existed
      when power was held by the compromisers and the Cadets. When the
      people at that time voted for the candidates of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party, they were not in a position to
      choose between the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, the
      supporters of the bourgeoisie, and the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, the supporters of socialism. The
      Constituent Assembly, therefore, which was to have crowned the
      bourgeois parliamentary republic, was bound to become an
      obstacle in the path of the October Revolution and Soviet power.

    
      The October Revolution, by giving power to the Soviets, and
      through the Soviets to the working and exploited classes,
      aroused the desperate resistance of the exploiters, and in the
      crushing of this resistance it fully revealed itself as the
      beginning of the socialist revolution. The working classes
      learned by experience that the old bourgeois parliamentary
      system had outlived its purpose and was absolutely incompatible
      with the aim of achieving socialism, and that not national
      institutions, but only class institutions (such as the Soviets)
      were capable of overcoming the resistance of the propertied
      classes and of laying the foundations of socialist society. To
      relinquish the sovereign power of the Soviets, to relinquish the
      Soviet Republic won by the people, for the sake of the bourgeois
      parliamentary system and the Constituent Assembly, would now be
      a step backwards and would cause the collapse of the October
      workers’ and peasants’ revolution.

    
      Owing to the above-mentioned circumstances, the Party of Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, the party of Kerensky, Avksentyev and
      Chernov, obtained the majority in the Constituent Assembly which
      met on January 5. Naturally, this party refused to discuss the
      absolutely clear, precise and unambiguous proposal of the
      supreme organ of Soviet power, the Central Executive Committee
      of the Soviets, to recognise the programme of Soviet power, to
      recognise the Declaration of Rights of the Working and Exploited
      People, to recognise the October Revolution and Soviet power. By
      this action the Constituent Assembly severed all ties with the
      Soviet Republic of Russia. It was inevitable that the Bolshevik
      group and the Left Socialist-Revolutionary group, who now
      patently constitute the overwhelming majority in the Soviets and
      enjoy the confidence of the workers and the majority of the
      peasants, should withdraw from such a Constituent Assembly.

    
      The Right Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik parties are in
      fact carrying on outside the Constituent Assembly a most
      desperate struggle against Soviet power, calling openly in their
      press for its overthrow and describing as arbitrary and unlawful
      the crushing of the resistance of the exploiters by the forces
      of the working classes, which is essential in the interests of
      emancipation from exploitation. They are defending the
      saboteurs, the servants of capital, and are going as far as
      undisguised calls to terrorism, which certain “unidentified
      groups” have already begun. It is obvious that under such
      circumstances the remaining part of the Constituent Assembly
      could only serve as a screen for the struggle of the
      counter-revolutionaries to overthrow Soviet power.

    
      Accordingly, the Central Executive Committee resolves that the
      Constituent Assembly is hereby dissolved.

    

Footnotes

[1] The
    question of dissolving the Constituent Assembly was discussed by
    the Soviet Government on January 6 (19), 4918. The main content of
    the decree dissolving it was set out by Lenin in the form of
    theses.
    
 
      The All-Russia Central Executive Committee met on the night of
      January 6 (19) and by a majority against two, with five
      abstentions, adopted the decree. Lenin spoke on the dissolution
      of the Assembly (see p p. 437-41). The decree was based on
      Lenin’s draft and was published in Pravda and I vestia on
      January 7 (20), 1918.





Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech On the Dissolution of the
    Constituent Assembly Delivered to the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee,
    January 6 (19), 1918
  







Speech On The Dissolution Of The Constituent Assembly







V. I. Lenin
Speech On The Dissolution
      Of The Constituent Assembly
Delivered To The All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee
January 6 (19), 1918


Delivered: 6 January, 1918
      
First Published: 22 January,
      Pravda No. 6. Published according to the manuscript.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 437-441

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and
      George Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 

Comrades, the clash between Soviet power and the Constituent
Assembly results from the entire course of the Russian
revolution, which was confronted by the unprecedented task of
reconstructing society on socialist lines. After the events of
1905 there could be no doubt that tsarism’s day was over
and that it had scrambled out of the pit only because of the
backwardness and ignorance of the rural population.
The Revolution of 1917 was marked on the one hand by the
transformation of the bourgeois imperialist party into a
republican party under the pressure of events, and on the
other hand, by the emergence of democratic organisations, the
Soviets, that had been formed in 1905; even then the
socialists had realised that the organisation of these Soviets
was creating something great, something new and unprecedented
in the history of world revolution. The Soviets, created
solely by the initiative of the people, are a form of
democracy without parallel in any other country of the world.

      
The revolution produced two forces—the union of the
masses for the purpose of overthrowing tsarism, and the
organisations of the working people. When I hear the enemies
of the October Revolution exclaim that the ideas of socialism
are unfeasible and utopian, I usually put to them a plain and
simple question. What in their opinion, I ask, are the
Soviets? What gave rise to these organisations of the people,
which have no precedent in the history of the development of
world revolution? Not one of them has been able to give a
precise answer to this question. Defending the bourgeois
system by inertia, they oppose these powerful organisations,
the formation of which has never before been witnessed in any
revolution in the world. All who are fighting the landowners
are joining forces with the Soviets of Peasants’
Deputies. The Soviets embrace all who do not wish to stand
idle and are devoting themselves to creative work. They have
spread their network over the whole country, and the denser
this network of Soviets of the people, the less will it be
possible to exploit the working people. For the existence of
the Soviets is incompatible with a prosperous bourgeois
system. That is the source of all the contradictions among the
bourgeoisie, who are fighting our Soviets solely in their own
interests.

      
The transition from capitalism to a socialist system entails a
long and bitter struggle. Having overthrown tsarism, the
Russian revolution was bound to go farther; it could not stop
at the victory of the bourgeois revolution; for the war, and
the untold sufferings it caused the exhausted peoples, created
a soil favourable for the outbreak of the social
revolution. Nothing, therefore, is more ludicrous than the
assertion that the subsequent development of the revolution,
and the revolt of the masses that followed, were caused by a
party, by an individual, or, as they vociferate, by the will
of a “dictator“. The fire of revolution broke out
solely because of the incredible sufferings of Russia, and
because of the conditions created by the war, which sternly
and inexorably faced the working people with the alternative
of taking a bold, desperate and fearless step, or of
perishing, of dying from starvation.

    
      And revolutionary fire was manifest in the creation of the
      Soviets—the mainstay of the workers’ revolution. The
      Russian people have made a gigantic advance, a leap from
      tsarism to the Soviets. That is a fact, irrefutable and
      unparalleled. While the bourgeois parliaments of all countries
      and states, confined within the bounds of capitalism and
      private property, have never anywhere supported a
      revolutionary movement, the Soviets, having lit the fire of
      revolution, imperatively command the people to fight, take
      everything into their own hands, and organise themselves. In
      the course of a revolution called forth by the strength of the
      Soviets there are certain to be all kinds of errors and
      blunders.

      But
      everybody knows that revolutionary movements are always
      and inevitably accompanied by temporary chaos, destruction and
      disorder. Bourgeois society is the same war, the same
      shambles; and it was this circumstance that gave rise to and
      accentuated the conflict between the Constituent Assembly and
      the Soviets. Those who point out that we are now
      “dissolving“ the Constituent Assembly although at
one time we defended it are not displaying a grain of sense,
but are merely uttering pompous and meaningless phrases. At
one time, we considered the Constituent Assembly to be better
than tsarism and the republic of Kerensky with their famous
organs of power; but as the Soviets emerged, they, being
revolutionary organisations of the whole people, naturally
became incomparably superior to any parliament in the world, a
fact that I emphasised as far back as last April. By
completely smashing bourgeois and landed property and by
facilitating the final upheaval which is sweeping away all
traces of the bourgeois system, the Soviets impelled us on to
the path that has led the people to organise their own
lives. We have taken up this great work of organisation, and
it is well that we have done so. Of course, the socialist
revolution cannot be immediately presented to the people in a
clean, neat and impeccable form; it will inevitably be
accompanied by civil war, sabotage and resistance. Those who
assert the contrary are either liars or cowards. (Stormy
applause.) The events of April 20, when the people,
without any directions from “dictators“ or parties,
came out independently and solidly against the government of
compromisers, showed even then that the bourgeoisie were weak
and had no solid support. The masses sensed their power, and
to placate them the famous game of ministerial leapfrog began,
the object of which was to fool the people. But the people
very soon saw through the game, particularly after Kerensky,
both his pockets stuffed with predatory secret treaties with
the imperialists, began to move the armies for an
offensive. Gradually the activities of the compromisers became
obvious to the deceived people, whose patience began to be
exhausted. The result was the October Revolution. The people
learned by experience, having suffered torture, executions and
wholesale shootings and it is nonsense for the butchers to
assert that the Bolsheviks, or certain “dictators“,
are responsible for the revolt of the working people. They are
given the lie by the split that is occurring among the people
themselves at congresses, meetings, conferences, and so
forth. The people have not yet fully under-stood the October
Revolution. This revolution has shown in practice how the
people must take into their own hands, the hands of the
workers’ and peasants state, the land, the natural
resources, and the means of transport and production. Our cry
was, All power to the Soviets; it is for this we are
fighting. The people wanted the Constituent Assembly summoned,
and we summoned it. But they sensed immediately what this
famous Constituent Assembly really was. And now we have
carried out the will of the people, which is~— All power
to the Soviets. As for the saboteurs, we shall crush
them. When I came from Smolny, that fount of life and vigour,
to the Taurida Palace, I felt as though I were in the company
of corpses and lifeless mummies. They drew on all their
available resources in order to fight socialism, they resorted
to violence and sabotage, they even turned knowledge—the
great pride of humanity—into a means of exploiting the
working people. But although they managed to hinder somewhat
the advance towards the socialist revolution, they could not
stop it and will never be able to. Indeed the Soviets that
have begun to smash the old, outworn foundations of the
bourgeois system, not in gentlemanly, but in a blunt
proletarian and peasant fashion, are much too strong.

      
To hand over power to the Constituent Assembly would again be
compromising with the malignant bourgeoisie. The Russian
Soviets place the interests of the working people far above
the interests of a treacherous policy of compromise disguised
in a new garb. The speeches of those outdated politicians,
Chernov and Tsereteli, who continue whining tediously for the
cessation of civil war, give off the stale and musty odour of
antiquity. But as long as Kaledin exists, and as long as the
slogan “All power to the Constituent Assembly“
conceals the slogan “Down with Soviet power“, civil
war is inevitable. For nothing in the world will make us give
up Soviet power! (Stormy applause.) And when the
Constituent Assembly again revealed its readiness to
post-pont’ all the painfully urgent problems and tasks
that were placed before it by the Soviets, we told the
Constituent Assembly that they must not be postponed for one
single moment. And by the will of Soviet power the Constituent
Assembly, which has refused to recognise the power of the
people, is being dissolved. The Byabushinskys have lost their
stakes; their attempts at resistance will only accentuate and
provoke a new outbreak of civil war.

      
The Constituent Assembly is dissolved. The Soviet
revolutionary republic will triumph, no matter what. the
cost. (Stormy applause. Ovation.)
      


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    On the History of the Question of the
    Unfortunate Peace







On The History Of The Question Of The Unfortunate Peace








V. I. Lenin
On The History Of The Question Of The Unfortunate Peace


Written: the Theses 7 January, 1918;
      Thesis 22 on 21 January; Introduction 11 February, 1918.

      
First Published: Without Thesis 22 in
      Pravda No. 34, 24 February, 1918.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 442-450

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 

      It might be argued that this is no time to deal with
      history. Certainly, this kind of assertion would be permissible
      if a particular question from the past were not inseparably and
      directly connected in practice with the present. The question of
      the unfortunate peace, the exceptionally harsh peace is,
      however, such a burning question that it calls for
      elucidation. I am therefore publishing my theses on this subject
      that were read at a meeting of about sixty of the leading
      Petrograd Party functionaries on January 8, 1918. 
    

      Here are these theses: 
    
  January 7, 1918. 
    

      Theses On The Question Of The Immediate Conclusion Of A Separate
      And Annexationist Peace[1]


      1. The position of the Russian revolution at the present moment
      is such that nearly all the workers and the vast majority of the
      peasants undoubtedly side with Soviet power and the socialist
      revolution which it has started. To that extent the socialist
      revolution in Russia is assured. 
    


      2. At the same time, the civil war, provoked by the frantic
      resistance of the wealthy classes, who realise full well that
      they are faced with the last and decisive fight for the
      preservation of private ownership of the land and means of
      production, has not yet reached its climax. The victory of
      Soviet power in this war is assured, but some time must
      inevitably elapse, no little exertion of effort will inevitably
      be required, a certain period of acute economic dislocation and
      chaos, which accompany all wars, and civil war in particular, is
      inevitable, before the resistance of the bourgeoisie is
      crushed. 
    


      3. Furthermore, this resistance, in its less active and
      non-military forms—sabotage, the hire of declassed elements
      and agents of the bourgeoisie, who worm their way into the ranks
      of the socialists in order to ruin their cause, and so on and so
      forth—has proved so stubborn and capable of assuming such
      diversified forms, that the fight against it will inevitably
      require some more time, and, in its main forms, is hardly likely
      to end until several months have passed. And unless this passive
      and covert resistance of the bourgeoisie and its supporters-is
      definitely crushed the socialist revolution cannot succeed. 
    


      4. Lastly, the organisational problems of the socialist
      transformation of Russia are so immense and difficult that their
      solution—in view of the numerous petty-bourgeois
      fellow-travellers of the socialist proletariat, and of the
      latter's low cultural level—will also require a fairly long
      time. 
    


      5. All these circumstances taken together are such as to make it
      perfectly clear that for the success of socialism in Russia a
      certain amount of time, several months at least, will be
      necessary, during which the hands of the socialist government
      must be absolutely free to achieve victory over the bourgeoisie
      first in our own country and to launch far-reaching mass
      organisational work on a wide scale. 
    


      6. The position of the socialist revolution in Russia must form
      the basis of any definition of the international tasks of our
      Soviet power, for the international situation in the fourth year
      of the war is such that it is quite impossible to predict the
      probable moment of outbreak of revolution and overthrow of any
      of the European imperialist governments (including the
      German). That the socialist revolution in Europe must come, and
      will come, is beyond doubt. All our hopes for the final
      victory of socialism are founded on this certainty and on this
      scientific prognosis. Our propaganda activities in general, and
      the organisation of fraternisation in particular, must be
      intensified and extended. It would be a mistake, however, to
      base the tactics of the Russian socialist government on attempts
      to determine whether or not the European, and especially the
      German, socialist revolution will take place in the next six
      months (or some such brief period). Inasmuch as it is quite
      impossible to determine this, all such attempts, objectively
      speaking, would be nothing but a blind gamble. 
    


      7. The peace negotiations in Brest-Litovsk have by
      now—January 7, 1918—made it perfectly clear that the
      war party has undoubtedly gained the upper hand in the German
      Government (which has the other governments of the Quadruple
      Alliance at its beck and call) and has virtually already
      presented Russia with an ultimatum (and it is to be expected,
      most certainly to be expected, that any day now it will be
      presented formally). The ultimatum is as follows: either the
      continuation of the war, or a peace with annexations, i.e.,
      peace on condition that we surrender all the territory we have
      occupied, while the Germans retain all the territory
      they have occupied and impose upon us an indemnity (outwardly
      disguised as payment for the maintenance of prisoners)—an
      indemnity of about three thousand million rubles,
      payable over a number of years. 
    


      8. The socialist government of Russia is faced with the
      question—a question whose solution brooks no delay—of
      whether to accept this peace with annexations now, or to
      immediately wage a revolutionary war. In fact, no middle course
      is possible. No further postponement can now be achieved, for we
      have already done everything possible and impossible to
      deliberately protract the negotiations. 
    


      9. On examining the arguments in favour of an immediate
      revolutionary war, the first argument we encounter is that a
      separate peace at this juncture would, objectively speaking, be
      an agreement with the German imperialists, an "imperialistic
      deal", and so forth, and that, consequently, such a peace would
      mean a complete break with the fundamental principles of
      proletarian internationalism. 
      
    


      This argument, however, is obviously incorrect. Workers who lose
      a strike and sign terms for the resumption of work which are
      unfavourable to them and favourable to the capitalists, do not
      betray socialism. The only people who betray socialism are those
      who secure advantages for a section of the workers in exchange
      for profit to the capitalists; only such agreements are
      impermissible in principle.  
      
    


      He betrays
      socialism who calls the war with German imperialism a defensive
      and just war, but actually receives support from the
      Anglo-French imperialists, and conceals secret treaties
      concluded with them from the people. He does not in the least
      betray socialism who, without concealing anything from the
      people, and without concluding any secret treaties with the
      imperialists, agrees to sign terms of peace which are
      unfavourable to the weak nation and favourable to the
      imperialists of one group, if at that moment there is no
      strength to continue the war. 
    


      10. Another argument in favour of immediate war is that, by
      concluding peace, we objectively become agents of German
      imperialism, for we afford it the opportunity to release troops
      from our front, we surrender to it millions of prisoners of war,
      and so on. But this argument too is manifestly incorrect, for a
      revolutionary war at the present juncture would, objectively
      speaking, make us agents of Anglo-French imperialism, by
      providing it with forces which would promote its aims. The
      British bluntly offered our Commander-in-Chief, Krylenko, one
      hundred rubles per month for every one of our soldiers provided
      we continued the war. Even if we did not take a single kopek
      from the Anglo-French, we nevertheless would be helping them,
      objectively speaking, by diverting part of the German army. 
      
    


      From that point of view, in neither case would we be entirely
      escaping some sort of imperialist bond, and it is obvious that
      it is impossible to escape it completely without overthrowing
      world imperialism. The correct conclusion from this is that the
      moment a socialist government triumphed in any one country,
      questions must be decided, not from the point of view of whether
      this or that imperialism is preferable, but exclusively from the
      point of view of the conditions which best make for the
      development and consolidation of the socialist revolution which
      has already begun. 
      
    


      In other words, the underlying principle of our tactics must not be,
      which of the two imperialisms it is more profitable to aid at
      this juncture, but rather, how the socialist revolution can be
      most firmly and reliably ensured the possibility of
      consolidating itself, or, at least, of maintaining itself in one
      country until it is joined by other countries.  
      
    


      11. It is said that the German Social-Democratic opponents of
      the war have now become "defeatists" and are requesting us not
      to yield to German imperialism. But we recognised defeatism only
      in respect of one's own imperialist bourgeoisie, and we
      always discountenanced victory over an alien imperialism,
      victory attained in formal or actual alliance with a "friendly"
      imperialism, as a method impermissible in principle and
      generally wrong. 
    


      This argument is therefore only a modification of the previous
      one. If the German Left Social-Democrats were proposing that we
      delay concluding a separate peace for a definite
      period, and guaranteed revolutionary action in Germany within
      this period, the question might assume a different
      aspect for us. Far from saying this, however, the German Lefts
      formally declare: "Hold out as long as you can, but decide the
      question from the point of view of the state of affairs in the
      Russian socialist revolution, for we cannot promise you
      anything positive regarding the German revolution." 
      
    


      12. It is said that in a number of Party statements we actually
      "promised" a revolutionary war, and that by concluding a
      separate peace we would be going back on our word. 
    


      That is not true. We said that in the era of imperialism a
      socialist government had to "prepare for and wage " a
      revolutionary war; we said this in order to combat abstract
      pacifism and the theory that "defence of the fatherland" must be
      completely rejected in the era of imperialism. and, lastly to
      combat the purely selfish instincts of a part of the soldiers,
      but we never gave any pledge to start a revolutionary war
      without considering whether it is possible to wage it at a given
      moment. 
    


      Unquestionably, even at this juncture we must prepare
      for a revolutionary war. We are carrying out this promise,
      as we have, in general, carried out all our promises that could
      be carried out at once: we annulled the secret treaties, offered
      all peoples a fair peace, and several times did our best to drag
      out peace negotiations so as to give other peoples a chance to
      join us.  
      
    


      But the question whether it is possible to carry on a revolutionary
      war now, immediately, must be decided
      exclusively from the point of view of whether material
      conditions permit it, and of the interests of the socialist
      revolution which has already begun. 
    


      13. Summing up the arguments in favour of an immediate
      revolutionary war, we have to conclude that such a policy might
      perhaps answer the human yearning for the beautiful, dramatic
      and striking, but that it would totally disregard the objective
      balance of class forces and material factors at the present
      stage of the socialist revolution now under way. 
    


      14. There can be no doubt that our army is absolutely in no
      condition at the present moment, and will not be for the next
      few weeks (and probably for the next few months), to beat back a
      German offensive successfully; firstly, owing to the extreme
      fatigue and exhaustion of the majority of the soldiers, coupled
      with the incredible chaos in the matter of food supply,
      replacement of the overfatigued, etc.; secondly, owing to the
      utter unfitness of the horses and the consequent inevitable ruin
      of our artillery; and, thirdly, owing to the absolute
      impossibility of defending the coastline from Riga to Revel,
      which affords the enemy a very certain chance of seizing the
      rest of Lifland, and then Estland, and of outflanking a large
      part of our forces, and finally, of capturing Petrograd. 
    


      15. Further, there is not the slightest doubt that the peasant
      majority of our army would at the present juncture unreservedly
      declare in favour of a peace with annexations and not in favour
      of an immediate revolutionary war; the socialist reorganisation
      of the army, the merging of the Red Guard detachments with it,
      and so on, have only just begun. 
 
    


      With the army completely democratised, to carry on war in
      defiance of the wishes of the majority of the soldiers would be
      a reckless gamble, while to create a really staunch and
      ideologically stable socialist workers' and peasants' army will,
      at the very least, require months and months. 
    


      16. The poor peasants in Russia are capable of supporting the
      socialist revolution led by the working class, but they are not
      capable of agreeing to fight a serious revolutionary war
      immediately, at the present juncture. To ignore the objective
      balance of class forces on this issue would be a fatal error. 
    


      17. Consequently, the situation at present with regard to a
      revolutionary war is as follows: 
    


      If the German revolution were to break out and triumph in the
      coming three or four months, the tactics of an immediate
      revolutionary war might perhaps not ruin our socialist
      revolution. 
    


      If, however, the German revolution does not occur in the next
      few months, the course of events, if the war is continued, will
      inevitably be such that grave defeats will compel Russia to
      conclude an even more disadvantageous separate peace, a peace,
      moreover, which would be concluded, not by a socialist
      government, but by some other (for example, a bloc of the
      bourgeois Rada and Chernov's followers, or something
      similar). For the peasant army, which is exhausted to the limit
      by the war, will after the very first defeats—and very
      likely within a-matter of weeks, and not of
      months—overthrow the socialist workers' government. 
    


      18. This being the state of affairs, it would be absolutely
      impermissible tactics to stake the fate of the socialist
      revolution, which has already begun in Russia, merely on the
      chance that the German revolution may begin in the immediate
      future, within a matter of weeks. Such tactics would be a
      reckless gamble. We have no right to take such risks. 
    


      19. The German revolution will by no means be made more
      difficult of accomplishment as far as its objective premises are
      concerned, if we conclude a separate peace. Probably chauvinist
      intoxication will weaken it for a time, but Germany's position
      will remain extremely grave, the war with Britain and America
      will be a protracted one, and aggressive imperialism will be
      fully and completely exposed on both sides. A socialist Soviet
      Republic in Russia will stand as a living example to the peoples
      of all countries, and the propaganda and revolutionising effect
      of this example will be immense. There—the bourgeois system
      and a fully exposed predatory war between two groups of
      marauders. Here—peace and a socialist Soviet Republic. 
    


      20. In concluding a separate peace we free ourselves as much
as is possible at the present moment from both hostile
      imperialist groups, we take advantage of their mutual enmity and
      warfare which hamper concerted action on their part against us,
      and for a certain period have our hands free to advance and to
      consolidate the socialist revolution. The reorganisation of
      Russia on the basis of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and
      the nationalisation of the banks and large-scale industry,
      coupled with exchange of products in kind between the
      towns and the small-peasant consumers' societies, is quite
      feasible economically, provided we are assured a few months in
      which to work in peace. And such a reorganisation will render
      socialism invincible both in Russia and all over the world, and
      at the same time will create a solid economic basis for a mighty
      workers' and peasants' Red Army. 
    


      21. A really revolutionary war at this juncture would be a war
      waged by a socialist republic against the bourgeois countries,
      with the aim—an aim clearly defined and fully approved by
      the socialist army—of overthrowing the bourgeoisie in other
      countries. However, we obviously cannot set ourselves
      this aim at the present moment. Objectively, we would
      be fighting now for the liberation of Poland, Lifland and
      Courland. But no Marxist, without renouncing the principles of
      Marxism and of socialism generally, can deny that the interests
      of socialism are higher than the interests of the right of
      nations to self-determination. Our socialist republic has done
      all it could, and continues to do all it can to give effect to
      the right to self-determination of Finland, the Ukraine,
      etc. But if the concrete situation is such that the existence of
      the socialist republic is being imperilled at the present moment
      on account of the violation of the right to self-determination
      of several nations (Poland, Lifland, Courland, etc.), naturally
      the preservation of the socialist republic has the higher
      claim. 
    


      Consequently, whoever says, "We cannot sign a humiliating,
      atrocious, etc., peace, betray Poland, and so forth", does not
      realise that by concluding peace on the condition that Poland is
      liberated, he would only be strengthening German imperialism
      against Britain, Belgium, Serbia and other countries still
      further. Peace on the condition of the liberation of
      Poland, Lifland and Courland would be a "patriotic" peace
      from the point of view of Russia, but would by no means
      cease to be a peace with the annexationists, with the
      German imperialists.
    


      January 21, 1918. The following should be
      added to the above theses: 
    

      22. The mass strikes in Austria and Germany, and, subsequently,
      the formation of the Soviets of Workers' Deputies in Berlin and
      Vienna, and, lastly, beginning from January 18-20, armed clashes
      and street fighting in Berlin—all this should be regarded
      as evidence of the fact that the revolution in Germany has
      begun. 
    

      This fact offers us the opportunity, for the time being, of
      further delaying and dragging out the peace negotiations.  
    
Footnotes

[1] A
      discussion of the question of war and peace was held by the
      Central Committee on January 11 (24), 1918, following a speech
      by Lenin, who was opposed by the Left Communists and
      Trotsky. Some of them—Bukharin, Uritsky, Lomov
      (Oppokov)—supported Trotsky's proposal for a "neither war
      nor peace" attitude. Stalin, Sergeyev (Artyom) and Sokolnikov
      favoured peace. The Left Communists did not expect the
      "revolutionary war now" slogan to go through (only two voted for
      it), and so voted for Trotsky's proposal, which received 9 votes
      to 7 against. In the hope of overcoming the resistance to the
      conclusion of peace within the Central Committee and winning
      over the section of the masses which followed the advocates of a
      revolutionary war, Lenin motioned the proposal that the talks
      should be delayed in every possible way, and this was passed by
      12 votes to one.   
    
N. Lenin


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Afterword to the Theses on the
    Question of the Immediate Conclusion of a
    Separate and Annexationist Peace







Afterword To The Theses On The Question Of The Immediate
    Conclusion
      Of A Separate And Annexationist Peace







V. I. Lenin
Afterword To The Theses On The Question Of The Immediate Conclusion
      Of A Separate And Annexationist Peace


Written: 8 and 11 January, 1918 

      
First Published: 1929 in Lenin
      Miscellany XI

Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 451-452

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

  

 

      I read the above Theses to a small private meeting of Party
      functionaries on January 8, 1918. The discussion on them showed
      three opinions in the Party on this question—about a half
      those present spoke in favour of revolutionary war (this was
      sometimes called the §Moscow¨ point of view because
      the Moscow Regional Bureau of our Party adopted it earlier than
      other organisations); then about a quarter were for Comrade
      Trotsky who proposed to declare the cessation of hostilities,
      demobilise the army, send the soldiers home but refrain from
      signing a treaty¨, and, lastly, about a quarter supported
      me.

    
      The state of affairs now obtaining in the Party reminds me very
      strongly of the situation in the summer of 1907 when the
      overwhelming majority of the Bolslieviks favoured the boycott of
      tile Third Duma and I stood side by side with Dan in favour of
      participation and was subjected to furious attacks for my
      opportunism. Objectively, the present issue is a complete
      analogy; as then, the majority of the Party functionaries,
      proceeding from the very best revolutionary motives and the best
      Party traditions, allow themselves to be carried away by a
      §flash¨ slogan and do not grasp the new
      socio-economic and political situation, do not take into
      consideration the change in the conditions that demands
      a speedy and abrupt change in tactics. The essence of my
      argument, today as then, is to make clear that Marxism demands
      the consideration of objective conditions and their changes,
      that the question must be presented concretely as applicable to
      those conditions, that the most significant change that has
      occurred is the foundation of the Russian Soviet Republic, and
      the preservation of the republic that has already begun the
      socialist revolution is most important to us and to the
      international socialist movement; that at the moment
      the slogan of revolutionary war proclaimed by Russia would
      either be an empty phrase and an unsupported demonstration, or
      would be tantamount, objectively, to falling into the trap set
      for us by the imperialists, who wish to inveigle us into
      continuing the imperialist war while we are still a
      weak unit, so that the young Soviet Republic might be crushed as
      cheaply as possible.

    
      §I stand by Lenin¥s old position,¨ exclaimed one
      young Muscovite (youth is one of the greatest virtues
      distinguishing that group of speakers). And that samespeaker
      reproached me for repeating the old arguments of the defencists
      about the improbability of a revolution in Germany.

    
      The whole trouble is that the Muscovites want to stick to the
      old tactical position, and stubbornly refuse to see the change
      that has taken place, the new objective situation that
      has arisen.

    
      The Muscovites, in their zealous repetition of old slogans, have
      not even taken into consideration the fact that we Bolsheviks
      have now all become defencists. Having overthrown the
      bourgeoisie, having denounced and exposed the secret treaties,
      having proposed peace to all peoples, actually... Here the manuscript breaks off
      .—Editor.



Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets
    of Workers’, Soldiers’ and
    Peasants’ Deputies, January 10-18,
    1918







Third All-Russia Congress Of Soviets Of Workers’,
    Soldiers’ And Peasants’ Deputies







V. I. Lenin
Third All-Russia Congress Of Soviets Of Workers’, Soldiers’
    And Peasants’ Deputies[1]
January 10-18 (23-31), 1918

Written: 10-18 January,
    1918
First Published: 26-27 January and February 2,
    1918 in Pravda Nos. 9, 10 and 15 and in Izvestia Nos. 8,
    9, 10 and 15 of January 12, 13, 14 and 20. Draft decreee on expunging
    references to the Constiutent Assembly from Soviet legislation first
    published in 1931 in Lenin Miscellany XVIII
Source:Lenin’s Collected Works,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pp. 453-482
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George Hanna,
    Edited by George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup: Charles Farrell and
    David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000

 
Report On The Activities Of The Council Of People’s
    Commissars
January 14(24)
Comrades, on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars I must submit to you a report of its activities for the two months and fifteen days that have elapsed since the establishment of Soviet power and the Soviet Government in Russia.
Two months and fifteen days—that is only five days more than the preceding workers’ power lasted and ruled over a whole country, or over the exploiters and the capitalists, the power of the Paris workers at the time of the Paris Commune of 1871.
We must first of all remember this workers’ power, we must cast our minds back and compare it with the Soviet power that was formed on October 25. And if we compare the preceding dictatorship of the proletariat with the present one we shall see at once what a gigantic stride the international working-class movement has made, and in what an immeasurably more favourable position Soviet power in Russia finds itself, notwithstanding the incredibly complicated conditions of war and economic ruin.
After retaining power for two months and ten days, the workers of Paris, who for the first time in history established the Commune, the embryo of Soviet power, perished at the hands of the French Cadets, Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries of a Kaledin type. The French workers had to pay an unprecedentedly heavy price for the first experience of workers’ government, the meaning and purpose of which the overwhelming majority of the peasants in France did not know.
We find ourselves in immeasurably more favourable circumstances because the Russian soldiers, workers and peasants were able 'to create the Soviet Government, an apparatus which informed the whole world of their methods of struggle. It is this that puts the Russian workers and peasants in a position that differs from the power of the Paris proletariat. They had no apparatus, the country did not understand them; we were immediately able to rely on Soviet power, and that is why we never doubted that Soviet power enjoys the sympathy and the warmest and most devoted support of the overwhelming majority of the people, and that therefore Soviet power is invincible.
Those who were sceptical of Soviet power and frequently, either consciously or unconsciously, sold and betrayed it for compromise with the capitalists and the imperialists, raised a deafening clamour about the power of the proletariat alone not being able to be maintained in Russia. As if any Bolsheviks or their supporters forgot even for a moment that in Russia only that power could last for any length of time that would be able to unite the working class and the majority of the peasants, all the working and exploited classes, in a single, inseparably interconnected force fighting against the landowners and the bourgeoisie.
We never doubted that only the alliance of the workers and the poor peasants, the semi-proletarians, mentioned in our Party Programme, can, in Russia, embrace the majority of the population arid ensure firm support for the government. And after October 25 we were immediately able, in the course of several weeks, to overcome all difficulties and establish a government on the basis of this firm alliance.
Yes, comrades! When the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, in its old form—when the peasants did not yet understand who in this party were real advocates of socialism—put forward the slogan of egalitarian land tenure, without caring who was to put it through, whether it was to be effected in alliance with the bourgeoisie or not, we branded that as a fraud. And this section, which has now realised that the people are not with it and that it is a bubble, claimed that it could carry out egalitarian land tenure in alliance with the bourgeoisie. In this lay the basic fraud. And when the Russian revolution presented an example of collaboration between the working people and the bourgeoisie, in the greatest moment in the life of the people; when the war had been ruining the people and dooming millions to death from starvation and its consequences showed what compromise meant in practice; when the Soviets themselves experienced it and felt it after having passed through the school of compromise, it became obvious that there was a sound, virile and great socialist core in the teachings of those who wanted to unite the working section of the peasants with the great socialist movement of the workers of the whole world.
And as soon as this became a clear and distinct practical question to the peasants, something happened of which no one had any doubt, as has now been proved by the Peasants’ Soviets and Congresses: when the time came to implement socialism, the peasants were able to see clearly these two main political lines—alliance with the bourgeoisie, or alliance with the working people. They then realised that the party which expressed the real aims and interests of the peasants was the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party. And when we concluded our government alliance with this party, we, from the very outset, arranged it so that the alliance rested on the clearest and most obvious principles. If the peasants of Russia want to socialise the land in alliance with the workers who will nationalise the banks and establish workers’ control, then they are our loyal colleagues, our most loyal and valuable allies. Comrades, no socialist would refuse to admit the obvious truth that between socialism and capitalism there lies a long, more or less difficult transitional period of the dictatorship of the proletariat, and that the forms this period will take will be determined to a large extent by whether small or big ownership, small or large-scale farming, predominates. It goes without saying that the transition to socialism in Estland, that small country in which the whole population is literate, and which consists of large-scale farms, cannot be the same as the transition to socialism in Russia, which is mainly a petty-bourgeois country. This must be taken into account.
Every politically-conscious socialist says that socialism cannot be imposed upon the peasants by force and that we must count only on the power of example and on the mass of the peasants assimilating day-to-day experience. How would the peasants prefer to pass to socialism? This is the problem which now confronts the Russian peasants in practice. How can they support the socialist proletariat and begin the transition to socialism? The peasants have already tackled this transition, and we have complete confidence in them.
The alliance we concluded with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries is built on a firm basis and is growing stronger and stronger by the hour. At first we on the Council of People’s Commissars feared that factional struggle would hinder the work, but now, after the experience of two months’ work together, I must say definitely that on the majority of questions we arrive at unanimous decisions.
We know that only when experience has shown the peasants, for example, the kind of exchange there must be between town and country they will themselves, from below, on the basis of their own experience, establish their own connections. On the other hand, the experience of the Civil War has demonstrated to the peasants that there is no other road to socialism except the dictatorship of the proletariat and the ruthless suppression of the rule of the exploiters. (Applause)
Comrades, every time we touch upon this theme, at the present meeting, or in the Central Executive Committee, I, from time to time, hear from the Right side of the meeting the exclamation “Dictator!” Yes, “when we were socialists” everyone recognised the dictatorship of the proletariat; they even wrote about it in their programmes, they were indignant at the widespread false idea that it was possible to persuade and prove to the population that the working people ought not to be exploited, that this was sinful and disgraceful, and that once people were persuaded of this there would be paradise on earth. No, this utopian notion was smashed in theory long ago, and now our task is to smash it in practice.
We must not depict socialism as if socialists will bring it to us on a plate all nicely dressed. That will never happen. Not a single problem of the class struggle has ever been solved in history except by violence. When violence is exercised by the working people, by the mass of exploited against the exploiters—then we are for it! (Stormy applause.) And we are not in the least disturbed by the howls of those people who consciously or unconsciously side with the bourgeoisie, or who are so frightened by them, so oppressed by their rule, that they have been flung into consternation at the sight of this unprecedentedly acute class struggle, have burst into tears, forgotten all their premises and demand that we perform the impossible, that we socialists achieve complete victory without fighting against the exploiters and without suppressing their resistance.
As far back as the summer of 1917 the exploiters understood that it is a matter of “the last and decisive battles”, and that if the Soviets came to power the last bulwark of the bourgeoisie, their principal source for suppressing the working people, would be torn out of their hands.
That is why the October Revolution began this systematic and unswerving struggle to compel the exploiters to cease their resistance and to become reconciled to the idea, no matter how difficult that may be for even the best of them, that the rule of the exploiting classes has gone never to return, that from now on the ordinary peasant will give the orders and that they must obey, however unpleasant that may be.
This will entail many difficulties, sacrifices and mistakes; it is something new, unprecedented in history and cannot be studied from books. It goes without saying that this is the greatest and most difficult transition that has ever occurred in history; but there is no other way to make this great transition and the fact that Soviet power has been established in Russia has shown that it is the revolutionary people who are richest of all in revolutionary experience—when millions come to the assistance of a few score of Party people—the people who actually take their exploiters by the throat.
That is why civil war has acquired predominance in Russia at the present time. Against us is advanced tile slogan: “Down with civil war!” I happened to hear this shouted from the Bight benches of the so-called Constituent Assembly. Down with civil war.... What does that mean? Civil war against whom? Against Kornilov, Kerensky and Byabushinsky who are spending millions to bribe vagabonds and officials? Against the saboteurs who, consciously or unconsciously, are accepting these bribes? Undoubtedly, among the latter there are ignorant people who accept these bribes unconsciously, because they cannot even imagine that the old bourgeois system can and must be destroyed to the very foundation and that an entirely new, socialist society can and must be built up on its ruins. Undoubtedly there are people like that, but does that alter the situation?
That is why the representatives of the propertied classes are staking their all, that is why these are the last and decisive battles for them, and they would stop at no crime in their efforts to smash Soviet power. Does not the whole history of socialism, particularly of French socialism, which is so rich in revolutionary striving, show us that when the working people themselves take power in their hands the ruling classes resort to unheard-of crimes and shootings if it is a matter of protecting their money-bags. When these people talk to us about civil war we answer them with ridicule; but when they spread their slogans among the students we say—you are deceiving them!
The class struggle did not accidentally assume its latest form, the form in which the exploited class takes all the means of power in its own hands in order to completely destroy its class enemy, the bourgeoisie, in order to sweep from the land of Russia not only the bureaucrats, but also the landowners, as the Russian peasants in several gubernias have done.
We are told that the sabotage with which the bureaucrats and the landowners met the Council of People’s Commissars is an indication of their unwillingness to assist socialism, as if it were not clear that the whole of this gang of capitalists and swindlers, vagabonds and saboteurs, represent a single gang bribed by the bourgeoisie and resisting the power of the working people. Of course, those who thought that it was possible to leap straight from capitalism to socialism, or those who imagined that it was possible to convince the majority of the population that this could be achieved through the medium of the Constituent Assembly—those who believed in this bourgeois-democratic fable, can go on blithely believing it, but let them not complain if life destroys this fable.
Those who have come to understand what the class struggle means, what the sabotage organised by the bureaucrats means, know that we cannot leap straight into socialism. There remained the bourgeoisie, capitalists, who hope to restore their rule and who defend their money-bags. There remained vagabonds, a section of corrupt people who are absolutely downtrodden by capitalism and who are unable to grasp the idea of the proletarian struggle. There remained office employees, bureaucrats who believe that it is in the interests of society to protect the old system. how can anyone imagine that the victory of socialism can come about except by the complete collapse of these sections, except by the complete destruction of the Russian and European bourgeoisie? Do you think the Ryabushinskys do not understand their class interests? It is they who are paying the saboteurs not to work. Or do they operate disunited? Are they not operating in conjunction with the French, British and American capitalists by buying up securities? It remains to be seen whether they will get much out of these transactions. Will not the heaps of securities they are now buying up turn out to be merely useless heaps of scrap-paper?
That is why, comrades, our reply to all the reproaches and accusations hurled against us of employing terror, dictatorship, civil war, although we are far from having resorted to real terror, because we are stronger than they— we have the Soviets, it will be sufficient if we nationalise the banks and confiscate their property in order to compel them to submit—our reply to all these charges of instigating civil war is: yes, we have openly proclaimed what no other government has been able to proclaim. The first government in the world that can speak openly of civil war is the government of the workers, peasants and soldiers. Yes, we have started and we are waging civil war against the exploiters. The more straightforwardly we say this, the more quickly will this war come to an end, the more quickly will all the working and exploited people understand us, will understand that Soviet power is fighting for the real, vital cause of all the working people.
Comrades, I do not think we shall achieve victory in this struggle quickly, but we are very rich in experience: we have managed to achieve a great deal in the course of two months. We have experienced Kerensky’s attempt to launch an attack against Soviet power and the complete
failure of this attempt. We have experienced the organisation of power of the Ukrainian Kerenskys—t.he struggle has not yet ended there, but to anyone who has watched it., who has heard at least a few truthful reports from representatives of Soviet power, it is obvious that tile bourgeois elements of the Ukrainian Rada are living their last days. (Applause) There cannot be the slightest doubt about the victory of Soviet power, of the Ukrainian People’s Republic, over the Ukrainian bourgeois Rada.
As for the struggle against Kaledin—here, indeed, everything rests on the basis of the exploitation of the working people, on the basis of the bourgeois dictatorship—if there is any social basis at all against Soviet power. The Peasants’ Congress has clearly demonstrated that Kaledin’s cause is hopeless; the working people are against him. The experience of Soviet power, propaganda by deeds, by the example of the Soviet organisations, is having its effect, and Kaledin’s stronghold in the Don Region is how collapsing—not so much externally as internally.
That is why, looking at the civil war front in Russia, we can say with complete conviction: here the victory of Soviet power is complete and absolutely assured. And, comrades, the victory of Soviet power is being achieved because right from the outset it began to realise the age-old aspirations of socialism, while consistently and determinedly relying on the people and considering it to be its duty to awaken the most oppressed and downtrodden sections of society to active life, to raise them to socialist creative work. That is why the old army with its barrack-square drilling and torture of soldiers has retreated into the past. It has been thrown on the scrap-heap, nothing remains of it. (Applause) The complete democratisation of the army has been carried out.
Permit me to relate an incident that occurred when I was in the carriage of a Finnish train and I overheard a conversation between several Finns and an old woman. I could not take part in the conversation because I cannot speak Finnish. But one of the Finns turned to me and said: “Do you know the curious thing this old woman said? She said, 'Now there is no need to fear the man with the gun. I was in the woods one day and I met a man with a gun, and instead of taking the firewood I had collected from me, he added some more.”’
When I heard that, I said to myself: let the hundreds of newspapers, no matter what they call themselves—socialist, near-socialist, etc.—let hundreds of extremely loud voices shout at us, “dictators”, “violators”, and similar words. We know that another voice is now rising from among the people; they say to themselves: now we need not be afraid of the man with the gun because he protects the working people and will be ruthless in suppressing the rule of the exploiters. (Applause) This is what the people have felt, and that is why the propaganda that simple and uneducated people are carrying on when they relate how the Red Guardsare turning their might against the exploiters—that propaganda is invincible. It will spread among millions and tens of millions, and will firmly create what the French Commune of the nineteenth century began to create, but was able to continue for only a very short time because it was wrecked by the bourgeoisie—it will create a socialist Red Army, something all socialists have always aimed at, i.e., the general arming of the people. It will create new Red Guard cadres that will enable us to train the working people for the armed struggle.
It used to be said about Russia that she would be unable to fight because she would have no officers. But we must not forget what these very bourgeois officers said as they observed the workers fighting against Kerensky and Kaledin. They said: “The Red Guards’ technical level is very low, but if these people had a little training they would have an invincible army.” This is because, for the first time in the history of the world struggle, elements have entered the army which are not the vehicles of bureaucratic knowledge, but are guided by the idea of the struggle to emancipate the exploited. And when the work we have commenced is completed, the Russian Soviet Republic will be invincible. (Applause)
Comrades, the road which Soviet power has traversed insofar as concerns the socialist army has also been traversed insofar as concerns another instrument of the ruling classes, an even more subtle, an even more complicated instrument—the bourgeois court, which claimed to maintain order, but which, as a matter of fact, was a blind, subtle instrument for the ruthless suppression of the exploited, an(h an instrument for protecting the interests of the moneybags. Soviet power acted in the way all the proletarian revolutions had shown that it must act; it immediately threw the 01(1 court on to the scrap-heap. Let them shout that we, without reforming the old court, immediately threw it on to the scrap-heap. By that we paved the way for a real people’s court, and not so much by the force of repressive measures as by massive example, the authority of the working people, without formalities; we transformed the court from an instrument of exploitation into an instrument of education on the firm foundations of socialist society. There is no doubt whatever that we cannot attain such a society at once.
These, then, are the main steps Soviet power has taken along the road indicated by the experience of the great popular revolutions throughout the world. There has not been a single revolution in which the working people did not begin to take some steps along this road in order to set up a new state power. Unfortunately, they only began to do this, but were unable to finish, they were unable to create the new type of state power. We have created it—we have already established a socialist Republic of Soviets.
I have no illusions about our having only just entered the period of transition to socialism, about not yet having reached socialism. But if you say that our state is a socialist Republic of Soviets, you will be right. You will be as right as those who call many Western bourgeois republics democratic republics although everybody knows that not one of even the most democratic of these republics is completely democratic. They grant scraps of democracy, they cut off tiny bits of the rights of the exploiters, but the working people are as much oppressed there as they are everywhere else. Nevertheless, we say that the bourgeois system is represented by both old monarchies and by constitutional republics.
And so in our case now. We are far from having completed even the transitional period from capitalism to socialism. We have never cherished the hope that we could finish it without the aid of the international proletariat. We never had any illusions on that score, and we know how difficult is the road that leads from capitalism to socialism. But it is our duty to say that our Soviet Republic is a socialist republic because we have taken this road, and our words will riot be empty words.
We have initiated many measures undermining the capitalists’ rule. We know that our power had to unite the activities of all our institutions by a single principle, and this principle we express in the words: “Russia is declared to be a Socialist Republic of Soviets.” (Applause) This will be that truth which rests on what we must do and have already begun to do, this will be the best unification of all our activities, the proclamation of our programme, a call to the working people and the exploited of all countries who either do not know at all what socialism is, or, what is worse, believe that socialism is the Chernov-Tsereteli mess of bourgeois reforms which we have tasted and tried during the ten months of the revolution and which we have become convinced is a falsification and not socialism.
And that is why 'free” Britain and France did all they could during the ten months of our revolution to prevent a single copy of Bolshevik and Left Socialist-Revolutionary newspapers from entering their countries. They had to act in this way because they saw that the workers and peasants in all countries instinctively grasped what the Russian workers were doing. There was not a single meeting where news about the Russian revolution and the slogan of Soviet power was not hailed with stormy applause. The working people and the exploited everywhere have already come into conflict with their party top leadership. The old socialism of these leaders is not yet buried like that of Chkheidze and Tsereteli in Russia, but it is already done for in all countries of the world, it is already dead.
A new state—the Republic of Soviets, the republic of the working people, of the exploited classes that are breaking down the old bourgeois barriers, now stands against the old bourgeois system. New state forms have been created, which make it possible to suppress the exploiters, to overcome the resistance of this insignificant handful who are still strong because of yesterday’s money-bags and yesterday’s store of knowledge. They—the professors, teachers and engineers—transform their knowledge into an instrument for the exploitation of the working people, saying they want their knowledge to serve the bourgeoisie, otherwise they refuse to work. But their power has been broken by the workers’ and peasants’ revolution, and a state is rising against them in which the people themselves freely elect their own representatives.
It is precisely at the present time that we can say that we really have- an organisation of power which clearly indicates the transition to the complete abolition of any power, of any state. This will be possible when every trace of exploitation has been abolished, that is, in socialist society.
Now I shall deal briefly with the measures which the socialist Soviet Government of Russia has begun to realise. The nationalisation of the banks was one of the first measures adopted for the purpose, not only of wiping the landowners from the face of Russian earth, but also of eradicating the rule of the bourgeoisie and the possibility of capital oppressing millions and tens of millions of the working people. The banks are important centres of modern capitalist economy. They collect fantastic wealth and distribute it over this vast country; they are the nerve centres of capitalist life. They are subtle and intricate organisations, which grew up in the course of centuries; and against them were hurled the first blows of Soviet power which at first encountered desperate resistance in the State Bank. But this resistance did not deter Soviet power. We succeeded in the main thing, in organising the State Bank; this main thing is in the hands of the workers and peasants. After these basic measures, which still require a lot of working out in detail, we proceeded to lay our hands on the private banks.
We did not act in the way the compromisers would probably have recommended us to do, i.e., first wait until the Constituent Assembly is convened, then perhaps draft a bill and introduce it in the Constituent Assembly and by that inform the bourgeoisie of our intentions and enable them to find a loophole through which to extricate themselves from this unpleasant thing; perhaps draw them into our company, and then make state laws—that would be a “state act”.
That would be the rejection of socialism. We acted quite simply; not fearing to call forth the reproaches of the “educated” people, or rather of the uneducated supporters of the bourgeoisie who were trading in the remnants of their knowledge, we said we had at our disposal armed workers and peasants. This morning they must occupy all the private banks. (Applause) After they have done that, after power is in our hands, only after this, we shall discuss what measures to adopt. In the morning the banks were occupied and in the evening the Central Executive Committee issued a decree: “The banks are declared national property”— state control, the socialisation of banking, its transfer to Soviet power, took place.
There was not a man among us who could imagine that an intricate and subtle apparatus like banking, which grew out of the capitalist system of economy in the course of centuries, could be broken or transformed in a few days. We never said that. And when scientists, or pseudo-scientists, shook their heads and prophesied, we said: you can prophesy what you like. We know only one way for the proletarian revolution, namely, to occupy the enemy’s positions-to learn to rule by experience, from our mistakes. We do not in the least belittle the difficulties in our path, but we have done the main thing. The source of capitalist wealth has been undermined in the place of its distribution. After all this, the repudiation of the state loans, the overthrow of the financial yoke, was a very easy step. The transition to confiscation of the factories, after workers’ control had been introduced, was also very easy. When we were accused of breaking up production into separate departments by introducing workers’ control, we brushed aside this nonsense. In introducing workers’ control, we knew that it would take much time before it spread to the whole of Russia, but we wanted to show that we recognise only one road —changes from below; we wanted the workers themselves, from below, to draw up the new, basic economic principles. Much time will be required for this.
From workers’ control we passed on to the creation of a Supreme Economic Council. Only this measure, together with the nationalisation of the banks and railways which will be carried out within the next few days, will make it possible for us to begin work to build up a new socialist economy. We know perfectly well the difficulties that confront us in this work; but we assert that only those who set to work to carry out this task relying on the experience and the instinct of the working people are socialists in deed. The people will commit many mistakes, but the main thing has been done. They know that when they appeal to Soviet power they will get whole-hearted support against the exploiters. There is not a single measure intended to ease their work that was not entirely supported by Soviet power. Soviet power does not know everything and cannot handle everything in time, and very often it is confronted with difficult tasks. Very often delegations of workers and peasants come to the government and ask, for example, what to do with such-and-such a piece of land. And frequently I myself have felt embarrassed when I saw that they had no very definite views. And I said to them: you are the power, do all you want to do, take all you want, we shall support you, but take care of production, see that production is useful. Take up useful work, you will make mistakes, but you will learn. And the workers have already begun to learn; they have already begun to fight against the saboteurs. Education has been turned into a fence which hinders the advance of the working classes; it will be pulled down.
Undoubtedly, the war is corrupting people both in the rear and at the front; people who are working on war supplies are paid far above the rates, and this attracts all those who hid themselves to keep out of the war, the vagabond and semi-vagabond elements who are imbued with one desire, to “grab” something and clear out. But these elements are the worst that has remained of the old capitalist system and are the vehicles of all the old evils; these we must kick out, remove, and we must put in the factories all the best proletarian elements and form them into nuclei of future socialist Russia. This is not an easy task, it will give rise to many conflicts, to much friction and many clashes. We, the Council of People’s Commissars, and I personally, have heard complaints and threats from them, but we have remained calm, knowing that now we have a judge to whom we can appeal. That judge is the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. (Applause). The word of this judge is indisputable, and we shall always rely upon it.
Capitalism deliberately differentiates the workers in order to rally an insignificant handful of the upper section of the working class around the bourgeoisie. Conflicts with this section are inevitable. We shall not achieve socialism without a struggle. But we are ready to fight, we have started it and we shall finish it with the aid of the apparatus called the Soviets. The Soviet of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies will easily solve any problem we bring before it. For however strong the group of privileged workers may be, when they are brought before the representative body of all the workers, then this court, I repeat, will be indisputable for them. This sort of adjustment is only just beginning. The workers and peasants have not yet sufficient confidence in their own strength; age-old tradition has made them far too used to waiting for orders from above. They have not yet fully appreciated the fact that the proletariat is the ruling class; there are still elements among them who are frightened and downtrodden and who imagine that they must pass through the despicable school of the bourgeoisie. This most despicable of bourgeois notions has remained alive longer than all the rest, but it is dying and will die out completely. And we are convinced that with every step Soviet power takes the number of people will constantly grow who have completely thrown off the old bourgeois notion that a simple worker and peasant cannot administer the state. Well, if he sets to doing it, he can and will learn! (Applause).
And it will be our organisational task to select leaders and organisers from among the people. This enormous, gigantic work is now on the agenda. There could even be no thought of carrying it out if it were not for Soviet power, a filtering apparatus which can promote people.
Not only have we a state law on control, we have something even far more valuable—attempts on the part of the proletariat to enter into agreements with the manufacturers’ associations in order to guarantee the workers’ management over whole branches of industry. Such an agreement has begun to be drawn up, and is almost completed, between the leather workers and the all-Russia leather manufacturers’ society. I attach very special importance to these agreements,[2] they show that the workers are becoming aware of their strength.
Comrades, in my report I have not dealt with the particularly painful and difficult questions of peace and the food supply, because they are special items on the agenda and will be discussed separately.
My purpose in making this brief report was to show, as it appears to me and to the whole of the Council of People’s Commissars, the entire history of what we have experienced during the past two and a half months, how the relation of class forces took shape in this new period of the Russian revolution, how a new state power was formed and what social tasks confront it.
Russia has started to achieve socialism in the right way— by the nationalisation of the banks and the transfer of all the land entirely to the working people. We are well aware of the difficulties that lie ahead, but we are convinced, by comparing our revolution with previous revolutions, that we shall achieve enormous successes and that we are on the road that guarantees complete victory.
And with us will go the masses of the more advanced countries, countries which have been divided by a predatory war, whose workers have passed through a longer period of training in democracy. When people depict the difficulties of our task, when we are told that the victory of socialism is possible only on a world scale, we regard this merely as an attempt, a particularly hopeless attempt, on the part of the bourgeoisie and of its voluntary and involuntary supporters to distort the irrefutable truth. The final victory of socialism in a single country is of course impossible. Our contingent of workers and peasants which is upholding Soviet power is one of the contingents of the great world army, which at present has been split by the world war, but which is striving for unity, and every piece of information, every fragment of a report about our revolution, every name, the proletariat greets with loud and sympathetic cheers, because it knows that in Russia the common cause is being pursued, the cause of the proletariat’s uprising, the international socialist revolution. A living example, tackling the job somewhere in one country is more effective than any proclamations and conferences; this is what inspires the working people in all countries.
The October strike in 1905—the first steps of the victorious revolution—immediately spread to Western Europe and then, in 1905, called forth the movement of the Austrian workers; already at that time we had a practical illustration of the value of the example of revolution, of the action by the workers in one country, and today we see that the socialist revolution is maturing by the hour in all countries of the world.
If we make mistakes and blunders and meet with obstacles on our way, that is not what is important to them; what is important to them is our example, that is what unites them. They say: we shall go together and conquer, come what may. (Applause).
The great founders of socialism, Marx and Engels, having watched the development of the labour movement and the growth of the world socialist revolution for a number of decades saw clearly that the transition from capitalism to socialism would require prolonged birth-pangs, a long period of the dictatorship of the proletariat, the break-up of all that belonged to the past, the ruthless destruction of all forms of capitalism, the co.-operation of the workers of all countries, who would have to combine their efforts to ensure complete victory. And they said that at the end of the nineteenth century “the Frenchman will begin it, and the German will finish it”[164]—.the Frenchman would begin it because in the course of decades of revolution he had acquired that intrepid initiative in revolutionary action that made him the vanguard of the socialist revolution.
Today we see a different combination of international socialist forces. We say that it is easier for the movement to start in the countries that are not among those exploiting countries which have opportunities for easy plunder and are able to bribe the upper section of their workers. The pseudo-socialist, nearly all ministerial, Chernov-Tsereteli parties of Western Europe do not accomplish anything, and they lack firm foundations. We have seen the example of Italy; during the past few days we witnessed the heroic struggle of the Austrian workers against the predatory imperialists.185 Though the pirates may succeed in holding up the movement for a time, they cannot stop it altogether, it is invincible.
The example of the Soviet Republic will stand before them for a long time to come. Our socialist Republic of Soviets will stand secure, as a torch of international socialism and as an example to all the working people. Over there—conflict, war, bloodshed, the sacrifice of millions of people, capitalist exploitation; here—a genuine policy of peace and a socialist Republic of Soviets.
Things have turned out differently from what Marx and Engels expected and we, the Russian working and exploited classes, have the honour of being the vanguard of the international socialist revolution; we can now see clearly how far the development of the revolution will go. The Russian began it—the German, the Frenchman and the Englishman will finish it, and socialism will be victorious. (Applause)
2 Concluding Speech  On The Report Of The Council Of People’s Commissars  
January 12 (25) Having listened today to the speakers on the Right, who voiced objections to my report, I am surprised that they have not yet learned anything and have forgotten all that they in vain call “Marxism”. One of the objectors declared that we had favoured the dictatorship of democracy, that we had recognised the rule of democracy. That declaration was so absurd, so utterly meaningless, that it is merely a collection of words. It was just like saying “iron snow”, or something similar. (Laughter.) Democracy is a form of bourgeois state championed by all traitors to genuine socialism, who now find themselves at the head of official socialism and who assert that democracy is contrary to the dictatorship of the proletariat. Until the revolution transcended the limits of the bourgeois system, we were for democracy; but as soon as we saw the first signs of socialism in the progress of the revolution, we took a firm and resolute stand for the dictatorship of the proletariat.
It is strange that people who cannot or refuse to understand this plain truth, this definition of the meaning of the terms “democracy” and “dictatorship of the proletariat”, should make bold to bring-before so numerous an assembly old, utterly worthless rubbish, such as that in which all the objecting gentlemen’s speeches abound. Democracy is formal parliamentarism, but in reality it is a continuous, cruel mockery, heartless, unbearable oppression of the working people by the bourgeoisie. And this can only be denied by those who are not true spokesmen for the working class but wretched men in mufflers who have kept away from life all the time, who have been sleeping with an old, shabby little book carefully stowed away under the pillow, the unwanted book that serves them as a guide and manual in implanting official socialism. But the minds of tens of millions of those who are doing things create something infinitely loftier than the greatest genius can foresee. Genuine, revolutionary socialism did not break away today but at the beginning of the war. This significant break, this rift in socialist theory, has come about in every country and every state. And it is splendid that socialism has split!
We can counter the accusation that we are fighting against “socialists” by saying merely that in the epoch of parliamentarism these supporters of the latter no longer have anything in common with socialism but have become decayed, obsolete and backward, and have ended by deserting to the bourgeoisie. “Socialists” who shouted about “defending the country” during a war resulting from the imperialist urge of international robbers are not socialists but hangers-on of the bourgeoisie, their dish-lickers.
Those who talk so much about the dictatorship of democracy merely utter meaningless, absurd phrases which indicate neither economic knowledge nor political understanding.
One of the objectors said here that the Paris Commune can be proud of the fact that during the Paris workers’ uprising there was no violence or arbitrary action on their part; but it is beyond doubt that the Commune fell only because it did not make proper use of armed force at the right moment, although it won undying fame in history, for it was the first to put the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat into practice.
Commenting briefly on the struggle against the bourgeoisie, landowners and capitalists, the speaker declared firmly and resolutely, amidst a burst of applause: “Say what you may, the bourgeoisie will in the end be forced by the will of the revolutionary people either to capitulate, or to perish.”
Drawing a parallel between anarchism and Bolshevik views, Comrade Lenin said that at that time, in the period of a radical break-up of the bourgeois system, the concept of anarchism was finally assuming concrete features. But if the oppression of the bourgeois system was to be abolished, there would have to be firm revolutionary power of the working classes, the power of a revolutionary state. This was the essence of communism. When the masses were themselves taking up arms to start an unrelenting struggle against the exploiters, when a new people’s power was being applied that had nothing in common with parliamentary power, it was no longer the old state, outdated in its traditions and forms, that they had before them, but something new, something based on the creative power of the people. And while some anarchists spoke of the Soviets with fear because they were still influenced by obsolete views, the new, fresh trend in anarchism was definitely on the side of the Soviets, because it saw their vitality and their ability to win the sympathy of the working masses and arouse their creative energy.
“Your sin and blindness,” said the speaker, turning to the “objectors”, “are due to your failure to learn anything from the revolution. As early as April 4, I affirmed, speaking in this hail, that the Soviets are the highest form of democracy. Either the Soviets will perish and then the revolution will be irrevocably lost, or the Soviets will live and then it will be ridiculous to talk of a bourgeois-democratic revolution at a time when the socialist system is on the way to its full development and capitalism is collapsing. The Bolsheviks spoke of a bourgeois-democratic revolution in 1905, but today, when the Soviets are in power, when the workers, soldiers and peasants have said—in a war situation unprecedented for hardships and horrors, in an atmosphere of ruin, and in the face of death by starvation—that they will assume full power and will themselves set about building a new life, there can be no question of a bourgeois-democratic revolution. And the Bolsheviks said as much at their congresses and meetings and conferences, and in their resolutions and decisions, as early as last April.
'“To those who say that we have done nothing, that we have been inactive all the time, that Soviet rule has borne no fruits, we can say this: Look wherever there are working people, look among the masses, and you will see organisational, creative work in full swing, you will see the stir of a life that is being renewed and hallowed by the revolution. The peasants are taking over the land in the countryside, the workers are seizing the factories, and all kinds of organisations are springing up everywhere.
“Soviet power is striving to bring the war to an end, and we are confident that it will achieve this goal earlier than Kerensky government spokesmen have promised. For the revolution has become a factor in the matter of ending the war, a factor which has denounced treaties and repudiated loans. The war will come to an end due to the international revolutionary movement.”
In conclusion, the speaker commented in a few words on counter-revolutionary saboteurs, saying that they were groups bribed by the bourgeoisie, which showered its gifts on the sabotaging officials who declared war on the Soviet state, for the triumph of reaction. To them it was doomsday, the irrevocable end of everything when they saw the people striking vigorously at the bourgeoisie with a peasants’ and workers’ axe. “Our only fault, if any, is that we were much too humane, much too kind-hearted, towards the monstrously treacherous representatives of the bourgeois-imperialist system.
“A few days ago some Novaga Zhizn writers visited me, saying they had come on behalf of bank employees who wanted to take up service and submit fully to Soviet power, stopping the policy of sabotage. High time, I answered. But, speaking confidentially, if they imagine that having begun those talks, we shall cede our revolutionary positions one iota, they are sorely mistaken.
“The world has never seen anything like that which is now taking place here in Russia, in this vast country broken up into a number of separate states and containing an enormous number of heterogeneous nationalities and peoples. I refer to the immense organisational work in every uyezd and region, the organisation of the lower strata, the work of the masses themselves, the creative, constructive activity, which encounters obstacles raised by various bourgeois representatives of imperialism. They, the workers and peasants, are engaged in an effort unprecedented in its titanic aims; together with the Soviets, they will smash capitalist exploitation, and bourgeois oppression will in the end be abolished once and for all.”
 
3 Draft Decree On Expunging References To The  Constituent Assembly From Soviet Legislation Decree A number of laws, decrees and decisions taken by the Soviet Government contain references to the Constituent Assembly and its legislative character.
All these references naturally become irrelevant and lapse with the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly by the Central Executive Committee and the approval of this step by the Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets.
Accordingly, the Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets resolves: any references to the forthcoming Constituent Assembly shall be expunged from all new editions of decrees and laws of the Soviet Government.
Writtin on January 18 (31). 1918
4 Summing-Up Speech At The Congress January 18 (31) Comrades, before the Third Congress of Soviets closes we must establish with complete impartiality the momentous part it has had to play in the history of the international revolution and of mankind. There are incontestable grounds for saying that the Third Congress of Soviets has opened a new epoch in world history and there is growing awareness of its significance in these times of world revolution. It has consolidated the organisation of the new state power which was created by the October Revolution and has projected the lines of future socialist construction for the whole world, for the working people of all countries.
The new system of the socialist Soviet Republic, as a federation of free republics of the different nations inhabiting Russia, has been finally accepted in this country in the sphere of domestic politics. It is now clear to all, and even to our enemies, I daresay, that the new system, the Soviet power, is not an invention or a party trick, but is the result of the development of life itself, the outcome of the world revolution as it spontaneously takes shape. You will recall that all great revolutions invariably strove to raze the old capitalist system to the ground; they strove not only to win political rights but also to wrest the very reins of government from the hands of the ruling classes, and all the exploiters and oppressors of the working people, so as to put an end to all exploitation and all oppression for good. Great revolutions strove to demolish this old exploiting state machine but had not managed to bring it off until now. And now Russia, in virtue of the peculiarities of her economic and political position, has first achieved this transfer of government powers into the hands of the working people. We shall now proceed to build, on the space cleared of historical rubbish, the airy towering edifice of the socialist society. A new type of state power is being created for the first time in history, a power that the will of the revolution has called upon to wipe out all exploitation, oppression and slavery the world over.
Let us take a look at what the new socialist principle of government has yielded in the sphere of our domestic policy. Comrades, you will recall that just recently the bourgeois press was vociferously accusing us of destroying the Russian state and saying that we were incapable of running the country, and so all the nationalities — Finland, the Ukraine, etc—were leaving us. The bourgeois press, transported with malicious joy, carried almost daily reports of such “secessioris”. We, comrades, had a better understanding than they of the main causes of this phenomenon which were rooted in the working people’s mistrust of the conciliatory imperialist government of Kerensky and Co. We kept silent, being quite sure that our just principles and our government would demonstrate our true purposes and aspirations to all the working people better than words.
We proved to be right. We see now that our ideas have won out in Finland and the Ukraine and are winning out on the Don, that they are awakening the working people’s class-consciousness and are organising them into a solid alliance. We acted without any diplomatists or the use of the old imperialist methods, but can point to the greatest result: the revolution has won, and those who have won are allied with us in a mighty revolutionary federation. We do not rule by dividing, as ancient Rome’s harsh maxim required, but by uniting all the working people with the unbreakable bonds of living interests and a sense of class. This our union, our new state is sounder than power based on violence which keeps artificial state entities hammered together with lies and bayonets in the way the imperialists want them. Thus, no sooner had the Finnish workers and peasants taken power than they sent us their expressions of loyalty to the world proletarian revolution and greetings which reveal unflinching determination to march with us along the path of the International.[3] There is the basis of our federation and I am profoundly convinced that more and more diverse federations of free nations will group themselves around revolutionary Russia. This federation is invincible and will grow quite freely, without the help of lies or bayonets. The laws and the state system which we are creating over here are the best earnest of its invincibility. You have just heard a reading of the law on the socialisation of land[4] Isn’t it a pledge of the unbreakable unity of the workers and peasants, isn’t it a guarantee that in this unity we shall be able to overcome all obstacles on the way to socialism?
I must tell you that these obstacles are tremendous. You can depend on the bourgeoisie to resort to every trick, to stake their all on crushing our unity. They can be expected to make use of liars, provocateurs, traitors, possibly, dupes, but henceforth we have nothing to fear, because we have established our own new state power and because we hold the reins of government. We shall throw the full weight of our power against any counter-revolutionary attempt. But the chief pillar of the new system is the organisational measures we shall be implementing for the sake of socialism. In this respect we are faced with a vast amount of work. You must bear in mind, comrades, that the imperialists, the world’s brigands, who had embroiled the nations in war, have disrupted the economic life of the world to its very roots. They have left us an onerous legacy, the work to restore what they had destroyed.
Of course, the working people had no experience in government but that does not scare us. The victorious proletariat looks out on a land that has now become a public good, and it will be quite able to organise the new production and consumption on socialist lines. In the old days, human genius, the brain of man, created only to give some the benefits of technology and culture, and to deprive others of the most essential—education and development. From now on all the marvels of science and the gains of culture belong to the nation as a whole, and never again will man’s brain and human genius be used for oppression and exploitation. Of this we are sure, so shall we not dedicate ourselves and work with abandon to fulfil this greatest of all historical tasks? The working people will perform this titanic historical feat, for in them lie dormant the great forces of revolution, renascence and renovation.
We are no longer alone. In the last few days, momentous events have taken place not only in the Ukraine and the Don area, not only in the realm of our Kaledins and Kerenskys, but in Western Europe as well. You have already heard of the telegrams on the state of the revolution in Germany. The flames of a revolutionary wildfire are leaping higher and higher over the whole of this rotten old world system. It was no pie-in-the-sky theory, no armchair pipe dream that once we had established Soviet power we would induce others to make similar attempts in other countries. For I must repeat that the working people had no other way out of the slaughter. These attempts are now being consolidated as gains of the international revolution. We close this historic Congress of Soviets under the sign of the mounting world revolution, and the time is not far off when the working people of all countries will unite into a single world-wide state and join in a common effort to build a new socialist edifice. The way to this construction runs through the Soviets, as a form of the incipient world revolution. (Stormy applause.)
In greeting you I urge you to build this new edifice. You will return to your various places and will bend every effort to organise and consolidate our great victory. (The delegates rise and greet Comrade Lenin with stormy applause.)
 
Footnotes [1] See Encyclopedia of Marxism entry.
[2] The reference is to the talks between the All-Russia Leather Workers’ Union with their employers for wider workers’ representation on the Central Leather Committee and its remoulding on democratic lines. The Central Committee and the district committees were reorganised in early 1918, with the workers getting two-thirds of the votes. On April 6. 1918, a telegram signed by Lenin was sell to all Soviets on the need to democratise the local organs of the leather industry and fulfil precisely the instructions issued by the Central and district committees of the leather industry.
[3] The reference is to the Message of the Revolutionary Finish Government to the Council of Peoples Commissars of the Russian Republic, published in Pravda (evening edition) No. 13, on January 17 (31), 1918.
The revolution in Finland broke out in mid-January 1918 in the southern industrial areas. On January 15 (28), the Finnish fled Guard occupied Helsingfors, the capital, and overthrew the reactionary bourgeois government of Svinhufvud . A revolutionary government of Finland, the Council of People’s Representatives, was setup on January 16 (29). Power in the towns and villages in the south of Finland passed into the hands of the workers. The Svinhufvud government was entrenched in the north and appealed to the German Government for help. Following the intervention of the German armed forces and a bitter civil war, the revolution in Finland was crushed in May 1918.
[4] The reference is to the Basic Law on the Socialisation of Land tabled for approval at the Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets. The draft was edited by a commission of the Congress in which Lenin took part. In January 18 (31), 1918. the law (Section One—General Provisions) was approved by the Congress. It was further elaborated at joint sittings of the Congress of Land Committees and the peasant section of the Third Congress of Soviets. The final text of the law was approved by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on January 27 (February 9).

Collected Works Volume
    26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 








==========

## 
    Instructions to the Red Guard H. Q







Instructions To The Red Guard H.Q.







V. I. Lenin
Instructions To The Red Guard H.Q.

Delivered: 12 January,
    1918
First Published: 1931 January, in Lenin
    Miscellany XVIII.
Source: Lenin's Collected Works,
    Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pp. 483
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George Hanna,
    Edited by George Hanna
Transcription\HTML Markup: Charles Farrell and
    David Walters
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000

 
January 12, 1918.
In view of the looming danger of famine in Petrograd, and in
    accordance with the Council of People's Commissars decision on the
    inspection of railways in Petrograd and its vicinity to discover any
    possible carloads of grain in the yards, the Red Guard H.Q. is hereby
    ordered to help carry out such inspection and apprehend profiteers and
    saboteurs.
With this aim in view, the required number of detachments must be
    immediately formed and dispatched tomorrow morning, January 13, to Comrade
    Nevsky or his Deputy at the Commissariat for Railway Affairs, to conduct
    the following joint operations with him:
(1) make a round of the stations and get their chiefs and other
    administrative personnel to sign written statements that there is not a
    single carload of grain or foodstuffs (at the station or on the railway
    tracks);
(2) to verify that there are actually no carloads of grain, etc.; the
    check-up to be conducted jointly with railwaymen;
(3) in the event of false evidence or misleading reports, administrative
    personnel (by agreement with railwaymen's committees) should be arrested
    and handed over to revolutionary tribunals.
V. Ulyanov (Lenin),
     Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars

Collected Works Volume
    26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## 
    Extraordinary All-Russia
    Railwaymen’s Congress, January 5-30
    (January 18-February 12), 1918 







Extraordinary All- Russia Railwaymen’s Congress January 5-30, 1918







V. I. Lenin
Extraordinary All- Russia Railwaymen’s
      Congress
January 5-30 (January 18-February 12), 1918[1]


Delivered: 5-30 January, 1918
      
First Published: 1918 in the book,
      Transactions of the All Russia Railwaymen’s Congress,
      Petrograd. Published according to the book.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 485-500

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters
      
      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000

    

 
1
Report Of The Council Of People’s Commissars January 13 (26)

      Comrades, I am unfortunately unable to report on all points and
      hope that those of you who take a closer interest in the state
      of affairs have got a full and accurate picture of the present
      position of Soviet power, its attitude to other institutions and
      the tasks now facing it, partly from newspaper reports and
      partly from personal impressions at the Congress of
      Soviets. Allow me, therefore, to confine myself to a few brief
      additional remarks. In order to characterise the tasks and
      position of Soviet power, I must tell you of its attitude to the
      organisation of the railway proletariat, the railway workers.

    
      Comrades, you are aware that Soviet power clashed with the
      Constituent Assembly and that all the propertied
      classes—the landowners, the bourgeoisie, the Kaledinites
      and their supporters—are now berating us for having
      dissolvedit. But the louder these complaints in the few
      bourgeois papers, the louder is the voice of the workers, the
      soldiers, the working and exploited people. The peasants say
      that they have never doubted that Soviet power was head and
      shoulders above any other power, and that the workers, soldiers
      and peasants would never let any institution take over from
      their own Soviets, which they had elected, and set up and which
      they control and verify. You are well aware that Soviet power
      clashed with the Constituent Assembly mainly because it had been
      elected on lists drawn up before
      the October Revolution. The Constituent Assembly was elected on
      the basis of proportional representation through universal,
      direct and equal suffrage by secret ballot. That is the most
      perfect electoral system but it can be a correct expression of
      the people’s will only on one condition, namely, that the
      parties which under that system alone have the right and
      possibility of drawing up electoral lists are truly
      representative of the mood, the wishes, the interests and the
      will of the groups of population electing them, because under
      another electoral system, when individual candidates or deputies
      are each elected by a separate district, the people, depending
      on their mood or any political changes, can very easily correct
      their mistakes. Under the system of proportional representation,
      the lists had to be drawn up by each party as a whole long
      before the elections actually took place; this explains how it
      came about that the parties had to draw up their lists back in
      September and early October for a Constituent Assembly that was
      to have met on November 12. You all remember that there was a
      statutory period within which all the parties had to submit
      their lists, and that no changes were allowed after that. That
      is how it came about thatRussia’s biggest party—the
      one that was undoubtedly the biggest that summer and autumn, the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party—had to present its lists by
      the beginning of October 1917 on behalf of the whole
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party. That is what actually took
      place. The lists of candidates were presented in early October,
      including that of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, as if such
      a party continued to exist as an entity. It turned out that the
      conciliation with Kerensky came to an end after the list had
      been drawn up, after the Russian workers and peasants had
      travelled a long, hard and strenuous way in setting up their
      Soviets. After all, Kerensky was also regarded as a
      Socialist-Revolutionary—he was believed to be both a
      socialist and a revolutionary—although in actual fact he
      was an imperialist who hid in his pocket secret treaties with
      the French and British imperialists, the very same treaties that
      had been concluded by the tsar, who was deposed in February, the
      very same treaties which doomed the Russian people to
      participation in the bloodbath over whether or not the Russian
      capitalists would seize Constantinople, the Dardanelles and
      Armenia or a piece of Galicia; some who really let themselves
      go, like the famous Milyukov, made maps, well in advance,
      showing the strip of Eastern Prussia which was to be the Russian
      people’s own reward for the blood shed by millions of its
      workers and soldiers. There you have a true picture of the
      dominant Russian bourgeois-imperialist republic of Kerensky, who
      continued to be regarded as, and in fact was, a member of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

    
      The Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and
      Soldiers’ Deputies met in late October, by which time the
      people were fed up with placating the imperialists, and the June
      offensive had cost us hundreds of thousands of lives, and had
      clearly shown why the war was dragging on, how these secret
      treaties doomed the soldiers to the slaughter, and why talk of
      peace remained nothing but talk. That was why the Second
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets overthrew the rule of the
      bourgeois-imperialist government and established Soviet
      power. The elections to the Constituent Assembly fell on
      November 12 and confronted the workers, soldiers and especially
      the peasants with a situation in which they had to vote on the
      old lists, because there were no others, and none could be drawn
      up. So when we are now told, “You have dissolved the
      Constituent Assembly which represents the majority of the
      people”, when this is chorused by bourgeois pen-pushers and
      newspapers of the Kerensky-socialist stamp, we respond:
      “Why is it that you cannot make a single straightforward
      statement to the people about the argument which I have just set
      forth and which was contained in the decree dissolving the
      Constituent Assembly?” We cannot consider the Constituent
      Assembly to be expressive of the people’s will because it
      was elected on old lists. The workers and especially the
      peasants voted for the Socialist-Revolutionaries as a whole
      party, but it split after the elections, and appeared before the
      people as two parties: the Right-wingers, who sided with the
      bourgeoisie, and the party of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, who sided with the working class and
      the working people, and came down on the side of socialism. Did
      the people have any chance to choose between the Right and Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries under the Constituent Assembly? No,
      they did not, and so we say that, even from this formal
      standpoint of the lists and the election, no one can refute our
      assertion that the Constituent Assembly was unable to give a
      correct expression to the people’s will. The revolution is
      not to blame for having come after the lists had been drawn up
      and before the elections to the Constituent Assembly had been
      held; the revolution is not to blame that the
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party had kept the people, especially
      the peasants, in the dark and misled them with talk for so long;
      that only after October 25, when the Second Peasants’
      Congress was convened, we saw that there could be no
      reconciliation between the Right and Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, and it was then that there came a
      series of congresses, starting with the soldiers’ and
      peasants’ and ending with the railwaymen’s congress.

    
      Everywhere we found the same picture: everywhere there was, on
      the one hand, the vast majority of those who truly belonged to
      the working and exploited people, and came down fully,
      unconditionally and irrevocably on the side of Soviet power, and
      on the other, the top layers of the bourgeoisie, the civil
      servants, the executives, the rich peasants, all of whom sided
      with the propertied classes and the bourgeoisie, and put out the
      slogan: “All power to the Constituent Assembly”, the
      assembly that was elected before the revolution, when the people
      had no way of distinguishing between Right and Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. No, indeed, the revolution of the
      working classes comes first and not the old lists; the interests
      of the working and exploited people who were oppressed before
      the revolution are paramount. If the Constituent Assembly goes
      against the will of Soviet power, the will of a clear majority
      of the working people, we say: Down with the Constituent
      Assembly, and long live Soviet power. (Applause.)
      Comrades, it is our daily experience that Soviet power is
      meeting with ever greater support from the poor, the working and
      exploited people in every branch of the economy and in every
      part of the country, and no matter how we may be slandered by
      bourgeois and by “socialist” newspapers, like those of
      Kerensky’s party, the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, no
      matter how they may lie that our power is against the people and
      does not have their support, they will still be
      patently lying. We got some very strong confirmation of this
      just today. It was a report from the Don area (a night telegram)
      about a congress held by a section of the Cossacks in Voronezh,
      and a congress of 20 Cossack regiments and 5 batteries in
      Kamenskaya village. The Cossacks at the front convened their own
      congress because they saw that Kaledin was rallying officers,
      cadets and landowners’ sons who do not want the Soviets to
      take power in Russia and want the Don to have
      self-determination. A party is being formed there around
      Kaledin, who styles himself the great chieftain, And so the
      congress of the front-line Cossacks had to be
      dispersed.’8’ The Cossacks countered by, firstly,
      uniting with the Voronezh Congress, and secondly, by declaring
      war on Kaledin, thirdly, arresting the Cossack atamans, and
      fourthly, occupying all the main stations.

    
      Let the Ryabushinskys, who sent millions abroad and donated
      millions over here to pay the saboteurs for obstructing Soviet
      power, let the Ryabushinskys, and the capitalists of France and
      Britain, together with the king of Rumania, let them all bewail
      their fate; their last stake has been lost even in the Don area,
      where there were the greatest number of rich peasants who lived
      on hired labour, who exploited the labour of others, and carried
      on a constant struggle against the migrant labourers driven to
      those parts from afar by privation; even there, where
      exploiter-peasants were most numerous, the people resent this
      organisation of cadets, officers and property-owners who have
      decided to oppose Soviet power. Even there we find the same
      division which everyone ignores and for which the blame is being
      put on us. “The Bolsheviks have declared civil war.”
      Is it possible that we have invented Kaledin; is it possible
      that the Bolsheviks have invented Ryabushinsky? We all know that
      they were the mainstay of the tsarist regime, and are now merely
      lying in wait, biding their time to turn the Russian. Republic
      into the kind of bourgeois republic that you have in most
      countries where, with all the liberty and representation, the
      working people are oppressed just as much as, if not more than,
      in any monarchy. When we hear it said that the Bolsheviks are
      kindling a fratricidal war, a civil war, when curses are heaped
      on the Bolsheviks for having brought about the criminal
      fratricidal civil war, we reply:

      “What kind of fratricidal war is this? Are the
      Ryabushinskys and Kaledins the working people’s brothers?
      It is strange that the sailors, the soldiers, the workers and
      the peasants had no inkling of this; it is strange that they had
      never noticed this before; and it is strange that they firmly
      demand that the Ryabushinskys and Kaledins submit to Soviet
      power.”

    
      The absurd, madcap attempt on the part of the cadets and
      officers to stage an uprising in Petrograd and Moscow fizzled
      out because the vast majority of the workers and soldiers are
      clearly on the side of Soviet power. They were aware that if
      they started a war, the soldiers would be armed and would not
      give up their arms to anyone. The people rallied to take their
      destiny into their own hands, and that was why they started the
      revolution. They were very well aware that over here, in
      Petrograd, the people were solidly behind Soviet power, and so
      when they were routed both in Petrograd and Moscow they rushed
      to the Don area to engineer a counter-revolutionary plot against
      the working people over there, hoping to get support from the
      bourgeois Rada in Kiev, which is on its last legs because it no
      longer commands confidence. Having declared civil war on the
      working people everywhere, they accused us of starting it. They
      said: You are fostering civil war, down with civil war. We
      replied: Down with the Ryabushinskys and Kaledins and all their
      accomplices. (Applause.)

      That is why, comrades, we say it is not true that we are
      destroying democracy as the bourgeoisie’s grave charge and
      assertion runs; nor is it true that we have destroyed faith in
      the forms of democracy, in the cherished democratic institutions
      which have for so long supported and fed the revolutionary
      movement in Russia; it is not true that we have destroyed the
      highest form of democracy, the Constituent Assembly. Under the
      republic of the socialist Kerensky—a republic of the
      imperialist chieftains, the chieftains of the bourgeoisie with
      secret treaties in thier pockets, driving the soldiers to war
      (and calling it a just war)—the Constituent Assembly was
      naturally preferable to the Pre-parliament, in which Kerensky,
      by agreement with Chernov and Tsereteli, conducted the same
      policy. We have been openly and straightforwardly saying from
      the very start of the revolution—April 1917—that the
      Soviets were a much higher, a very much more perfect and
      purposeful form of democracy—a working people’s
      democracy—than the Constituent Assembly. The Constituent
      Assembly unites all classes, which means also the exploiter
      classes, the propertied classes, hence, the bourgeoisie and
      those who received their education at the expense of the people,
      at the expense of the exploited, and abandoned the people to
      join the capitalists, turning their knowledge, the greatest
      achievements of knowledge, into a tool for oppressing the
      people, and fighting the working classes. For our part we
      declare that when a revolution of the working and exploited
      classes breaks out, all power in the state goes to their
      organisation. This form of democracy is incomparably higher than
      the old one. No party invented the Soviets. You know very well
      that no party could have invented them. They were brought to
      life by the 1905 revolution. And although at that time the
      Soviets were short-lived, it was clear that they were the
      people’s only reliable bulwark in the struggle against the
      autocracy. Whenever the Soviets declined and gave way to some
      national representative institutions—as all these Dumas,
      congresses and assemblies have shown—the
      Constitutional-Democrats, the capitalists and exploiters came to
      the fore, deals were made with the tsar, the organs of the
      people’s movement declined and the revolution
      collapsed. That is why when the 1917 Revolution did not merely
      revive the Soviets but extended a network of them across the
      country, they taught the workers, soldiers and peasants that
      they could and should take all state power into their own hands,
      not as in bourgeois parliaments, where every citizen has the
      same rights as the next man. Life will not be sweeter for the
      poor if the worker proclaims that he is the equal of
      Ryabushinsky, and the peasant the equal of a man who owns 12,000
      dessiatines of land. That is why the best form of democracy, the
      best democratic republic is power without the landowners and the
      rich.

    
      The Russian people gained a great deal of experience much faster
      and came to a decision in a matter of months because of the war,
      the unprecedented dislocation, the famine, the danger of
      extinction, the physical destruction of millions of people. From
      April 20 on, when the wounded Linde marched his soldiers out
      into a street in Petrograd to overthrow the government of
      Milyukov and Guchkov, through the long period of ministerial
      leapfrogging, when all the parties kowtowed the
      Constitutional-Democrats and vied with each other in displaying
      loud and alluring programmes, the people saw for themselves that
      it was no use at all: they had been promised peace, but were in
      fact driven into an offensive. In June 1917, tens of thousands
      of soldiers died because of this secret treaty between the tsar
      and the European imperialists, which Kerensky honoured. It was
      not propaganda but this first-hand experience that helped the
      people to make a comparison between the socialist power of the
      Soviets and the bourgeois republic. They carried away the
      conviction that there was nothing in the old reforms and the old
      institutions of bourgeois imperialism for the working and
      exploited people, and that only the power of the Soviets was
      good enough for them. The people—and this includes workers,
      soldiers, peasants and railwaymen, in fact, all working
      people—are free to elect their own deputies to the Soviets
      and are free to recall them when they do not satisfy the
      people’s demands and wishes. You don’t sit in a Soviet
      to interpret laws or make brilliant parliamentary speeches but
      to implement the freedoms and throw off the yoke of
      exploitation. The workers, on their own, will build their state
      on new lines; they will build a new life in the new Russia
      without any room for exploiters. That is what produced the
      Soviets, and that is why we say that the experience of the
      Russian revolution showed the people and went to confirm
      something we had said long ago, namely, that Soviet power is a
      much higher form of democracy than any bourgeois republic that
      has taken shape in Western Europe; in a real democracy, the
      working classes can and must control the non-working elements,
      the exploiting section of society; workers, soldiers, peasants
      and railwaymen can be their own masters; they can arrange an
      exchange of goods between towns and villages, and set a fair
      wage, without the capitalists and landowners.

    
      That is why the Soviet Republic in Russia has now taken the
      shape of a fully socialist republic which has taken away the
      land from the landowners, established workers’ control in
      industry, and put the banks in the hands of socialist
      workers’ organisations, giving the people access to the
      immense wealth accumulated and stockpiled by the capitalists to
      manage and use for the greater welfare and cultural growth of
      all the working people and not for their oppression. That is the
      task facing the Soviet Republic. And this is why we have so much
      sympathy among the people, the working classes abroad, in spite
      of the military censorship of the tsars, and the harassment of
      socialist newspapers by the Kerenskys abroad. The bourgeois
      newspapers over there tell lies about this country in a most
      shameful fashion; our newspapers are suppressed: not a single
      issue of Pravda has been allowed to go through. A few days ago a
      friend of mine returned from Switzerland, from that part of the
      country where I recently spent so many miserable days, and he
      said that people in free Switzerland were not aware of the fact
      that the free republics of free Europe were not letting through
      any issues of our paper, that they read only the wholesale lies
      circulated by the bourgeois newspapers, which do nothing but
      rail at the Bolsheviks. Yet the workers in all countries have
      understood that Soviet power in Russia is truly a working
      people’s government. You will not find a single worker in
      Europe today—either in Britain, France, Germany or any
      other country—who does not applaud news of the Russian
      revolution, because they all regard it with hope and see it as a
      torch that will light the flame all over Europe.

    
      The Russian revolution was such a simple affair only’
      because Russia had been under the most savage oppression of
      tsarism and because no other country had been torn and tortured
      by the war as she had been.

    
      The Russian people were the first to raise the torch of the
      socialist revolution, but they are aware that they are not alone
      in their struggle and that they will accomplish their task with
      the help of the most loyal comrades and friends. We don’t
      know how long it will take for the socialist revolution to break
      out in the other countries—it may take a long time. You
      know how revolutions generally take place in other
      countries. Everyone here has been through 1917, and you all know
      that three months before the revolution
      started, no one knew that it was coming. We know that
      workers’ strikes have already spread to Austria. When the
      European parties headed by their local Chernovs and Tseretelis
      began to lose control of events and felt they had lost all
      touch, there was talk of martial law there, and of military
      dictatorship, in Germany; the strikes in Vienna have now been
      stopped and the papers are out again. I have received a telegram
      from our Stockholm representative, Vorovsky, and he says that
      the movement has undoubtedly halted but that it is impossible to
      crush it altogether, and that it would go on. There you have one
      of the results of the fact that the peace negotiations have
      opened at Brest and that we have kept our promise. The secret
      treaties have been abrogated, published and exposed to public
      shame. We have shown that we regard these commitments of the old
      capitalists—whether they are known as secret treaties or
      loans— as mere scraps of paper to be swept aside because
      they hamper us, the working masses, in our construction of
      socialist society. The working masses are beginning to realise
      the impudence of the German demands at Brest, which revealed the
      same plunderous and predacious urge behind a screen of promises
      to accept a just peace. The delay is artificial, and the masses
      are clear on this: they say that the war can be stopped, because
      the Russian workers and peasants have stopped it, and that an
      offensive can be started against the governments. On October 17,
      1905, the first great nationwide strike was suppressed by the
      autocracy, but it sparked off a chain of events and
      workers’ demonstrations in Austria, in Vienna and Prague,
      and that was when the Austrians won their universal
      suffrage. Although the Russian revolution of 1905 was crushed by
      tsarism, it gave hope to the West-European workers of great
      reforms in the future, that is, the very events now taking
      place.

    
      When the Third Congress of Soviets opened, you all saw a number
      of delegates from foreign parties who said in one voice that
      from their observation of the working-class movement in Britain,
      Switzerland and America they drew the conclusion that the
      socialist revolution in Europe was becoming a task of the
      day. The bourgeoisie over there is stronger and cleverer than
      our Kerenskys; it has managed to get organised to make the
      uprising of the masses more difficult.
      Over there the workers have a measure of prosperity, which is
      why it is more difficult to shake up the old socialist parties
      which had been there for decades, had come to power, and had
      acquired authority in the eyes of the people. But that kind of
      authority is already running out, the masses are surging, and
      there is no doubt at all that in the nearer possibly more
      remote—future, the socialist revolution will be on the
      order of the day in all countries, because the oppression of
      capital is at an end.

    
      When we are told that the Bolsheviks have invented this utopian
      idea of introducing socialism in Russia, which is an impossible
      thing, we reply: How did it happen that utopians and dreamers
      enjoy the sympathy of the majority of the workers, peasants and
      soldiers? Did not the majority of the workers, peasants and
      soldiers side with us because they had acquired a first-hand
      knowledge of the war and its effects? They realised that there
      was no way out of the old society, that the capitalists with all
      their marvels of technology and culture were engaged in a
      destructive war, and that men had degenerated to a state of
      frenzy, savagery and starvation. That is what the capitalists
      have done, and that is why we are faced with the alternative of
      perishing or demolishing the old bourgeois society. That
      explains why our revolution has depth. That is why we find that
      in tiny neighbouring Estland, where the people are literate,
      there was recently a congress of farm-hands who elected agents
      to take control of all the efficient farms. This is a
      world-shaking development: farms are controlled by farm-hands
      who had always been at the very bottom of the social scale in
      the capitalist economy. Then take Finland, where the Diet spoke
      on behalf of the nation, and the bourgeoisie demanded that we
      should recognise her independence. We were not going to use
      force to keep under Russia’s control or in one Russian
      state any of the nations tsarism had kept in by oppression. We
      had not planned to attract other nations—the Ukraine or
      Finland—by force or imposition but by allowing them to set
      up their own socialist system, their own Soviet republics. We
      now find that a working-class revolution is expected to break
      out in Finland almost any day. This is the same Finland that had
      enjoyed complete internal freedom for 12 years—since
      1905—and had the right to elect democratic
      institutions. Between 1905 and 1917, the sparks of the fire
      which the Bolsheviks are alleged to have fanned artificially,
      also penetrated into that country which is distinguished for its
      high culture, its efficient economy and its history, and we find
      the socialist revolution beginning there as well. This proves
      that we are not blinded by party struggles, that we had not
      acted according to plan, and that it was nothing but
      mankind’s hopeless state since the war began that brought
      on the revolution, and made the socialist revolution invincible.

    
      Comrades, let me point out in conclusion that the same thing has
      happened at this railwaynien’s congress. We saw your hard
      fight against your top-drawer railway organisations. You
      railwaymen have seen for yourselves that the mass of working
      railway proletarians bore the brunt of the effort to get the
      railways running. Things did not come to such a pass by pure
      chance: either they had been deliberately hampered by the
      bourgeoisie, bribed by the millionaires who threw in hundreds of
      thousands of rubles and were prepared to go to any length to
      destroy Soviet power, or had been caused by the
      bourgeoisie’s refusal to change the system, because it held
      that that was how God had ordained all things—there have
      always been masters and servants, and the rich have always
      abused the poor who worked for them. In effect the railway
      officials thought that such a state of affairs had been ordained
      by God, which meant there could be no other system, and that
      chaos would result from any attempt to change it. But that did
      not happen. The unity of the working masses is paramount; they
      will establish their own discipline of equals and, using the
      technical and cultural achievements, make the railways run like
      clockwork, and carry on the exchange of goods between town and
      country to help the workers and peasants organise the economy on
      a Russia-wide scale and enable the working masses to make use of
      the products of their labour without the capitalists and
      landowners. When this is done scientific and technical knowledge
      will no longer help a handful of men to get rich and stuff their
      money-bags, but will help to improve the operation of the
      railway system as a whole. This is of especial importance to
      us. You know how much corruption, swindling and speculation
      there is at each junction; you also know that the exploiters are
      spending millions to disrupt transportation and get cars into
      places where they cannot be found. All this is being done to
      aggravate the famine and incite the people against Soviet
      power. But you all know that if the majority of railway
      organisations unite and set themselves the task of supporting
      Soviet power, all the swindlers, saboteurs, capitalists and
      exploiters—all these remnants of bourgeois society will be
      ruthlessly swept away. Only then will it be possible to organise
      the railways in a proper manner and achieve the complete
      liberation of the workers, soldiers and peasants from the power
      of the oppressors. Only then we shall have socialism. (The
      entire audience joins in stormy applause.)

2
Replies To Notes

      Comrades, the notes lying before me fall into two groups: one
      raises the question of the Constituent Assembly, the other, of
      the famine and the economic chaos. I shall reply on these two
      points, putting those notes together that more or less refer to
      the same topic. About the Constituent Assembly we are being
      asked: Was it fair to dissolve it, and shouldn’t another
      one be convened? Or wouldn’t it have been more correct to
      refer the question to a popular referendum before dissolving the
      Constituent Assembly? No, comrades, neither a referendum nor a
      new constituent assembly can help matters. That is how the
      parties in Russia have taken shape. We have seen where the
      sympathies of the capitalists, and where those of the workers
      and peasants lie. Soviet power was not established by decree or
      party resolution, because it is above parties, and is the
      outcome of revolutionary experience, the experience of millions
      of men: it was no accident at all that the Soviets first emerged
      in 1905, and in 1917 grew to full stature and established a new
      republic, the likes of which do not exist in any European
      country, and will not exist in any of them so long as they are
      ruled by capital. But the Soviet Republic will triumph
      everywhere, and that is when the decisive blow will be dealt at
      capital. I must point out that the Constituent Assembly and the
      referendum are based on the old bourgeois parliamentary pattern
      and because capital holds sway, any popular poll has to reckon
      and bargain with it. Soviet power does not produce men who fence
      in parliament and exchange brilliant speeches, the while
      consolidating the rule of capital and the bureaucracy. Soviet
      power springs from the working masses themselves;.it does not
      produce a parliament, but an assembly of working people’s
      representatives who enact laws which are implemented
      immediately, are translated into life and are aimed at fighting
      the exploiters. The old-type constituent assembly and referendum
      were designed to unite the will of the whole nation and create
      the possibility of the sheep living side by side with the
      wolves, the exploited with the exploiters. That is something we
      don’t want. It is something we have tried out and gone
      through. We’ve had enough. And we are sure that the
      majority of the workers, peasants and soldiers feel that way
      too. At a time when the war has forced us to make a series of
      heroic efforts to escape the grip of capital or perish in the
      attempt, we are invited to put on an experiment which had
      already been tried out in some European countries, and which
      would give us the old bourgeois capitalism and national
      representation, instead of the representation of the working
      masses. We do not want bourgeois representation but the
      representation of the exploited and the oppressed that would
      wage a ruthless fight against the exploiters. That is the
      intention of Soviet power, which does not include either
      parliament or referendum. It is superior to both, because if the
      working people are dissatisfied with their party they can elect
      other delegates, hand power to another party and change the
      government without any revolution at all, for their experience
      of Kerensky-Kaledin and the bourgeois Rada has shown that it is
      impossible to fight against Soviet power. There might be a
      handful of men in Russia today fighting against Soviet power,
      but such eccentrics are few, and they will disappear in a matter
      of weeks, while Soviet power will triumph as an organisation of
      the oppressed class for the overthrow of the oppressors and
      removal of the exploiters.

    
      I now come to the famine, this horrible curse of our time which
      threatens us. What is the main cause of the chaos? The main
      cause of the chaos which threatens the towns and industrial
      areas with famine js the sway of saboteurs, and the economic
      chaos these saboteurs keep stirring up, while blaming it on
      us. We are very well aware that there is enough grain in Russia
      and that it is stored in Kaledin’s realm, in far-away
      Siberia and in the grain producing gubernias. I must say that
      the exploited classes will never succeed in liberating
      themselves unless they set up a firm, ruthless and revolutionary
      government. About the saboteurs, let me say, comrades, that we
      know the addresses at which sabotaging civil servants called to
      collect and sign for a three-month advance on their salaries, to
      which Ryabushinsky had contributed 5 million, the Anglo-French
      imperialists so much, and the Rumanian, so much. Here is what
      sabotage means: it means people, senior officials, who are
      bribed and whose only purpose is to overthrow Soviet power,
      although many of them are not aware of this. Sabotage is the
      effort to restore the old paradise for the exploiters and the
      old hell for the working people. But if we are to frustrate them
      in this purpose, we must break down their resistance.

    
      Railwaymen’s pay is another point that has been brought to
      our notice. This is nothing but a misunderstanding. It may have
      been that one commissar took this view of the affair and issued
      a decree but amended it’70 as soon as he received
      instructions from the Council of People’s Commissars, so
      that anyone who says that that had been the Soviet
      Government’g intention doesn’t know what he is talking
      about.

    
      What are we to do to eliminate the famine and the chaos?
      Firstly, the capitalists’ resistance must be broken, and
      the saboteurs driven to the wall. When the supporters of
      Novaya Zhizn and other ostensibly socialist periodicals
      say that sabotage has not been stopped in these ten weeks, I
      say: why don’t you help us stop it? The banks have now
      passed under the authority of the Soviets. Here is what happened
      yesterday: a certain specialist writer by the name of Finn
      Yenotayevsky came to see me on behalf of 50,000 persons and
      declared that the banks were prepared to operate entirely under
      the authority of Soviet power. (Loud applause.)
      “High time, too,” I said to this spokesman of the bank
      officials. We will not refuse to negotiate with any
      organisation, be it an organisation of bank officials or any
      other, provided such recognition of Soviet power is actually
      accepted by the majority of the working people. That is what we
      were told by the bank officials who are in the habit of putting
      through unheard-of speculative deals to turn an honest penny,
      all of which keeps their pockets bulging with profits running
      into millions of rubles.

    
      Now they want to negotiate with us, but these negotiations will
      differ from those of Kerensky. We shall not discuss any reform
      of banking. After occupying the banks with armed force, we enter
      into negotiations and issue orders and instructions. It is
      important for us to break down the resistance of the saboteurs
      before opening negotiations. That is the way to fight the famine
      and the chaos, and this alone can help us to overcome the
      horrors of capitalism and anarchy. You know of the terrible
      chaos that has spread everywhere in the world, especially in
      Russia, where tsarism has left a legacy of graft, violence,
      hatred and humiliation of the working people. This is followed
      by complaints about chaos; I put it to you: can the war-weary
      men who have stood in the trenches for three years fight to
      increase the profits of the Russian capitalists and capture
      Constantinople for them? On every hand they see that millions
      are being spent to overthrow Soviet power and get the country
      under control.

    
      Comrades, such changes cannot be expected to take place
      overnight. The socialist revolution is on, and everything now
      depends on the establishment of a discipline of equals, the
      discipline of the working masses themselves, which must take the
      place of capitalist barrack-room discipline. When the railway
      workers take power into their own hands, they will wipe out
      sabotage and speculation through their armed organisation, and
      set themselves the task of prosecuting those who engage in graft
      and disrupt railway traffic. Such people should be prosecuted as
      arch-criminals, fighting against the people’s power. It is
      on such a well-knit, vigorous organisation—a Soviet
      organisation—that the fight against the capitalists, the
      saboteurs, the swindlers and the Ryabushinskys depends. That is
      the way to defeat the famine, because Russia has everything she
      needs: iron, oil and grain, in short, everything it takes to
      have a decent life. If we defeat the exploiters, we shall
      establish Soviet power and economic control in Russia, and that
      is the way it is going to be. (Stormy applause.)


Footnotes

[1]
Extraordinary AIl-Russia Railwaymen’s Congress was
      held in Petrograd from January 5 to 30 (January 18 to February
      12), 1918. The Left wing of the Second Extraordinary
      Railwaymen’s Congress called by the Vikzhel on December 19,
      1917 (January 1, 1918), walked out a held a separate congress when
      the Right wing (Right Socialist-Revolutionaries Mensheviks, etc.)
      adopted a resolution by a majority of 12 to the effect that all
      power in the country must belong to the Constituent Assembly.
    
 
      The resolution adopted by the Extraordinary All-Russia
      Railwaymen’ s Congress said that it was solidly behind
      Soviet power. It worked out new wage rates for railway workers
      and officials; adopted railway regulations and rules for the
      peoples railway militia, heard a report oil the nationalisation
      of private railways, etc.. It elected a new All-Russia
      Railway’s Executive Committee (Vikzhedor).
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Meeting of Presidium of the Petrograd
    Soviet With Delegates Prom Food Supply
    Organisations, January 14(27), 1918







Meeting Of Presidium Of The Petrograd Soviet With Delegates
    From Food Supply Organisations







V. I. Lenin
Meeting Of Presidium
      Of The Petrograd Soviet
      With Delegates From Food Supply
      Organisations
January 14 (27), 1918[1]


Delivered: 14 January, 1918

      
First Published: 1924 in the magazine
      Krasnaya Letopis No. 1. Published according to a
      handwritten copy of the Minutes.

      
Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 501-502

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 
1
On Combating The Famine
I
Vladimirov's data indicate that the old ration should not be
    changed. Measures must be taken to find what there is available in
    Petrograd.
II

      All these data show that the workers of Petrograd are
      monstrously inactive. The Petrograd workers and soldiers must
      understand that they have no one to look to but themselves. The
      facts of abuse are glaring, the speculation, monstrous; but what
      have the mass of soldiers and workers done about it? You cannot
      do anything without rousing the masses to action. A plenary
      meeting of the Soviet must be called to decide on mass searches
      in Petrograd and the goods stations. To carry out these
      searches, each factory and company must form contingents, not on
      a voluntary basis: it must be the duty of everyone to take part
      in these searches under the threat of being deprived of his
      bread card. We can't expect to get anywhere unless we resort to
      terrorism: speculators must be shot on the spot. Moreover,
      bandits must be dealt with just as resolutely: they must be shot
      on the spot.

    
      The rich section of the population must be left without bread
      for three days because they have stocks of other foodstuns and
      can afford to pay the speculators the higher price.
2
Draft Resolution

      A plenary meeting of the Petrograd Soviet shall be called to
      take revolutionary measures to fight speculators and overcome
      the famine:
      
    (1)All soldiers and workers must be recruited to form
    several thousand groups (consisting of 10-15 men, and possibly
    more) who shall be bound to devote a certain number of hours (say,
    3-4) daily to the food supply service.

    (2)Regiments and factories failing to provide the number
    of groups required shall be deprived of bread cards, subjected to
    revolutionary coercive and penal measures.

    (3)The groups shall immediately conduct searches,
    firstly, of railway stations, inspecting and counting cars loaded
    with grain; secondly, of railway tracks and junctions near
    Petrograd; thirdly, of all warehouses and private living quarters.

    The instructions covering search, counting and requisition
    shall be worked out by the presidium of the Petrograd Soviet with
    participation of delegates from the district Soviets or by a
    special commission.

    (4)Speculators who are caught and fully exposed as such
    shall be shot by the groups on the spot. The same penalty shall be
    meted out to members of the groups who are exposed as dishonest.

    (5)The most reliable and best armed groups of the mass of
    revolutionary contingents organised to take extreme measures to
    overcome the famine shall be detailed for dispatch to all stations
    and all uyezds of the principal grain supplying gubernias. These
    groups, with the participation of railway-men delegated by local
    railway committees, shall be authorised, firstly, to control the
    movement of grain freights; secondly, take charge of the
    collection and storage of grain; thirdly, adopt the most extreme
    revolutionary measures to fight speculators and to requisition
    grain stocks.

    (6)When making any record of requisition, arrest or
    execution, the revolutionary contingents shall summon at least six
    witnesses to be selected from the poorest section of the
    population closest at hand.

    
Footnotes

[1]
      The meeting of the Presidium of the Petrograd Soviet with
    delegates from food supply organisations discussed the grave food
    situation of the workers and soldiers of Petrograd who received
    only a quarter of a pound of bread a day. It heard a report by a
    representative of the food board on the prospects of better food
    supplies for Petrograd and a report of the unloading commission. A
    decision of the Council of People’s Commissars on January 19
    (February 1) increased the food ration to half a pound for the
    entire population of Petrograd.




Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Decree on the Nationalisation of
    the Merchant Marine and Inland Water
    Transport







 Draft Decree On The Nationalisation Of The Merchant Marine And Inland Water Transport







V. I. Lenin
Draft Decree On The Nationalisation Of The Merchant Marine

      And Inland Water Transport[1]


Written: 18 January, 1918

      
First Published: January, 1945 in
      Lenin Miscellany XXXV

Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 505-506

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
      2000
    

 
1
Draft Decree

      1. The Council of People's Commissars states that the
      Central
      Committee[2]
      and
      Tsentrovolga[he Central Committee of the Volga F1eet]
      are entirely in agreement concerning the need to nationalise,
      immediately and without compensation, all sea-going and river
      vessels used for commercial purposes.
      
    
      2. The C.P.C. accordingly resolves that such
      nationalisation shall be carried out immediately, and authorises
      a special commission consisting of representatives of the Navy
      Commissariat, two from the C.C., two from Tsentrovolga, and a
      chairman appointed by the Supreme Economic Council to work out
      the following main points of a nationalisation decree and to
      submit it to the Council of People's Commissars within two days.

    
      3. The nationalisation of the entire fleet is decreed.

    
      4. It is incumbent on the crews and subsequently on the
      unions of ship workers of each basin and sea to maintain order
      on board their vessels, safeguard them, etc.

    
      5. The C.C. and Tsentrovolga shall be regarded as
      caretaker central boards of the nationalised fleet, pending a
      congress and their merger.

    
      If the merger is not achieved on a voluntary basis, it shall be
      carried out forcibly by the Soviet Government.

    
      6. The central boards shall operate in full subordination to the
         local and central organs of Soviet power.
    
2
Addendum to the Draft

      This should be added to the immediate decree on nationalisation:

    

      (a) arrest of all boards of management (house arrest),

    

      (b) strict liability for damage to vessels, etc.
    

Footnotes

[1] The
      question of the nationalisation of the merchant marine arid
      inland water transport was discussed at a meeting of the Council
      of People's Commissars on January 18 (31), 1918. It heard three
      reports: one from Tsentrovolga, another from the Central
      Committee of the All-Russia Seamen's and River Transport
      Workers' Union, and a third from the Supreme Economic
      Council. Lenin's draft was approved as a decision of the Council
      of People's Commissars "Or, Seamen and River Transport Workers".

    

[2]
      The reference is to the Central Committee of the All-Russia
      Seamen's arid River Transport Workers' Union.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speeches at a Meeting of the Central
    Committee Of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.), January 19
    (February 1), 1918.  Minutes 







Speeches At A Meeting Of The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.) January 19 (February 1), 1918







V. I. Lenin

      Speeches
      At A Meeting Of The Central Committee
      Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
January 19 (February 1), 1918
Minutes


Written: 19 January, 1918
      
First Published: 1 and 6 in 1922, in
      N. Lenin (V. Ulyanov), Works, Voume XV; 2 and 5 in
      1929, in the book, Minutes of the Central Committee of the
      R.S.D.L.P., August 1917-February, 1918. Published according to a
      handwritten copy of the Minutes.

Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
pp. 507-509


Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and
George Hanna, Edited by George Hanna


Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
Farrell and David Walters


Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive November,
2000

    

 
1

      Comrade Lenin asks what kind of conference should be
      called. [1]
      He believes we should have it out with the advocates of a
      revolutionary war, because their remark seems to hint at the
      charge that one group within the Party suspects the other of
      being diplomatic on the question of peace. Actually, there is no
      diplomacy involved at all, because the armistice decision said
      quite openly that any side wishing to terminate it must announce
      its intention to do so seven days before the start of
      hostilities. On that ground we have been marking time with the
      peace. How was the decision adopted at the Third Congress of
      Soviets? It was adopted as proposed by the Central Executive
      Committee, which adopted its decision on the strength of the
      Party group decision, and the latter adopted it in line with a
      C.C. resolution. Lenin believes that the best way to dissuade
      the comrades favouring a revolutionary war would be for them to
      go to the front and see for themselves that it is quite
      impossible to conduct the war. Nor does he see any sense in
      having a conference, because its decisions could not be binding
      on the Central Committee; in view of this it might be necessary
      for us to call a Party congress[2] to get precise instructions from the
      Party. By dragging out the peace talks we are creating an
      opportunity to continue fraternisation, and by concluding a
      peace we could at once have an exchange of prisoners of war,
      thereby sending to Germany a great mass of people who had seen
      our revolution in action and had been schooled by it. It would
      be easier for them to work on the awakening of a revolution in
      Germany. He believes, in addition, that in order to ascertain
      exactly what is going on in Germany we should send aviators to
      Berlin, which, they say, is quite possible.
    
2

      Comrade Lenin, speaking on a point of order, suggests that
      Bukharin should give the facts on the state of affairs within
      the Petrograd Committee.
    
3

      Comrade Lenin makes a concrete proposal. He points out to those
      who want a conference that it would not heal the rift. A Party
      congress is a necessity, whereas a conference merely elicits
      opinion in the Party which should be put on record. With that
      end in view he proposes the convocation of a meeting
      representing all shades of opinion and standpoints, each by at
      least three persons. Such a meeting should work out an
      agreement.
    
4

      Comrade Lenin suggests the meeting should be held within two or
      three days, without publishing the theses, which should not be
      made known to Germany. The question of the conference should not
      be solved before the meeting, but it would be absurd to defer
      the question of peace until a congress without publishing the
      theses.
    
5

      Comrade Lenin proposes a meeting of delegates leaving after the
      Third Congress of Soviets, without, however, anything being
      handed out in writing.
    
6

      Comrade Lenin says that the Party programme will not be ready by
      February 15, and proposes that:

    

      the meeting should be held on
      January 20, and should be made up as follows: (1) Central
      Committee; (2) representatives of clearly expressed opinions,
      namely, Lenin, Sokolnikov, Bukharin, Obolensky, Stukov. If
      Smirnov, Obolensky, Stukov and Pyatakov differ, they will send
      two representatives, and otherwise, one; (3) the Petrograd
      Committee to be represented by Fenigstein; (4) a Latvian.

    
      Bukharin and Lomov should be authorised to talk it over
      with the Muscovites and with Pyatakov. Each group to present its
      own theses. [3]


Footnotes

[1]
      The reference is to a demand made by a group of Left Communists
      —Bukharin, Lomov (Oppokov), Osinsky (Obolensky) and
      others—on January 15 (28), 1918, to the Central Committee
      of the R.SD.L.P.(B.) for a Party conference to discuss and
      decide on the question of peace.
    

[2] Lenin's
      proposal for a congress was adopted. It was first set by the
      CC. meeting of January 19 (February 1), 1918, for February 20,
      but was later postponed until March 6, 1918.

    

[3]
      Lenin's proposal for a conference of various groups on peace was
      adopted. It was held on January 21 (February 3), 1918, but no
      minutes are available. There is only a record of the vote on 10
      questions connected with the conclusion of peace (see
      Minutes of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B),
      August 1917-February 1918, in Russian, 1958,
      pp. 190-91). On the main question - Is it permissible to sign a
      German annexationiist peace now? 151;five participants said
      yes. They were Lenin, Stalin, Muranov, Artyom (Sergeyev) and
      Sokolnikov; 9 voted against. They were Lomov (Oppokov),
      Krestinsky, Bubnov, Kosior, Osinsky (Obolensky), Stukov,
      Preobrazhensky, Spunde and Fenigstein. Zinoviev, Bukharin and
      Uritsky left the conference before the vote. 

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Wireless Message Addressed to
    All. Special to the Peace Delegation in
    Brest-Litovsk







 Wireless Message Addressed To All. Special To The Peace Delegation
      In Brest-Litovsk 
    







V. I. Lenin
Wireless Message Addressed To All.
      Special To Tile Peace Delegation
      In Brest-Litovsk


Written: 21 January, 1918
      
First Published: 1929 Lenin
      Miscellany XVI

Source:Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 510

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      We are also extremely alarmed that the line[The reference is to a break in telegraph
      communications between Moscow and Brest-Litovsk due to German
      tampering.] is out of order for which, we think, the
      Germans are to blame. The Kiev Rada has fallen. All power in the
      Ukraine is in the hands of the Soviet. The Kharkov Central
      Executive Committee holds undivided sway over the Ukraine;
      Bolshevik Kotsubinsky has been appointed Commander-in-Chief of
      the troops of the Ukrainian Republic. In Finland, the affairs of
      the bourgeois counter-revolutionaries are hopeless, and workers'
      resentment is running extremely high. At a congress in the
      village of Kamenskaya, the Don area, 46 Cossack regiments
      proclaimed themselves the government, and are fighting against
      Kaledin. There is great enthusiasm among Petrograd workers over
      the formation of a Soviet of Workers' Deputies in Berlin. There
      are rumours that Karl Liebknecht has been released and will soon
      head the German Government. Tomorrow's sitting of the Petrograd
      Soviet will discuss a message to the Berlin and Vienna Soviets
      of Workers.
      Lenin
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Wireless Message Addressed to All
  







Wireless Message Addressed To All







V. I. Lenin
Wireless Message Addressed To All


Written: 22 January, 1918

      
First Published: 1929 Lenin
      Miscellany XI

Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 511

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000
    

 

Calling Everybody
A number of newspapers
      abroad have published false reports of horrors and chaos in
      Petrograd, etc.

    
      All these reports are absolutely untrue. There is complete calm
      in Petrograd and Moscow. No socialists have been arrested. Kiev
      is in the hands of the Ukrainian Soviet authorities. The Kiev
      bourgeois Rada has fallen and dispersed. The authority of the
      Ukrainian Soviet in Kharkov has been fully recognised. On the
      Don, 46 Cossack regiments have revolted against
      Kaledin. Orenburg has been taken by the Soviet authorities and
      the Cossack ataman, Dutov, has been routed and is in flight. In
      Finland, the victory of the Finnish workers' government is being
      rapidly consolidated, the counter-revolutionary whiteguard
      troops have been pushed back to the North, and the workers'
      victory over them is certain.

    
      There has been an improvement in the food situation in
      Petrograd. Today, January 22, 1918, old style, Petrograd workers
      are sending 10 carloads of food to aid the Finns.

    
      Information about Germany is very scarce. The Germans are
      clearly concealing the truth about the revolutionary movement in
      Germany. Trotsky has telegraphed to Petrograd from Brest-Litovsk
      that the Germans are dragging out the talks. The German
      bourgeois press, obviously given its cue, is spreading false
      reports about Russia to intimidate the public.

    
      A decree on the complete separation of church and state and the
      confiscation of all church property was published yesterday,
      January 21, 1918.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech to Propagandists On Their Way
    to the Provinces. January 23 (February
    5). 1918. Newspaper Report







Speech To Propagandists On Their Way To The Provinces







V. I. Lenin
Speech To Propagandists On Their Way To The Provinces 
January 23 (February 5), 1918
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 23 January, 1918
      
First Published: 6 February, 1918,
      Pravda No. 18/ Publsihed according the text in
      Pravda.

Source: Lenin’s Collected
    Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
    pp. 512-516

    
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
    Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

    
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
    Farrell and David Walters

    
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive November, 2000
  

 

    Comrades, you all know that Soviet power has been recognised by
    the majority of the workers, soldiers and peasants of the Russian
    nation and of other nations which in the old days were part of
    Russia by compulsion and are now parts of the free Russian
    Republic. We now have before us a short struggle against the
    pathetic remnants of Kaledin's counter-revolutionary troops, who,
    it seems, has to save himself from the revolutionary Cossacks in
    his home Don area.

  
    Now that the last bastion of the counter-revolution is about to
    collapse it is safe to say that Soviet power is growing stronger
    and it will be consolidated. Everyone can understand this, for
    there is compelling proof that only this power—the workers,
    soldiers and peasants in their Soviets— can lead Russia to a
    free working people's community.

  
    We are confronted with two powerful enemies, the first of which is
    international capital. There it stands raging at the consolidation
    of Soviet power it hates. There is no doubt that these
    multi-millionaires must wage war over an extra piece of the pie
    grabbed from someone else. There is no doubt either that they are
    as yet stronger than the Soviet Republic.

  
    But it turns out that although the capitalists are stronger than
    we are, they have already been sending their men to our
    Commissars, and might even recognise Soviet power and, what is
    more, our repudiation of the loans, which for these tightwads
    would really be a most painful and terrible blow. The fact that
    the agents of the international financial oligarchy have broached
    the subject shows that the capitalists of the world have reached
    an impasse. They would love to extricate themselves from the war
    and throw their full force against the hated Soviet Republic,
    which has started a conflagration all over Europe and America, but
    they cannot.

  
    Our revolution sprang from the war: but for the war, we would find
    the capitalists of the world banded and ranged against us. Their
    only worry is to prevent the sparks of our fire from falling on
    their roofs. But you can't throw up a Chinese Wall around
    Russia. We have yet to hear of a workers' organisation anywhere in
    the world that is not elated at our decrees on land,
    nationalisation of the banks, etc.

  
    We may be faced with a stiff fight in the future, but you should
    never forget, comrades, that in most countries the workers,
    oppressed by their capitalists, are already awakening, and the
    Kaledinites of all countries, no matter how they rave, will never
    be able to consolidate their positions, even if they manage to get
    in a blow at Russia. Upon the other hand, our position is sound
    because we have the workers of all countries behind
    us. (Applause.)

  
    Chaos is our other enemy. It has to be fought with greater vigour
    now that the position of the Soviets has become stronger. That
    struggle, comrades, is one you must promote. Great importance now
    attaches to your trip, the trip of propagandists from both
    government parties now at the head of Soviet power. I believe that
    in the backwoods you will derive a great deal of satisfaction from
    persistent efforts to build up Soviet power and spread
    revolutionary ideas in the villages, eliminate the chaos and
    liberate the toiling peasants from the village kulaks.

  
    We are faced with some very hard work in healing the wounds of
    war-The bourgeoisie of other European countries had made better
    preparations than ours did. Over there they had a correct
    distribution of foodstuffs, which is why they now have it easier;
    they also had a system of rotating the soldiers at the
    front. Nothing of the sort had been done by the tsarist regime or
    by the Kerensky government, which was a vacillating, conciliating
    bourgeois regime.

  
    That is why Russia now finds herself in such dire straits. To lay
    the foundation of socialist society on the ruins she must solve
    the tasks of organisation and struggle against those who are
    war-weary and against the criminal elements who play up the chaos
    for their own benefit.

  
    Comrades, you have before you some very difficult but, as I have
    said, satisfying work which boils down to getting the rural
    economy running and building up Soviet power. But you have
    assistants, for we know that every worker and peasant earning his
    own livelihood feels, deep down in his heart, that there is no
    salvation from famine and ruin but in Soviet power. We can save
    Russia. There is every indication that Russia has the grain, and
    it would have been available if we had taken stock of it in good
    time and distributed it fairly. Cast your mind's eye over the
    boundless expanses of Russia and her disrupted railways and you
    will realise that we need to tighten up the control and
    distribution of grain, if this famine is not to be the end of us
    all. This can be done only on one condition, which is that each
    worker, each peasant and each citizen must understand that he has
    no one to look to but himself. Comrades, no one is going to help
    you. All the bourgeoisie, the civil servants, the saboteurs are
    against you, for they know that if the people manage to share out
    among themselves this national wealth which had been in the hands
    of the capitalists and kulaks, they will rid Russia of the chaff
    and the drones. That is why they have mustered against the working
    people all their forces, ranging from Kaledin and Dutov to the
    saboteurs, the bribed vagrants and those who are simply weary and
    are habitually unable to put up any resistance because they are
    mesmerised by the exploiting bourgeoisie. One day they bribe
    ignorant soldiers to raid wine and spirit warehouses; the next day
    they get railway officials to hold up freights or shipowners to
    hold up grain barges, etc., on their way to the capital. But when
    the people come to realise that organisation alone will bring
    cohesion and the conscious discipline of equals, they need have no
    fear of any tricks on the part of the bourgeoisie.

  
    That is the job you have, that is where you must work to unite,
    organise and establish Soviet power. Out there in the countryside,
    you will come across "bourgeois" peasants, the kulaks, who will
    try to upset Soviet power. It will be easy to fight them because
    the mass will be on your side.
    They will see that it is not punitive expeditions but
    propagandists that are sent from the centre to bring light to the
    countryside, to unite those in every village who earn their own
    livelihood and have never lived at the expense of others.

  
    Take the question of land: it has been declared public property
    and all types of private property are being abolished. This marks
    a great step towards the elimination of exploitation.

  
    There will be a struggle between the rich and the working
    peasants, and it is not bookish help that the poor need but
    experience and actual participation in the struggle. We did not
    take away the land from the landowners to let the rich peasants
    and the kulaks get it. It is for the poor. This will win you the
    sympathies of the poor peasants.

  
    You must see to it that farm implements and machines do not remain
    in the hands of the kulaks and rich peasants. They must belong to
    Soviet power and be temporarily allotted to the working peasants
    for their use, through the volost committees. They themselves must
    see to it that these machines are not used to enrich the kulaks
    but to cultivate their own land.

  
    Every peasant will help you in this difficult task. You must
    explain to the people in the villages that the kulaks and sharks
    must be pulled up short. There is need for an even distribution of
    products so that the working people can enjoy the fruits of the
    people's labour. Ten working people must stand up against every
    rich man who stretches out his avaricious paw towards public
    property.

  
    The Soviets have a revenue of 8,000 million and an expenditure of
    28,000 million. With such a state of affairs we are naturally
    going to fail, unless we manage to pull the state chariot out of
    the bog into which the tsarist regime drove it.

  
    The external war is over or nearly so. There is no doubt on that
    score. It is an internal war that is now before us. The
    bourgeoisie, its plundered goods hidden in its chests, is not
    worried and thinks: "We shall sit this out." The people must
    ferret out the sharks and make them disgorge. This is your task in
    the localities. If we are not to collapse, we must get at them in
    their hideouts. It is not the police who must make them
    disgorge—the police are dead and buried—the people
    themselves must do this, and there is no other way of fighting
    them.

  
    One old Bolshevik gave a correct explanation of Bolshevism to a
    Cossack.

  
    The Cossack asked him: "Is it true that you Bolsheviks plunder?"
    "Yes, indeed," said the old man,"we plunder the plunder."[The reference is to the fact cited in a report to
    the Third Congress of Soviets on January 16 (29), 1918, by a
    participant in the Cossack Congress in Kamenskaya.]

    We shall sink in this sea unless we manage to extract from those
    coffers all that is stored in them, all that has been amassed
    through plunder over the years of ruthless criminal exploitation.

  
    We in the Central Executive Committee will soon adopt a law on a
    new tax on the property holders, but it is up to you to put this
    through in the localities and get the working people to lay their
    hands on all the hundred ruble notes tucked away since the
    war. But this should not be done by force of arms: the shooting
    war is over but this one is ahead of us.

  
    Our revolution will not be overthrown by the force of the
    exploiters, if we go about this business efficiently, because the
    world proletariat is on our side.






Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Trotsky Russian Peace
    Delegation. Brest-Litovsk. Reply







Trotsky. Russian Peace Delegation. Brest-Litovsk







V. I. Lenin
Trotsky. Russian Peace Delegation.
      Brest-Litovsk
Reply


Written: 28 January, 1918
      
First Published: 1929 in Lenin
      Miscellany XI

Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 517

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000
    

 
January 28, 6.30 p.m.

      You know our standpoint; it has lately been confirmed,
      especially after Joffe's letter. We repeat: nothing remains of
      the Kiev Rada, and the Germans will have to recognise this fact,
      if they have not done so already.

    
      Keep us informed.

    Lenin


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speech at a Meeting of the Land
    Committee Congress and the Peasant Section
    of the Third Congress Of Soviets, January 28
    (February 10), 1918. Newspaper Report
  







 Speech At A Meeting Of The Land Committee Congress And The Peasant Section Of The Third Congress Of Soviets







V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Meeting Of The Land Committee
      Congress And The Peasant Section
      Of The Third Congress Of Soviets
January 28 (February 10),
      1918[1]
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 28 January, 1918

      
First Published: 15 February, 1918, in
      the newspaper Izvestia Sovetov Rabochikh, Soldatskish i
      Krestyanskikh Deputatov Goroda Moshvy i Moshovkoi Oblast
      No. 25

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 518-519

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      We are now engaged in the great task of consolidating the gains
      of the working masses, the great task of uniting the workers,
      soldiers and peasants. At the Peasant Congress where the Rights
      had a majority I said that if the peasants recognised all our
      demands we in turn would support all the peasant demands, the
      chief of which is socialisation of land.
      We have now done this. We have passed the world's first law
      abolishing all private ownership of land. We now have power, the
      power of the Soviets. This power, brought to the fore by the
      people themselves, lays a sound foundation for the great cause
      of world peace. The war has been stopped, and demobilisation has
      been ordered on every front. There is still the war against the
      bourgeoisie which is mobilising all its forces to against Soviet
      power. We have almost put an end to the Russian
      counter-revolution. We are gaining the upper hand in almost
      every battle fought on all the fronts. There is still another
      enemy; it is international capital; the fight against this enemy
      will be a long one and we shall win by getting organised and
      obtaining support for our revolution from the international
      proletariat. We are still faced with a big fight, the class
      struggle at home. This is an economic struggle against the
      bourgeoisie, who, directly or indirectly, support our enemies
      and who will try to establish economic domination over the
      working masses.

     
      One thing that we suffer from, that makes our country weak, is
      the lack of money. The big kulaks in town and country still have
      lots of money, which is evidence of their exploitation of the
      people's labour, and which must belong to the people. We are
      sure that the working peasants will declare a ruthless war
      against the kulaks, their oppressors, and will help us in our
      struggle for the people's better future and for socialism.
    

Footnotes

[1]
      Lenin delivered his speech at the closing sitting of the Land
      Conimittee Congress and the peasant section of the Third
      Congress of Soviets.

      The Land Committee Congress opened in Petrograd on January 17
      (30), 1918. Its first sitting was attended by 472 delegates from
      43 gubernias and 243 uyezds. The Congress
      subsequently worked together with the peasant section of the
      Third All-Russia Congress of Soviets which ended on January 18
      (31). It was then attended by more than 1,000 delegates. The
      various sections of the Congress worked out the details of the
      Basic Law on the Socialisation of Land.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Statements Made At the Morning Sitting
    of the Central Committee of the
    R.S.D.L.P.(B.). February 18, 1918
    Minutes







Statements Made At The Morning Sitting Of The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.) February 18, 1918







V. I. Lenin
Statements Made At The Morning Sitting
      Of The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
February 18, 1918[1]
Minutes


Written: 18 February, 1918

      
First Published: 1 and 2 in1928 in the
      magainze Proletarskaya Revolutsia

      No. 2; 3 in 1922, in N. Lenin (V. Ulyanov), Works, Volume XV
      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 520-521

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000
    

 
I

      Item under discussion: German offensive. A. Lomoy
      (G. I. Oppokov) moves a proposal to adjourn the debate.

    
      Comrade Lenin objects, but proposes that a five-minute limit
      should be set for speakers expressing group opinions.
    
2

      Following a decision to continue the debate, N. I. Bukharin
      moves that more speakers should be given the floor.

    
      Comrade Lenin objects to this and proposes that the matter
      should be reduced to the dispatch or non-dispatch of a telegram
      with an offer of peace, and the pros and cons heard.

    
      Lenin's proposal is adopted.
    
3

      L. D. Trotsky opposes the dispatch of a telegram with an offer
      of peace.

    
      Comrade Lenin (speaking in favour of a peace offer). Yesterday's
      vote was especially characteristic, with everyone recognising
      the need for peace in the event of an offensive but no movement
      in Germany.182 There is good cause to believe that the Germans
      want an offensive in order to overthrow the Soviet
      Government. We face a situation which calls for action. If an
      imperialist offensive clearly gets under way, we shall then all
      be in favour of defence, and this can be explained to the
      people. If an offensive gets under way now, and we explain this
      to the masses later, we shall create more confusion than if we
      now continue negotiations for an extension of the armistice;
      there is no time to lose in this because the masses will never
      understand such an approach. Either we wage a revolutionary war
      for the sociallsation of land, something the masses can
      understand, or we continue the peace negotiations.
    

Footnotes

[1] The
      morning sitting of the Central Committee on February 18, 1918,
      discussed the German offensive and the dispatch of a telegram to
      the German Government announcing readiness to conclude a peace.
    
 
      The pretext for the German offensive was Trotsky's refusal to
      sign a peace treaty in Brest-Litovsk. At 7.30 p.m. on February
      16, 1918, the German Command officially informed the Soviet
      representatives at Brest-Litovsk that the ceasefire between
      Russia and Germany would be terminated at noon on February 18
      and a state of war resumed. Under the Brest-Litovsk armistice
      agreement, concluded on December 2 (15), 1917, the parties were
      bound to give a seven-day notice of their intention to abrogate
      the agreement. The German Command violated this commitment. The
      Soviet Government sent a protest to the German Government over
      the breach of the armistice agreement, but received no reply. On
      the morning of February 18 reports were received that German
      troops had gone into action.

     
      At the Central Committee meeting, Lenin's proposal that a
      telegram should be sent to the German Government immediately was
      opposed by Trotsky and Bukharin; Zinoviev favoured its
      dispatch. When put to the vote Lenin's proposal got 6 votes with
      7 against. It was decided to call the next meeting at 2.00
      p.m. the next day, but in view of the unfurling German offensive
      it was called on the night of February 18.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Speeches at the Evening Sitting of the
    Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.),
    February 18, 1918. Minutes
  







 Speeches At The Evening Sitting
      Of The Central Committee Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
      February 18, 1918







V. I. Lenin
Speeches At The Evening Sitting Of The Central Committee
    Of The R.S.D.L.P.(B.)
February 18, 1918[1]


Delivered: 23 January, 1918

      
First Published: 1922 in N. Lenin
      (V. Ulynanov), Works Volume XV.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 522-524

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000



 
Minutes
I

      Comrade Lenin. This is a basic question. Uritsky's proposal is
      amazing. The Central Committee voted against a revolutionary
      war, but we have neither war nor peace, and are being drawn into
      a revolutionary war. War is no joke. We are losing railway cars,
      and our transport is breaking down. We cannot wait any longer
      because the situation has fully crystallised. The people will
      not understand this: since there is a war on, there should have
      been no demobilisation; the Germans will now take
      everything. This thing has gone so far that continued sitting on
      the fence will inevitably ruin the revolution. Loffe wrote from
      Brest that there was no sign of a revolution in Germany; if that
      is so the Germans will find their advance very rewarding. We
      cannot afford to wait, which would mean consigning the Russian
      revolution to the scrap-heap. If the Germans said that they
      wanted to overthrow Bolshevik power, we would naturally have to
      fight; no more procrastination is permissible. It is now no
      longer a matter of the past but of the present. If we apply to
      the Germans, all we have is a piece of paper. You can't call
      that a policy. The only thing we can do is offer the Germans a
      resumption of the talks. There is no half-way house in this. If
      it is to be revolutionary war it must be declared, and the
      demobilisation stopped, but we can't go on in this manner. While
      we engage in paperwork, they take warehouses and railway cars,
      leaving us to perish.  The issue now is that while playing with
      war we have been surrendering the revolution to the Germans.

    
      History will say that you have surrendered the revolution. We
      could have concluded a peace which held no threat to the
      revolution. We have nothing, we have not even got the time to
      blow up anything as we retreat. We have done our best to help
      the revolution in Finland, but now we can do no more. This is
      not the time for an exchange of notes, and this temporising must
      stop. It is too late to put out feelers, because it is quite
      clear now that the Germans can launch an offensive. We cannot
      argue against the advocates of a revolutionary war, but we can
      and must argue against the temporisers. An offer of peace must
      be made to the Germans.


2

Comrade Lenin. Bukharin failed to notice how he went
      over to the position of a revolutionary war. The peasants do not
      want war and will not fight. Can we now tell the peasants to
      fight a revolutionary war? But if that is what we want we should
      not have demobilised the army. It is a utopia to want a
      permanent peasant war. A revolutionary war must not be a mere
      phrase. If we are not ready, we must conclude peace. Since we
      have demobilised the army it is ridiculous to talk of a
      permanent war. There is no comparison at all with a civil
      war. The muzhik will not have a revolutionary war, and
      will overthrow anyone who openly calls for one. The revolution
      in Germany has not yet started, and we know that over here, too,
      our revolution did not win out all at once. It has been said
      here that they would take Lifland and Estland; but we can give
      them up for the sake of the revolution. If they should want us
      to withdraw our troops from Finland, well and good-let them take
      revolutionary Finland. The revolution will not be lost if we
      give up Finland, Lifland and Estland. The prospects with which
      Comrade Joffe tried to scare us yesterday do not at all spell
      ruin to the revolution.

    
      I propose a declaration that we are willing to conclude the
      peace the Germans offered us yesterday; should they add to this
      non-interference in the affairs of the Ukraine, Finland, Lifland
      and Estland, we should unquestionably accept all that as
      well. Our soldiers are in a poor state; the Germans want grain,
      they will take it and go back, making it impossible for Soviet
      power to continue in existence. To say that the demobilisation
      has been stopped is to be overthrown.

    

Footnotes

[1]
      The evening sitting of the Central Committee on February 18,
      1918, was held in a highly tense atmosphere. It was called in
      view of the fact that the Germans had launched an offensive that
      day and had taken Dvinsk in their headlong advance. The Left
      Communists once again opposed Lenin's proposals, but Trotsky
      proposed that inquiries should be sent to Berlin and Vienna
      about the German Government's demands, without informing it of
      the consent to conclude a peace. Sverdlov, Stalin and Zinoviev
      favoured the dispatch of a telegram to the German Government
      informing it of readiness to resume the talks. It was at this
      sitting that Lenin first succeeded, after a bitter struggle, to
      secure a majority in favour of concluding a peace: his proposal
      for an immediate message to the German Government offering to
      conclude peace was adopted by 7 votes to 6.

    
      The general position of Trotsky's is often misnamed "Neither
      Peace nor War". Readers should keep in mind that Trotsky's
      proposals were all within the parameters of Lenin's position:
      figuring out a way to back out of the war while holding the
      Bolshevik faction in the Soviet together, preventing the front
      from collapsing by continued German offensives and preventing
      the triumph of the counter-revolution. Trotsky knew there had to
      peace, but he was conserned that of the effect on the German
      Revolution if the terms of the "peace" were not explained in
      such a way as to assure the German working class of the Soviet's
      continued support for the overthrow of the Kaiser and the end of
      the war.

    
      Trotsky's consistant position on this question and his eventual
      abstention on the final terms of the Treaty actually allowed for
      Lenin's position to triumph and end the war on with the German
      army, dealing a blow to the imperialist war, the Left-Communists
      and solidifying the Bolshevik support among the demoralized and
      haggard rements of the Russian Army.

    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
    Draft Wireless Message to the
    Government of the German Reich







 Draft Wireless Message To The Government Of The German Reich1







V. I. Lenin
Draft Wireless Message
      To The Government Of The German Reich[1]


Delivered: 18 February, 1918

      
First Published: 19 February, 1918 in
      Pravda No. 30 (evening edition).

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 525

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      The Council of People's Commissars lodges a protest over the
      German Government's movement of troops against the Russian
      Soviet Republic, which had declared the state of war ended and
      had started to demobilise its army on all fronts. The Workers'
      and Peasants' Government of Russia could not have expected such
      a step, especially since neither of the parties to the armistice
      had, directly or indirectly, made any announcement either on
      February 10, or at any other time, that the armistice was at an
      end, as both parties to the treaty of December 2 (15), 1917 had
      undertaken to do.

    
      The Council of People's Commissars finds itself forced, in the
      situation that has arisen, to declare its readiness formally to
      conclude peace on the terms the German Government demanded at
      Brest-Litovsk.

    
      At the same time, the Council of People's Commissars expresses
      its readiness, if the German Government should formulate its
      precise peace terms, to reply within 12 hours whether or not
      these terms are acceptable.

    

Footnotes

[1]

      The wireless message to the Government of the German Reich was
      sent to Berlin on the morning of February 19 on behalf of the
      Council of People's Commissars. But the German Government's
      reply, containing even harsher peace terms, was handed to the
      Soviet courier only on February 22 and was received in Petrograd
      on the morning of February 23; it demanded that the new peace
      terms should be studied within 48 hours. The Germans, while
      delaying their own reply, continued their offensive, and in
      those few days covered a great deal of territory; they occupied
      a number of towns and came within striking distance of
      Petrograd.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## 
  Direct-Line Conversation With the
  Moscow Soviet. February 20, 1918







Direct- Line Conversation With The Moscow Soviet February 20, 1918







V. I. Lenin
Direct- Line Conversation
      With The Moscow Soviet
      February 20, 1918


Held: 20 February, 1918

      
First Published: 21 February, 1918 in
      the newpaper Izvestia Sovetov Rabochkh, Soldatskikh I
      Krestyanskikh Deputatov Goroda Moskvy I Moskovishoi Oblasti
      No. 29

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 26, 1972,
      pp. 526

      
Translated: Yuri Sdobnikov and George
      Hanna, Edited by George Hanna

      
Transcription & HTML Markup: Charles
      Farrell and David Walters

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive December,
      2000

    

 

      At 2.15 p.m. the Chairman of the Council of People's Commissars,
      Comrade Lenin, was called up by Comrade Feldman, member of the
      Executive Committee., who, on behalf of the Bolshevik group,
      asked Comrade Lenin the following:

     
      (1)What happened after the receipt of the telegram from
      Berlin;

      
      (2)What measures have been taken by the Council of
      People's Commissars at present;

      
      (3) Whether or not there was any other reply from Berlin apart
      from Hofimana's telegram.

     
      To the first question Comrade Lenin replied:

    
      There is no army; the Germans are attacking from Riga along the
      entire front. They have taken Dvinsk and Rezhitsa and are on their
      way to Lutsk and Minsk. Those who want to do something-and stop
      talking-must conclude peace and continue the task of consolidating
      and extending the revolution at home

    
      To the second question:

    
      Until the offensives are stopped, an order has been issued to
      put up resistance wherever possible, and destroy everything,
      down to the last hunk of bread, all along the way.

    
      To the third question:

    
      No, there was none.
    


Collected Works Volume 26
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







