# Volume 28

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 28







Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 28



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 28
July 1918 - March 1919


Preface




1918



Speech at a Joint Session Of the
  All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And
  Trade Unions Of Moscow, July 29, 1918
69k



Speech at a Congress Of Chairmen
Of Gubernia Soviets, July 30, 1918 Newspaper Report
10k



Speech at a Meeting of the Warsaw
Revolutionary Regiment, August 2, 1918. Newspaper Report
8k



Speech at a Meeting in Butyrsky
District, August 2, 1918 Newspaper Report 
8k



Speech at a Rally of Red Army Men
At Khodynka, August 2, 1918 Brief Newspaper Report
3k



Theses on the Food Question
For the Commissariats Of Food, Agriculture, the Supreme Economic Council,
Finance, Trade And Industries.
9k



Admission to Higher Educational
Institutions Of the Russian Federation. Draft Decision Of the Council Of
People’s Commissars.
3k



Letter to Yelelts Workers
8k



Speech at a Meeting In Sokolniki
Distrtct, August 9, 1918 Brief Newspaper Report.
4k



Comrade Workers, Forward to the
Last, Decisive Fight!
16k



Draft Of Telegram to All Soviets
of Deputies Concerning the Worker-Peasant Alliance
8k



Speeches at a Meeting Of the
Moscow Party Committee On Organising Groups of Sympathisers, August 16,
  1918.
     Minutes
8k



Letter to American
Workers
44k



Speech at a Meeting in the
Alexeyev People’s House. August 23,1918 Brief Newspaper
Report
8k



Speech In Polytechnical Museum,
August 23, 1918
15k



Speech at the First All-Russia
Congress On Education, August 28, 1918
11k



Speech at a Meeting in Basmanny
District, August 30, 1918. Brief Newspaper Report
8k



Speech at a Meeting at the Former
Michelson Works, August 30, 1918
     Brief Newspaper Report.
8k



Greetings to the Red Army On the
Capture Of Kazan
2k



Letter to the Presidium Of the
Conference Of Proletarian Cultural And Educational Organisations
5k



Telegram to Officer Cadets In
Petrograd
8k



The Character Of Our
Newspapers 
7k



Telegram to the Penza Gubernia
Executive Committee And the Revolutionary War Council Of the First Army
2k



Letter to Red Army Men Who Took
Part In the Capture Of Kazan
2k



Letter to a Joint Session Of the
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet And Representatives Of
Factory Committees And Trade Unions, October 3, 1918
8k



The Proletarian Revolution And the
Renegade Kautsky 
23k



Report At a Joint Session Of the
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And
Trade Unions, October 22, 1918 
45k



Resolution Adopted At a Joint
Session Of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory
Committees And Trade Unions, October 22, 1918
8k



Speech at a Rally In Honour Of the
Austro-Hungarian Revolution, November 3,1918 Brief Newspaper
Report
8k



Speech at a Ceremonial Meeting Of
The All-Russia Central And Moscow Trade Union Councils, November 6,
  1918.
     Newspaper Report
12k



Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia
Congress Of Soviets Of Workers’, Peasants’, Cossacks’ And Red
Army Deputies, November 6-9, 1918.
12k



Speech at the Unveiling Of a
Memorial to Marx and Engels, November 7, 1918
12k



Speech at the Unveiling Of a
Memorial Plaque to Those Who Fell In the October Revolution, November 7,
  1918
8k



Speech at a Rally And Concert For
the All-Russia Extraordinary Commission Staff, November 7, 1918
4k



Speech at a Meeting of Delegates
From the Poor Peasants’ Committees Of Central Gubernias, November 8,
  1918
20k



Telegram to All Soviets Of
Deputies, to Everyone
8k



Speech at First All-Russian
Congress of Women Workers
8k



Speech at a Rally In
Lenin’s Honour, November 20, 1918. Brief Newspaper Report
8k



Valuable Admissions Of Pitirim
Sorokin
28k



Speech On Red Officers’ Day,
November 24 1918
8k



Speech Delivered to a Meeting Of
Delegates From the Moscow Central Workers’ Co-Operative, November 26,
  1918
16k



Moscow Party Workers’
Meeting, November 27, 1918
60k



Telegram to
Commander-In-Chief In Serpukhov
--k



The Proletarian Revolution
  And the Renegade Kautsky

360k



Draft Decision on the Use of State
Control
4k



Speech to the Moscow Gudernia
Congress Of Soviets, Poor Peasants’ Committees And District Committees Of
the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), December 8, 1918. Brief
Newspaper Report
4k



Speech to the Third Workers’
Co-Operative Congress, December 9, 1918
4k



Speech to the First All-Russia
Congress Of Land Departments, Poor Peasants Committees And Communes, December
  8, 1918
33k



Rough Draft of Rules for the
Administration of Soviet Institutions 1. 2. 3.
12k



Draft Decision of the Central
Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks).
7k



Speech at a Presnya District
Workers’ Conference, December 14, 1918
31k



Telegram to the Samara
Ukrainians
31k



“Democracy” and
Dictatorship 
16k



Heroism Of the Presnya Workers

8k



Speech to the Second All-Russia
Congress Of Economic Councils, December 25, 1918 
19k



Tasks of the Trade Unions

8k



A Little Picture In Illustration
Of Big Problems 
11k


1919



Telegram to J. V. Stalin And
  Dzerzhinsky 
2k



Speech at a Joint Session Of the
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet And All-Russia Trade
Union Congress
     January 17, 1919
40k



Speech at the Moscow City
Conference Of the Russian Communist Party
(Bolsheviks)
     January 18, 1919.
Brief Newspaper Report
8k



Speech at the Second All-Russia
Congress Of Internationalist Teachers
     January 18, 1919
16k



Speech at a Protest Rally
Following the Murder Of Karl Liebknecht And Rosa
Luxemburg
     January 19,
1919. Brief Newspaper Report
8k



Report At the Second All-Russia
Trade Union Congress, January 20, 1919 
48k



Letter to the Workers Of Europe
And America
8k



Speech at the Second Conference Of
Heads Of Adult Education Divisions Of Gunernia Education
Departments
    
January 24, 1919
8k



Everybody On Food And Transport
Work!
16k



Measures Governing the Transition
From Bourgeois-Co-Operative to Proletarian-Communist Supply And
Distribution.
9k



Telegram to Ufa Gubernia
Revolutionary Committee
3k



Draft Wireless Message From
People’s Commissar For Foreign Affairs
3k



Closure Of the Menshevik Newspaper
Undermining the Country’s Defence. a All-Russia Central Executive
  Committee Draft Resolution
11k



To the People’s
Commissariat Of Education
6k



First Congress of the
Communist International
     March 2-6, 1919
60k



Won And Recorded
7k



Founding Of the
Communist International

Speech at a Joint Meeting of the All-Russia
Central Executive Committee, the Moscow
Soviet, the Moscow Committee of the Russian
Communist Party (Bolsheviks), the All-Russia
Central Council of Trade Unions, Moscow Trade
Unions and Factory Committees to Mark the
Founding of the Communist International, March
6, 1919
      

20k



Note to Stalin On Reorganisation
Of State Control
4k


 

Volume 28 Transcription/Mark-up: Brian
    Baggins, R. Cymbala, Sally Ryan and David Walters:
    
    2000—2002

  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Joint Session Of the
  All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And
  Trade Unions Of Moscow, July 29, 1918









Speech At A Joint Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, The Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And Trade Unions Of Moscow, July 29, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees and Trade Unions
      of Moscow

      July 29, 1918[1]



Delivered: 29 July, 1918.

      

First Published:
      
      
      Published in 1919 in the book All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee. Fifth Convocation. Verbatim Report, Moscow; Published
      according to the text of the book checked with the verbatim
      report.

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 17-33

      
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan 

      
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters

      Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002

    


      (Applause, which grows into ovation.) Comrades, this is
      not the first time we have pointed out in the Party press, in
      Soviet institutions and in our agitation among the people that
      the period up to the new harvest will be the most difficult,
      arduous and crucial phase in the socialist revolution that has
      begun in Russia. Now, I think, we must say that this crucial
      situation has reached its climax. That is because it has now
      become perfectly clear once and for all who are the supporters
      of the imperialist world, of the imperialist countries, and who
      are the supporters of the Soviet Socialist Republic. It should
      first be said that from the military standpoint the position of
      the Soviet Republic has only now become quite clear. Many at
      first regarded the Czechoslovak revolt[2]

      as just one of the episodes in the chain of counterrevolutionary
      revolts. We did not sufficiently appreciate the news in the
      papers about the participation in this revolt of British and
      French capital, of the British and French imperialists. We must
      now recall how events developed in Murmansk, among the Siberian
      troops and in the Kuban, how the British and French, in alliance
      with the Czechs, with the closest co-operation of the British
      bourgeoisie, endeavoured to overthrow the Soviets. All these
      facts now show that the Czechoslovak movement was one link in
      the chain long since forged by the systematic policy of the
      British and French imperialists to throttle Soviet Russia so as
      to again drag Russia into the ring of imperialist wars. This
      crisis must now be resolved by the broad mass of the people of
      Soviet Russia, for we are today laced not only with a struggle
      to preserve the Soviet Socialist Republic from the Czech attack,
      as one particular counter-revolutionary assault, and not even
      from counterrevolutionary assaults in general, but with a
      struggle against the onslaught of the whole imperialist world.

    

      I should like first of all to remind you of the fact that the
      direct participation of the British and French imperialists in
      the Czechoslovak revolt has long been established; I would
      remind you of an article printed by Prukopnik Svobody, the
      central organ of the Czechoslovak Communist Party, on June 28
      and reprinted in our press[3]:

    

      “ On March 7, the Department of the National Council
      received the first instalment from the French Consul to the
      amount of three million rubies.

    

      This money was handed to a certain Mr. Sip, an official of the Department of the National Council.

    

      On March 9, this same Sip received another two million and on
      March 25 another million, and on March 26,
      Mr. Bohumil-Cermák, Vice-President of the National Council,
      received one million; on April 3, Mr. Sip received another
      million.

    

      In all, from March 7 to April 4, the French Consul paid the
      Department of the National Council 8 million rubles.

    

      No dates are indicated for the following payments: Mr. Sip one
      million, Mr. Bohumil-Cermák one million and Mr. Sip another
      million.

    

      In addition, a sum of 188,000 rubles was paid to an unknown
      person. Total: 3,188,000 rubles. Together with the
      above-mentioned 8 million we get a total of 11,188,000 rubles
      paid by the French Government to the Department of the National
      Council.

    

      From the British Consul the Department received
      £,80,000. Thus, from March 7 to the date of action, the
      leaders of the Czech National Council received about 15 million
      rubles from the French and British governments, and for this sum
      the Czechoslovak army was sold to the French and British
      imperialists.” 

    

      The majority of you, of course, read this report in the
      newspapers at the time it was published. We certainly never
      doubted that the imperialists and financial magnates of Britain
      and France would do their very utmost to overthrow the Soviet
      government and place every possible obstacle in its way. But at
      that time the picture was not yet complete to show that what we
      are faced with here is a systematic, methodical and evidently
      long-planned counter-revolutionary military and financial
      campaign against the Soviet Republic, which all the
      representatives of British and French imperialism had evidently
      been preparing for months The general trend of events becomes
      clear now when we review them as a whole, when we compare the
      Czechoslovak counter-revolutionary movement with the Murmansk
      landing-where we know the British have disembarked over ten
      thousand soldiers, and under the pretext of defending Murmansk
      have actually begun to advance, have occupied Kem and Soroki,
      have moved to the east of Soroki, and have begun to shoot our
      Soviet officials-and when we read in the newspapers that many
      thousands of railwaymen and other workers of the Far North are
      fleeing from these saviours and liberators, or, to give them
      their true name, these new imperialist bandits who are rending
      Russia from another end. And quite recently we received new
      confirmation of the character of the Anglo-French offensive
      against Russia.

    

      For geographical considerations alone it is clear that the form
      of this imperialist offensive against Russia cannot be the same
      as it was in the case of Germany. There are no common frontiers
      with Russia, as in the case of Germany; troop strength is
      less. In her wars of conquest, Britain has been compelled for
      many decades, owing to the primarily colonial and naval
      character of her military might, to employ different methods of
      attack, to attempt chiefly to cut off her victim’s supply
      sources, and to prefer the method of strangulation, under
      pretext of aid, to open, direct, blunt and outright military
      force. From information recently received, it is clear that
      Alexeyev, who has long been notorious among the Russian soldiers
      and workers and who recently seized the village of
      Tikhoretskaya, has undoubtedly been utilising the aid of British
      arid French imperialism. There the revolt was more clear-cut,
      again apparently because British and French imperialism had a
      hand in it.

    

      Lastly, we received news yesterday that in Baku the British and
      French imperialists have succeeded in making a very effective
      move. They have managed to secure a majority of about thirty
      votes in the Baku Soviet, over our Party, over the Bolsheviks,
      and those Left Socialist-Revolutionaries[4]

      unfortunately, very few in number-who refused to fall in with
      the despicable gambles and treachery of the Moscow Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, and who have remained loyal to the
      Soviet government in the struggle against imperialism and
      war. Over this nucleus in the Baku Soviet which is loyal to the
      Soviet government and which up to now constituted the majority,
      the British and French imperialists have now secured a majority
      of thirty votes, owing to the fact that the greater part of the
      Dashmktsutyun Party,[5]

      the Armenian quasi-socialists, have sided with them against us. (Reads telegram.)

    

      “On July 26, on the orders of People’s Commissar
      Korganov, the Adji-Kabul detachment retired from Adji-Kabul to a
      position near Alyat. After the withdrawal of the Shomakha
      detachment from Shemakha and Maraza the enemy began to advance
      along the River Pirsagat valley; the first skirmish with the
      enemy’s vanguard occurred near the village of Kubala.

    

      Simultaneously from the south, from the direction of the Kura, a
      large force of cavalry began to advance towards Pirsagat. Under
      the circumstances, to hold Adji-Kabul we would have had to
      deploy all our available forces on three sides: to the west of
      Adji-Kabul, and to the north and south of the Navagi-Pirsagat
      valley. Such an extension of the front would have left us
      without reserves and would have made it impossible for us to
      strike at the enemy as we have no cavalry, and would even have
      endangered the group at Adji-Kabul if the front had been broken
      from the north or south. In view of this situation, and in order
      to conserve the strength of the troops, orders were given to the
      detachment to retreat from Adji-Kabul to a position near
      Alyat. The retreat was carried out in good order. Important
      railway installations and the Adji-Kabul station as well as the
      kerosene and oil tanks, have been blown up. In Daghestan, the
      enemy is on the move as part of the general offensive. On July
      24, the enemy advanced in large forces in four directions. After
      twenty-four hours’ fighting we occupied the enemy’s
      trenches; the foe dispersed into the woods and nightfall
      prevented further pursuit. Oil July 24, news of successes was
      received from Shura, where fighting is going on around the town;
      the enemy is tting up a stubborn and organised resistance, and
      is commanded by former Dagbestan officers. Daghestan peasants
      are taking an active part in the fighting around Shura.

    

      The Bight-wing parties in Baku have raised their heads and are
      vigorously campaigning to call in the British. This campaign is
      strongly backed by the army officers and is being conducted
      among the forces at the front. Anglophil agitation has
      disorganized the army. The British orientation has recently been
      making great headway among the worn-out and despairing people.

    

      Under the influence of the unscrupulous and provocative
      activities of the Right-wing parties, the Caspian flotilla has
      adopted several contradictory resolutions in regard to the
      British. Deceived by British hirelings and volunteer agents,
      until quite recently it blindly believed in the sincerity of
      British support.

    

      Latest reports say that the British are advancing in Persia and
      have occupied Resht (Giljan), where for four days they have been
      engaged against Knchuk-Khan and the German and Turkish
      bands. who have joined forces with him, headed by Mussavatists[6]

      who had fled from Baku. After the Resht battle the British
      applied to us for assistance, but our representatives in Persia
      refused. The British got the upper hand in Resht. But they have
      practically no forces in Persia. We know they have only fifty
      men in Enzeli. They need petrol, in exchange for which they are
      offering us cars. Without petrol they are stuck.

    

      On July 25, a second session of the Soviet was held to discuss
      the political and military situation, and at the insistence of
      the rightwing parties the question of the British was raised
      Comrade Shahumyan, Commissar Extraordinary for the Caucasus,
      citing the resolution of the Fifth Congress of Soviets and
      Stalin’s telegram on behalf of the Central Council of
      People’s Commissars, spoke against inviting the British
      and demanded that this question be struck from the
      agenda. Comrade Shahumyan’s move was defeated by a small
      majority, whereupon, as representative of the central
      government, he entered a vigorous protest. The session heard the
      report of the delegates who had visited the front. By 259 votes
      of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, Right Dashnaks and
      Mensheviks against 236 votes of the Bolsheviks Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Left Dashnaks, a resolution was
      adopted to invite the British and form a government comprising
      members of all parties represented in the Soviet and recognising
      the Power of the Council of People’s Commissars. The
      resolution was sharpy condemned by the Left wing. Shahumyan
      declared that he regarded it as a shameful betrayal and stark
      ingratitude towards the workers and peasants of Russia and that
      as the central government’s representative, he renounced
      all responsibility for the decision. A statement was made on
      behalf of the group of the Bolsheviks, Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Left Dashnaks to the effect that
      they would not join the coalition government and that the
      Council of People’s Commissars would resign. Comrade
      Shahumyan declared in the name of the three Left groups that a
      government which had in fact broken with the Russian Soviet
      government by inviting the British imperialists would receive no
      support from Soviet Russia. By its treacherous policy of
      inviting the British, the local Soviet had lost Russia and the
      parties supporting the Soviet government.

    

      The Right-wing parties were thrown into utter confusion at the
      decision of the Council of People’s Commissars to
      resign. When news of this situation got around there was an
      abrupt change of sentiment in the districts and at the
      front. The sailors realised they had been duped by traitors who
      want to break with Russia and bring down the Soviet
      government. The people are having second thoughts about the
      British. Yesterday, an urgent meeting of the Executive Committee
      was held over the resignation of the Council of People’s
      Commissars. It was decided that all the People’s
      Commissars should remain at their posts and continue their
      former functions pending decision of the question of power at
      the Soviet’s session on July 31. The Executive Committee
      has decided to take urgent t measures to combat the threatening
      counter-revolution. The foe is carrying on activities under the
      wing or the A nglo-French parties.

    

      Press Bureau of the Baku Council of People’s
      Commissars,” 

    

      Not unlike the groups here. who call themselves socialists but
      have never broken off relations with the bourgeoisie there,
      too. these people came out in favour of inviting the British
      troops to defend Baku.[7]

      We already know only too well the meaning of such an invitation
      to imperialist troops to defend the Soviet Republic. We know the
      meaning of this invitation extended by the bourgeoisie a section
      of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and by the Mensheviks. We know
      the meaning of this invitation extended by the Menshevik leaders
      in Tiflis, Georgia.

    

      We may now say that the Bolshevik, the Communist Party is the
      only party which has never invited imperialists and has never
      entered into a rapacious alliance with them but has only
      retreated before these cutthroats when they pressed too
      hard. (Applause.) We know our Communist comrades in the
      Caucasus were in a very difficult position because the
      Mensheviks betrayed them everywhere by entering into direct
      alliance with the German imperialists, on the pretext, of course
      of defending Georgia’s independence.

    

      You are all aware that this independence of Georgia has become a
      sheer fraud. In actual fact it amounts to the occupation and
      complete seizure of Georgia by the German imperialists, an
      alliance of German bayonets with the Menshevik government
      against the Bolshevik workers and peasants. And, therefore., our
      Baku comrades were a thousand times right in refusing to close
      their eyes to the danger of the situation and saying: W(,. would
      never be opposed to peace with an imperialist power on the basis
      of ceding part of our territory, provided this would not harm
      us, would not bind our troops in an alliance with the bayonets
      of the aggressors and would not prevent us from carrying on our
      Socialist reconstruction.

    

      But since, as the question now stands, by inviting the British,
      supposedly for the defence of Baku, they are inviting a power
      which has now swallowed up the whole of Persia and which has
      long been moving up its forces for seizing the Southern
      Caucasus—that is, surrendering themselves to British and
      French imperialism—we cannot doubt or hesitate for a
      moment any must say that, however difficult the position of our
      Baku comrades may be, by refusing to conclude such a peace they
      have taken the only step worthy of true socialists. This
      resolute rejection of any agreement whatsoever with the British
      and French imperialists was the only true course for our Baku
      comrades to take, for you cannot invite them without converting
      your independent socialist government, even though on severed
      territory, into a slave of imperialist war.

    

      We therefore do riot entertain the slightest doubt as to the
      significance of the Baku events in the general scheme of
      things. Yesterday, news was received that counter-revolutionary
      revolts have broken out in a number of towns in Central Asia
      with the obvious complicity of the British entrenched in India,
      who, having brought Afghanistan completely under their sway,
      long ago created a base for extending their colonial
      possessions, strangling nations, and attacking Soviet
      Russia. And now, when these separate links have become quite
      clear to us, the present military and general strategic position
      of our Republic has been fully revealed. Murmansk in the North,
      the Czechoslovak front in the East, Turkestan. Baku and
      Astrakhan in the South-East—we see that practically all
      the links in the chain forged by British and French imperialism
      have been joined.

    

      We now clearly see that the landowners, the capitalists and the
      kulaks, all of whom, of course. for perfectly natural reasons
      have a burning hatred for the Soviet government are acting here,
      toe, in ways greatly resembling those of the landowners,
      capitalists and kulaks in the Ukraine and in other regions
      severed from Russia. As the lackeys of British and French
      imperialism they have done their utmost to undermine the Soviet
      government at all costs. Realising they could not do it with
      forces inside Russia alone, they decided to act not by words or
      appeals in the spirit o the Martov gentry, but by restoring to
      more effective methods of struggle—military
      hostilities. That is where our attention should he chiefly
      directed: that is Where we should concentrate all our agitation
      arid propaganda; and we should shift the centre of the whole of
      our Soviet work accordingly.

    

      The fundamental fact is that it is the imperialist forces of the
      other coalition that are now at work, not the German, but the
      Anglo-French, which have seized part of our territory and are
      using it as a base. Up to now their geographical position has
      prevented them from attacking Russia by the direct route; now
      British and French imperialism, which for four years has been
      drenching the whole world in blood in a bid for world supremacy,
      has by an indirect route approached within easy reach of Russia,
      with the object of strangling the Soviet Republic and once more
      plunging Russia into imperialist war. You are all perfectly
      aware, comrades, that from the very beginning of the October
      Revolution our chief aim has been to put a stop to the
      imperialist war; but we never harboured the illusion that the
      forces of the proletariat and the revolutionary people of any
      one country, however heroic and however organised and
      disciplined they might be, could overthrew international
      imperialism. That can be done only by the joint efforts of the
      workers of the world.

    

      What we have done, however, is to sever all connections with the
      capitalists of the whole world in one country. Our government is
      net tied by a single thread to any kind of imperialist and never
      will be, whatever future course our revolution may take. The
      revolutionary movement against imperialism during the eight
      months of our rule has made tremendous strides, and in one of
      the chief centres of imperialism, Germany, matters in January
      1918 came to an armed clash and the bloody suppression of that
      movement. We have done our revolutionary duty as no
      revolutionary government in any country has ever done on an
      international world-wide scale. But we never deceived ourselves
      into thinking this could be done by the efforts of one country
      alone. We knew that our efforts were inevitably leading to a
      world-wide revolution, and that the war begun by the imperialist
      governments could not be stepped by the efforts of those
      governments themselves. It can be stopped only by the efforts of
      all workers; and when we came to power, our task as the
      proletarian Communist Party, at a time when capitalist bourgeois
      rule still remained in the ether countries-our immediate task, I
      repeat, was to retain that power, that torch of socialism, so
      that it might scatter as many sparks as possible to add to the
      growing flames of socialist revolution.

    

      This was everywhere an extremely difficult task; and what
      enabled us to accomplish it was the fact that the proletariat
      rallied to the defence of the gains of the Socialist
      Republic. This task has led to a particularly arduous and
      critical situation, for the socialist revolution, in the direct
      sense of the term, has not yet begun in any country, although it
      is more imminent in countries like Italy and Austria. But as it
      has net yet begun, we are faced with a new success to British
      and French, and therefore world, imperialism. Whereas from the
      West, German imperialism continues to stand as a military,
      annexatory, imperialist force, from the North-East and South of
      Russia, British and French imperialism has been able to dig
      itself in and is making it patently obvious to us that this
      force is prepared once more to plunge Russia into imperialist
      war, is prepared to crush Russia, the independent socialist
      state that is continuing its socialist work and propaganda on a
      scale hitherto unparalleled anywhere in the world. Against this,
      British and French imperialism has won a big victory, and,
      surrounding us on all sides, it is doing its utmost to crush
      Soviet Russia. We are fully aware that British and French
      imperialism’s victory is inseparably connected with the
      class struggle.

    

      We have always said, and revolutions bear it outthat when the
      foundations of the exploiters’ economic power are at
      stake, their property, which places the labour of tens of
      millions of workers and peasants at their disposal and enables
      the landowners and capitalists to enrich themselves, when, I
      repeat the private property of the capitalists and landowners is
      at stake, they forget all talk about love for one’s
      country and independence. We know full well that the Cadets, the
      Right Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks have beaten
      the record in concluding alliances with the imperialist powers,
      in concluding predatory treaties and betraying the country to
      Anglo-French imperialism. The Ukraine and Tiflis are good
      examples The alliance of the Mensheviks and Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries with the Czechs is sufficient proof of
      this. And the action of the Left Socialist-R revolutionaries,
      when they tried to embroil the Russian Republic in war in the
      interests of the Yaroslavl white guards,[8]

      shows quite clearly that when their class profits are at stake,
      the bourgeoisie will sell their country and strike a bargain
      with any foreigner against their own people. This truth has time
      and again been borne out by the history of the Russian
      revolution, after the history of revolution over a hundred years
      had shown that that is the law of the class interests, of the
      class policy of the bourgeoisie at all times and in all
      countries. It is therefore by no means surprising that the
      present aggravation of the Soviet Republic’s international
      position is connected with the aggravation of the class struggle
      at home.

    

      We have often said that, in this respect, in regard to the
      aggravation of the food crisis, the period until the new harvest
      will be the most difficult. Russia is being flayed with the
      scourge of famine, which has attained unparalleled proportions
      precisely because it is the plan of the imperialist robbers to
      cut off her granaries. Their calculations are well founded and
      are aimed at getting social and class support in the
      grain-producing outlying regions; they seek areas where the
      kulaks predominate—the rich peasants, who have battened on
      the war and who live by the labour of others, the labour of the
      poor. You know that these people have piled up hundreds of
      thousands of rubles and that they have huge stocks of grain. You
      know that it is these people who have battened on national
      misfortunes and who had greater opportunity to rob and increase
      their profits the more the population of the capital
      suffered—it is these kulaks who have constituted the chief
      and most formidable buttress of the counter-revolutionary
      movement in Russia. Here the class struggle has reached its
      deepest source. There is not a village left where the class
      struggle is not. raging between a miserable handful of kulaks on
      the one hand and the vast labouring majority-the poor and those
      middle peasants who have no grain surpluses, who have consumed
      them long ago, and who did not go in for profiteering—on
      the other. This class struggle has penetrated every village.

    

      When we were determining our political plans and publishing our
      decrees-the vast majority of those present here are, of course,
      familiar with them—when, I repeat, we drafted and passed
      the decrees on the organisation of the poor peasants,[9]

      it was clear to us we were coming up against the most decisive
      and fundamental issue of the whole revolution, the most decisive
      and fundamental issue, the issue of power-whether power would
      remain in the hands of the workers; whether they could gain the
      support of all the poor peasants, with whom they have no
      differences; whether they would succeed in winning over the
      peasants with whom they have no disagreement, and unite this
      whole mass, which is dispersed, disunited and scattered through
      the villages-in which respect it lags behind the urban workers;
      whether they could unite them against the other camp, the camp
      of the landowners, the imperialists and kulaks.

    

      Before our very eyes the poor peasants have begun to rally
      together very quickly. It is said that revolution teaches. The
      class struggle does indeed teach in practice that any false note
      in the position of any party immediately lands that party where,
      it deserves to be. We have clearly seen the policy of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party, who, because of their
      spinelessness and stupidity, started to vacillate at a time when
      the food problem was at its height, and that party disappeared
      from the scene as a party and became a pawn in the hands of the
      Yaroslavl white guards. (Applause.)

    

      Comrades, the wave of revolts sweeping Russia is easy to
      understand in the light of this sharpening of the class struggle
      over the food crisis at the very time when we know the new
      harvest is a bumper one but cannot yet be gathered, and when the
      hunger-tormented people of Petrograd and Moscow are being driven
      to revolt by the kulaks and the bourgeoisie, who are making the
      most desperate efforts, crying “Now or never!” There
      is the revolt in Yaroslavl. And we can see the influence of the
      British and French; we see the calculations of the
      counterrevolutionary landowners and bourgeoisie. Wherever the
      question of grain arose, they obstructed the grain monopoly,
      without which there can be. no socialism. That. is just where
      the bourgeoisie are bound to unite; here the bourgeoisie have a
      stronger backing than the country yokel. The decisive fight
      between the forces of socialism and bourgeois society is bound
      to come in any case, whatever happens, if not today, then
      tomorrow, on one issue or another. Only pseudo-socialists, like
      our Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, for example, can waver. When
      socialists waver over this question, over this fundamental
      question, it means they are only pseudo-socialists, and are not
      worth a brass farthing. The effect of the revolution has
      virtually been to turn such socialists into more pawns in the
      hands of the French generals, pawns whose role was demonstrated
      by the former Central Committee of the former Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

    

      Comrades, the result of these combined efforts of the
      counter-revolutionary Russian bourgeoisie and the British and
      French imperialists has been that the Civil War-in our country
      is now coming from a quarter which not all of us anticipated and
      from which not all of us clearly realised it might come, and it
      has merged with the war from without into one indivisible
      whole. The kulak revolt, the Czechoslovak mutiny and the
      Murmansk movement are all part of one and the same war that is
      bearing down on Russia. We escaped from war in one quarter by
      incurring tremendous losses and signing an incredibly harsh
      peace treaty; we knew we were concluding a predatory peace,[10]

      but we said we would be able to continue our propaganda and our
      constructive work, and in that way cause the imperialist
      world’s disintegration. We have succeeded in doing
      so. Germany is now negotiating with us as to how many thousand
      millions to extort from Russia on the basis of the Brest-Litovsk
      Peace Treaty, but she has recognised all the acts of
      nationalisation we proclaimed under the decree of June 28.[11]

      She has not raised the question of private ownership of land in
      the Republic; this point must be stressed as a counterblast to
      the fantastic lies spread by Spiridonova and similar leaders of
      the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, lies that have brought grist
      to the mill of the landowners and are now being repeated by the
      most ignorant and backward Black-Hundred[12]

      elements. These lies must be nailed.

    

      The fact of the matter is that, burdensome as the peace treaty
      may be, we have won freedom to carry on socialist construction
      at home, and have taken steps in this direction which are now
      becoming known in Western Europe and constitute elements of
      propaganda that are incomparably more effective than any before.

    

      So, having got out of war in one quarter, with one coalition, we
      have been at once subjected to an imperialist assault from
      another quarter. Imperialism is a world-wide phenomenon; it is a
      struggle for the division of the whole world, of the whole
      earth, for the domination of one or another group of
      robbers. Now another group of vultures, the Anglo-French, are
      hurling themselves at our throats and threatening to drag us
      into war again. Their war is merging with the Civil War into one
      continuous whole, and that is the chief source of our
      difficulties at present, when the question of war, of military
      hostilities, has again come to the fore as the cardinal and
      fundamental question of the revolution. There lies the whole
      difficulty, for the people are tired of war, exhausted by it as
      never before. The Russian people’s state of extreme war
      fatigue and exhaustion is rather like that of a man who has been
      thrashed within an inch of his life, and who cannot be expected
      to show any energy or working capacity. And in the same way this
      nearly four years’ war, overwhelming a country which had
      been despoiled, tormented, and defiled by tsarism, by the
      autocracy, the bourgeoisie and Kerensky, has for many reasons
      naturally aroused a feeling of abhorrence in the Russian people,
      and is one of the chief sources of the tremendous difficulties
      we are now experiencing.

    

      Yet such a turn of events definitely made for war. We have again
      been plunged into war, we are in a state of war; and it is not
      only civil war, war against the kulaks, the landowners and the
      capitalists who have united against us-now we are faced with
      British and French imperialism. The imperialists are still not
      in a position to throw their armies against Russia-they are
      prevented by geographical conditions; but they are devoting all
      they can, all their millions, all their diplomatic connections
      and forces, to aid our enemies. We are in a state of war, and we
      can emerge triumphant. But here we come up against a formidable
      enemy, one of the most difficult to cope with war-weariness,
      hatred and abhorrence of war; and this must be overcome,
      otherwise we shall not be able to tackle this problem-the
      problem of war-which does not depend on our will. Our country
      has again been plunged into war, and the outcome of the
      revolution will now entirely depend on who is the victor. The
      principal protagonists are the Czechs, but the real directors,
      the real motive and actuating power are the British and French
      imperialists. The whole question of the existence of the Russian
      Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, the whole question of the
      Russian socialist revolution has been reduced to a question of
      war. There lie tremendous difficulties, considering the state in
      which the people have emerged from the imperialist war. Our task
      is now perfectly clear. Any deceit would be tremendously
      harmful; we consider it a crime to conceal this bitter truth
      from the workers arid peasants. On the contrary, let the truth
      be brought home to them all as clearly and graphically as
      possible.

    

      Yes, there have been cases when our troops displayed criminal
      weakness, as, for example, during the capture of Simbirsk by the
      Czechs, when our forces retreated. We know the troops are tired
      of war and loathe it; but it is also natural and inevitable that
      until imperialism is defeated internationally, it should attempt
      to drag Russia into imperialist war, endeavour to make a
      shambles of her. Whether we like it or not, the question stands
      as follows: we are in a war, and on the outcome of that war
      hangs the fate of the revolution. That should be the first and
      last word in our propaganda work, in all our political,
      revolutionary, and construction activities. We have done very
      much in a short time, but the job is not yet over. All our
      activities must he entirely and completely geared to this
      question, on which the fate and outcome of the revolution, the
      fate of the Russian and world revolution now depends. Of course,
      world imperialism cannot get out of the present war without a
      number of revolutions; this war cannot end otherwise than by the
      ultimate victory of socialism. But our task now is to maintain,
      protect and uphold this force of socialism, this torch of
      socialism, this source of socialism which is so actively
      influencing the whole world. And as matters now stand, this task
      is a military task.

    

      This is not the first time we have been in such a situation, and
      many of us have said that however severe the price we had to pay
      for peace, however grave the sacrifices it demanded of us,
      however much the enemy was striving to rob us of more and more
      territory, Russia so far, in the face of great odds, was
      enjoying peace and in a position to consolidate her socialist
      gains. We have even gone farther in this direction than many of
      us expected. For example, our workers’ control has
      advanced a long way from its early forms, and today we are about
      to witness the conversion of the state administration into a
      socialist system. We have made great strides in our practical
      affairs. We now have the workers completely running
      industry. But circumstances have prevented us from continuing
      that work in peace; they have once again plunged us into war,
      and we must strain every nerve and summon everyone to arms. It
      would be a disgrace for any Communist to be in two minds over
      this.

    

      Vacillation among the peasants does not surprise us. The
      peasants have not been through the same school of life as the
      workers, who have been accustomed for decades to look upon the
      capitalist as their class enemy, and who have learned to unite
      their forces to combat him. We know the peasants have riot been
      through such a university. At one time they sided with the
      workers but today we are witnessing a period of vacillation,
      when the peasants are splitting up. We know any number of
      instances of kulaks selling grain to the peasants below the
      fixed prices in order to create the impression that they, the
      kulaks, are defending the peasants’ interests. None of
      this surprises us. But the Communist worker will not waver, the
      working class will stand firm; and if a kulak spirit prevails
      among the peasants, it is quite understandable. Where the Czechs
      rule and the Bolsheviks no longer are, we have the following
      picture: at first the Czechs are hailed practically as
      deliverers; but after a few weeks of this bourgeois rule, a
      tremendous movement against the Czechs and in favour of the
      Soviet government arises, because the peasants begin to realise
      that all talk about freedom of trade and a Constituent Assembly
      means only one thing-the rule of the landowners and capitalists.

    

      Our job is to get the workers to rally and to create an
      organisation under which within the next few weeks evertheing
      will be devoted to solving the war issue. We are now at war with
      British and French imperialism and with evertheing bourgeois and
      capitalist in Russia, with everyone endeavouring to frustrate
      the socialist revolution and embroil us in war. The situation is
      one where all the gains of the workers and peasants are at
      stake. We may be confident that we shall have the broad sympathy
      and support of the proletariat, and then the danger will be
      completely averted, and new ranks of the proletariat will come
      forward to stand up for their class and save the socialist
      revolution. As matters now stand, the struggle is being fought
      over two major issues, and all the main party differences have
      been obliterated in the fires of revolution. The Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary who keeps insistently reminding us that
      he is on the left, concealing himself behind a cloud of
      revolutionary phrases, while actually revolting against the
      Soviet government, is just the same a hireling of the Yaroslavl
      whiteguards. That is what he is in history and the revolutionary
      struggle! Today only two classes confront each other in the
      battle arena: the class struggle is between the proletariat,
      which is protecting the interests of the working people, and
      those protecting the interests of the landowners and
      capitalists. All talk about a Constituent Assembly, about an
      independent state and so on, which is being used to dupe the
      ignorant masses, has been exposed by the experience of the Czech
      and Caucasian Menshevik movements. Behind all this talk stand
      the same forces-the landowners and capitalists; and the Czech
      mutiny brings in its train the rule of the landowners and
      capitalists, just as the German occupation does. That is what
      the war is about!

    

      Comrades, the workers must close their ranks more firmly than
      ever and set an example of organisation and discipline in this
      struggle. Russia is still the only country which has severed all
      ties with the imperialists. True, we are bleeding from grave
      wounds. We have retreated in the face of the imperialist brute,
      playing for time, striking a blow at it here and there. But, as
      the Socialist Soviet Republic, we have remained
      independent. Performing our socialist work, we opposed the
      imperialism of the whole world; and this struggle is becoming
      clearer and clearer to the workers of the world, and their
      mounting indignation is bringing them nearer and nearer to the
      future revolution. It is over this that the struggle is being
      waged, because our Republic is the only country in the world not
      to march hand in hand with imperialism and not to allow millions
      of people to be slaughtered to decide whether the French or the
      Germans will rule the world. Our Republic is the only country to
      have broken away by force, by revolutionary means, from the
      world imperialist war, and to have raised the banner of
      socialist revolution. But it is being dragged back into the
      imperialist war, and being forced into the trenches. Let the
      Czechs fight the Germans, let the Russian bourgeoisie make their
      choice, let Milyukov decide, perhaps even in concurrence with
      Spiridonova and Kamkov, which imperialists to side with. But we
      declare we must be prepared to lay down our lives to prevent
      them deciding this question, for the salvation of the whole
      socialist revolution is at stake. (Applause.) I know
      there is a change of spirit among the peasants of the Saratov,
      Samara, and Simbirsk gubernias, where fatigue was most marked
      and fitness for military action was lowest of all. After
      experiencing the ravages of the Cossacks and Czechs, and having
      a real taste of what the Constituent Assembly and the cries
      “Down with the Brest Peace Treaty!” mean, they have
      realised that all this only leads to the return of the
      landowner, to the capitalist mounting the throne-and they are
      now becoming the most ardent champions of Soviet power. I have
      not the slightest doubt that the Petrograd and Moscow workers,
      who are marching at the head of the revolution, will understand
      the situation, will understand the gravity of the times and will
      act with greater determination than ever, and that the
      proletariat will smash both the Anglo-French and the Czech
      offensive in the interests of the socialist
      revolution. (Applause.).
    

Endnotes
 [1]
      The session was called because of the critical position of the
      Soviet Republic which was cut off from her main sources of food
      supply, raw materials and fuel as a result of the foreign armed
      intervention and whiteguard revolts. A unanimous resolution was
      passed on Lenin’s report, moved by the Communist group.

    

[2]
      Reference is to a counter-revolutionary revolt of the
      Czechoslovak army corps engineered by the Entente with the
      active assistance of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The corps was formed in Russia from
      Czech and Slovak prisoners of war before the October Socialist
      Revolution. In the summer of 1918 the corps numbered more than
      60,000 men (the total number of Czechoslovak prisoners of war
      was 200,000). After the establishment of Soviet power the corps
      was financed by the Entente. Tomás Masaryk, President of
      the Czechoslovak National Council and leader of the Czech
      bourgeois nationalists, proclaimed the corps part of the French
      army, and Entente representatives raised the question of its
      evacuation to France. The Soviet Government agreed to the
      evacuation, provided the Russian troops were allowed to return
      home from France. The agreement of March 26, 1918, allowed the
      corps to leave Russia via Vladivostok on the condition that it
      surrender its arms. But the commanders of the corps did not keep
      their word and provoked an armed revolt at the end of May on the
      instigation of the Entente. The governments of the U.S.A.,
      Britain and France openly supported the revolt in every possible
      way, while French officers took a direct part in it. Acting in
      close contact with the whiteguards and kulaks, the mutineers
      occupied a large part of the Urals, the Volga area and Siberia
      and restored bourgeois rule. In the occupied areas they formed
      whiteguard governments with Menshevik and SocialistRevolutionary
      participation-the Siberian government in Omsk, the Committee of
      Constituent Assembly members in Samara, etc. 

    

      On June 11, the Central Executive Committee of the Czechoslovak
      Communist groups in Russia addressed an appeal to the soldiers
      of the corps exposing the counter-revolutionary nature of the
      revolt and calling on them to join Czechoslovak units of the Red
      Army. Most Czech and Slovak prisoners of war were sympathetic to
      Soviet power and did not fall for the counter-revolutionary
      propaganda of the corps commanders. Realising they had been
      deceived, many left the corps, refusing to fight against Soviet
      power. About 12,000 fought for the Red Army. 

    

      The Volga area was liberated in the autumn of 1918. The
      whiteguard Czechs were completely routed along with
      Kolchak’s troops.

    

[3]
      Lenin refers to the article “The French Millions”,
      which appeared in the issue of June 28, 1918, of the
      Czechoslovak Communist newspaper 
      Prukop nik Svobody

      (The Banner of Freedom) published in Moscow in 1918-19. On the
      same day, the article was reprinted in lull in 
      Pravda
      and partly in 
      Izvestia
      of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. 
    

[4]
      Reference is to a counter-revolutionary revolt of the
      Czechoslovak army corps engineered by the Entente with the
      active assistance of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The corps was formed in Russia from
      Czech and Slovak prisoners of war before the October Socialist
      Revolution. In the summer of 1918 the corps numbered more than
      60,000 men (the total number of Czechoslovak prisoners of war
      was 200,000). After the establishment of Soviet power the corps
      was financed by the Entente. Tomás Masaryk, President of
      the Czechoslovak National Council and leader of the Czech
      bourgeois nationalists, proclaimed the corps part of the French
      army, and Entente representatives raised the question of its
      evacuation to France. The Soviet Government agreed to the
      evacuation, provided the Russian troops were allowed to return
      home from France. The agreement of March 26, 1918, allowed the
      corps to leave Russia via Vladivostok on the condition that it
      surrender its arms. But the commanders of the corps did not keep
      their word and provoked an armed revolt at the end of May on the
      instigation of the Entente. The governments of the U.S.A.,
      Britain and France openly supported the revolt in every possible
      way, while French officers took a direct part in it. Acting in
      close contact with the whiteguards and kulaks, the mutineers
      occupied a large part of the Urals, the Volga area and Siberia
      and restored bourgeois rule. In the occupied areas they formed
      whiteguard governments with Menshevik and SocialistRevolutionary
      participation-the Siberian government in Omsk, the Committee of
      Constituent Assembly members in Samara, etc. 

    

      On June 11, the Central’. Executive Committee of the
      Czechoslovak Communist groups in Russia addressed an appeal to
      the soldiers of the corps exposing the counter-revolutionary
      nature of the revolt and calling on them to join Czechoslovak
      units of Lenin refers to the counter-revolutionary revolt of the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries which took place on July 6-7,
      1918, as the Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets was meeting in
      Moscow. 

    

      The Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party was formed at its First
      National Congress held in November 1917. Until then its members
      had belonged to the Left wing of the Socialist-Revolutionary
      Party which had emerged during the First World War and was
      headed by M. A. Spiridonova, B. D. Kamkov and M. A. Natanson
      (Bobrov). At the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets, Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries constituted the majority in the
      SocialistRevolutionary group. The group split over the question
      of Congress attendance. The Right Socialist-Revolutionaries left
      the Congress on the directives of the Central Committee of their
      party and the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries stayed and voted
      together with the Bolsheviks on the major items of the
      agenda. But they rejected the Bolsheviks’ invitation to
      join the Soviet Government. After long hesitation and so as to
      retain influence among the peasants, the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries came to an agreement with the
      Bolsheviks and their representatives took posts in the Council
      of People’s Commissars. They clashed with the Bolsheviks,
      however, on the fundamental questions of the socialist
      revolution and opposed the dictatorship of the proletariat. In
      January and February 1918 the Central Committee of the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party campaigned against the
      Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. Following its conclusion and
      ratification by the Fourth Congress of Soviets in March 1918 the
      Left Socialist-Revolutionaries resigned from the Council of
      People’s Commissars, but retained their posts on the
      boards of People ’s Commissariats and in local government
      bodies. As the socialist revolution developed in the countryside
      they went into opposition to Soviet power. 
      
    

      On June 24 the party’s Central Committee decided on
      revolt. 

    

      Defeated at the Fifth Congress of Soviets, the Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries decided to torpedo the Brest-Litovak
      Peace Treaty and embroil the country in a war with Germany. On
      July 6 they assassinated the German Ambassador, Count Mirbach,
      in Moscow. 

    

      They followed this up with armed revolt. Their strike force was
      a unit under the command of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary
      Popov, a Cheka worker. They bombarded the Kremlin and seized the
      Telephone Exchange and the Telegraph Office which they held for
      two hours. They issued several provocative messages, bulletins
      and telegrams announcing that power had passed into their hands
      and that the entire population had greeted them
      enthusiastically. 

    

      The Fifth Congress of Soviets instructed the government to take
      urgent measures to suppress the revolt. The Left
      SocialistRevolutionary group at the Congress was
      arrested. Twenty-four hours after it had begun, by 2 p. m. July
      7, the revolt was put down due to the steps taken by the Soviet
      Government and the concerted action of the Moscow workers and
      garrison. The revolt was part of the anti-Soviet campaign of the
      counter-revolutionaries at home and the imperialists abroad, and
      was secretly supported by foreign diplomatic missions. The Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries tried to start revolts also in
      Petrograd, Vologda and other towns. 

    

      Following the suppression of the revolt the Fifth All-Russia
      Congress of Soviets adopted a decision to remove from the
      Soviets all Left Socialist-Revolutionaries who supported the
      reckless policy of their leaders. The Congress received numerous
      telegrams from workers and peasants all over the country
      welcoming the suppression of the revolt and expressing their
      readiness to defend Soviet power by arms. 

    

[5]
      Dashnaktsutyun Party-Armenian nationalist party which arose in
      the early nineties of the last century and strove for liberation
      of the Turkish Armenians from subjugation to the sultan of
      Turkey. Besides the bourgeoisie it included many national
      intellectuals, petty bourgeoisie and working people who fell for
      the nationalist and socialist phrase-mongering. During the
      Revolution of 1905-07 the party drew close to the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. In 1907 a congress of the party
      adopted a Narodnik type of “socialist” programme. 

    

      After the February 1917 revolution the Dashnaks supported the
      Provisional Government policy and, following the October
      Revolution, they joined with the block of Mensheviks,
      Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mussavatists. Between 1918 and
      1920 they headed the counter-revolutionary nationalist
      government of Armenia. Their policy tended to turn Armenia into
      a colony of the imperialists and bridgehead for the British and
      French imperialists and Russian whiteguards in the struggle
      against the Soviet Republic. In November 1920 the people of
      Armenia led by the Bolsheviks and Red Army units brought down
      the Dashnak government. After Soviet power had triumphed in
      Transcaucasia the Dasbnaktsutvun organisations were broken up. 

    

[6]
      Mussauatists—members of the nationalist Mussavat Party of
      the Azerbaijanian bourgeoisie and landowners, which was formed
      in 1912. During the October Revolution and Civil War it was the
      main counter-revolutionary force in Azerbaijan. After the fall
      of Soviet government in 1918, the Mussavatists came to power
      with the help of the Turkish and British interventionists. On
      April 28, 1920, the working people of Azerbaijan and Red Army
      units overthrew the Mussavatist government. 

    

[7]
      On July 25, 1918, an emergency session of the Baku Soviet
      discussed the political and military situation in Baku in
      connection with the Turkish offensive. Under the pretext of
      defending Baku, the Mensheviks, Dashnaks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries demanded that British-troops be called
      in "for help". The Bolshevik leaders of the Soviet government in
      Baku, S. G. Shahumyan, WA. Azizbekov, P. A. Djaparidze,
      Y. D. Zevin and others, rejected these treacherous demands. They
      declared that-to “invite” the British
      interventionists into Baku would he betraying the Soviet
      Republic and insisted on taking urgent measures to defend Baku
      with the forces available. The Bolsheviks, however, were
      narrowly defeated and a resolution was carried to call in the
      British. 

    

      Finding themselves outvoted, the Bolsheviks announced their
      resignation from the Council of People’s Commissars. But
      they soon realised their mistake and decided to stay on and
      utilise every opportunity to isolate and defeat the traitors. At
      its emergency meeting the Executive of the Baku Soviet decided
      that the People’s Commissars should retain their posts
      until settlement of the question of power. The Baku city
      Bolshevik conference held on July 27 decided not to relinquish
      power without a fight, urgently to organise the city’s
      defence under the leadership of the Council of People’s
      Commissars, announce general mobilisation and call on the
      workers to defend the city and Soviet government. In pursuance
      of this decision the Baku Council of People’s Commissars
      declared martial law in the city, instructed the Cheka to cut
      short counter-revolutionary propaganda and called on the workers
      of Baku to take to arms in defence of the city. 

    

      However, the efforts of the Communists and many Baku workers
      were frustrated by the treachery of the Dashnaks,
      SocialistRevolutionaries and Mensheviks. The Dashnak units left
      the front and the Turkish troops advanced ---through the exposed
      section. On July 31 Soviet power in Baku fell to the foreign
      interventionists and their agents. Among other causes of its
      fall were the failure of the Party organisations of Azerbaijan
      and the Baku Council of People’s Commissars to secure a
      firm alliance between the Baku proletariat and the working
      peasants of Azerbaijan and their mistakes over the national
      question, which were taken advantage of by the Mussavatists,
      Dashnaks and other counter-revolutionaries to deceive the
      people. 

    

      Socialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and Dasimaks, the agents
      of the Entente, formed a counter-revolutionary
      government—the Dictatorship of the Central Caspianr
      Area. The Soviet leaders in Azerbaijan were arrested. On the
      night of September 19-20 twenty-six Baku Commissars
      (S. C. Shabumyan, M. A. Aziz bekov, P. A. Djaparidze,
      1. T. Fioletov, Y. D. Zevin, G. N. Korganov, M. (I. Vezirov and
      others) were shot by the British with the direct connivance of
      the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. 

    

[8]
      This refers to the whiteguard revolt in Yaroslavl which began on
      July 6, 1918. It was organised by the counter-revolutionary
      Union for the Defence of the Country and Freedom which was led
      by the Right Socialist-Revolutionary B. V. Savinkov. This
      revolt, like other counter-revolutionary revolts in Russia at
      that time, was supported by the Entente imperialists with the
      active participation of the Mensheviks and
      Socialist-Revolutionaries. The Union received large sums of
      money from them. The revolt was part of the general plan of
      intervention in Russia and was timed to coincide with the revolt
      of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries in Moscow (see Note 4). It
      was also planned to start simultaneous revolts in Murom,
      Kostroma, Rybinsk and other towns of the Volga area and central
      Russia. 

    

      On the eve of the revolt Socialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks
      and whiteguard officers gathered in Yaroslavl in large
      numbers. The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, being most
      influential, filled a number of responsible posts. On July 6,
      the mutineers occupied the centre of the town, the arsenal, the
      Post and Telegraph Office and other buildings. Party and Soviet
      workers were killed. The mutineers tried to seize the
      workers’ districts but encountered stubborn and organised
      resistance. Party organisations of the factories rallied the
      people, and armed workers and Red Army units went into
      battle. The Soviet Government sent military units and armed
      workers’ detachments from Moscow, Petrograd,
      Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Kostroma, Vologda and Rybinsk. On July 21,
      1918, the revolt was put down. 

    

[9]
      Lenin refers to the decree On the Organisation of the Village
      Poor and Supply to them of Grain, Prime Necessities and
      Agricultural implements which was endorsed by the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee on June 11, 1918. The decree
      provided for the establishment of the Poor Peasants’
      Committees on local initiative. It charged the Committees with
      the task of taking stock of the food supplies of the peasant
      farms, ascertaining the kulaks’ food resources and
      assisting the Soviet supply bodies in requisitioning surpluses,
      as well as protecting and delivering confiscated grain to the
      state granaries. The Committees were also to supply the poor
      peasants with food at the expense of the kulak farms, distribute
      farm implements and manufactured goods, look after sowing and
      harvesting, protect the crops and combat grain profiteering. By
      the autumn of 1918 over 80,000 Poor Peasants’ Committees
      were functioning in the localities. They formed the strongholds
      and organs of the proletarian dictatorship in the
      countryside. Their establishment marked the extensive
      development of the socialist revolution in the villages. They
      played an outstanding part in suppressing the kulak
      counter-revolution and undermining the economic power of the
      kulaks through their partial expropriation. In a comparatively
      short period of time the Committees confiscated and turned over
      to the poor and middle peasants 50 million hectares of land, and
      requisitioned the hulk of the kulaks’ farm implements for
      distribution among the poor and economically weak middle
      peasants. Great credit is due to the Committees for carrying
      through the abolition of landed proprietorship and supplying
      foodstuffs to the hungry industrial centres and the Red
      Army. The Poor Peasants’ Committees were active in
      establishing collective agricultural enterprises, the artels and
      communes, which together with the state farms were the first
      stones laid in the foundation of the socialist
      countryside. According to incomplete data, the number of
      collective farms increased from 240 at the time the Poor
      Peasants’ Committees were created to 1,600 at the end of
      1918. The Committees took the initiative in forming Red Army
      units by recruiting volunteers from among the poor
      peasants. They also helped to consolidate local Soviets and
      purge them of kulak elements. 

    

      The Poor Peasants’ Committees were vastly important in
      strengthening the worker-peasant alliance and in winning over
      the middle peasants to the Soviet side. As Lenin pointed out, in
      their activities the Poor Peasants’ Committees were to
      rely on the middle as well as the poor peasants. They paved the
      way for a change-over from the policy of neutralising the middle
      peasants to a firm alliance with them. 

    

      By the autumn of 1918 the Poor Peasants’ Committees, which
      played a historic role in the socialist revolution, had outlived
      their usefulness. The Soviets were consolidated with the help of
      the Committees and the extensive network of rural Party
      cells. In view of this and also of the need to “consummate
      Soviet construction by establishing a uniform pattern of Soviets
      on the entire territory of the Soviet Republic” the
      Extraordinary Sixth AllRussia Congress of Soviets held in
      November 1918 decided to merge the Poor Peasants’
      Committees with the volost and village Soviets. 

    

[10]
      Lenin refers to the decree On the Organisation of the Village
      Poor and Supply to them of Grain, Prime Necessities and
      Agricultural implements which was endorsed by the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee on June 11, 1918. The decree
      provided for the establishment of the Poor Peasants’
      Committees on local initiative. It charged the Committees with
      the task of taking stock of the food supplies of the peasant
      farms, ascertaining the kulaks’ food resources and
      assisting the Soviet supply bodies in requisitioning surpluses,
      as well as protecting and delivering confiscated grain to the
      state granaries. The Committees were also to supply the poor
      peasants with food at the expense of the kulak farms, distribute
      farm implements and manufactured goods, look after sowing and
      harvesting, protect the crops and combat grain profiteering. By
      the autumn of 1918 over 80,000 Poor Peasants’ Committees
      were functioning in the localities. They formed the strongholds
      and organs of the proletarian dictatorship in the
      countryside. Their establishment marked the extensive
      development of the socialist revolution in the villages. They
      played an outstanding part in suppressing the kulak
      counter-revolution and undermining Lenin refers to the peace
      treaty concluded between Soviet Russia and the countries of the
      Quadruple Alliance (Germany, AustriaHungary, Bulgaria and
      Turkey) on March 3, 1918, in Brest-Litovsk and ratified on March
      15 by the Extraordinary Fourth All Russia Congress of
      Soviets. The peace terms were very harsh. Germany and
      Austria-Hungary were to get Poland, nearly the whole of the
      Baltic region and part of Byelorussia. The Ukraine was to be
      severed from Russia and become dependent on Germany. Turkey was
      to get Ardahan, Batumi and Kars. In August 1918 Germany forced
      Soviet Russia to conclude a supplementary treaty and financial
      agreement which contained even harsher terms. 

    

      The Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty was concluded despite dogged
      resistance from Trotsky and the anti-Party group of “Left
      Communists.” Credit for its conclusion was due to
      Lenin’s efforts to overcome opposition. The peace was a
      judicious political compromise. It brought a respite from the
      war and enabled the Soviet government to demobilise the old,
      demoralised army and create a new Red Army, to launch socialist
      construction and gather strength for the coming struggle against
      internal counter-revolution and foreign intervention. The
      signing of the treaty also promoted the peace struggle, enhanced
      the revolutionary mood in the armies and among the people of all
      countries in the war. On November 13, following the revolution
      in Germany, which led to the downfall of the monarchy, the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee repealed the treaty. 

    

[11]
      Lenin refers to the historic decree of the Council of
      People’s Commissars on the nationalisation of large-scale
      industry, approved on June 28, 1918, and published in 

      Izvestia

      No. 134 on June 30. Under the decree all big factories with
      basic capital of 200,0001,000,000 rubles and over were
      nationalised. The decree consummated the socialisation of the
      major means of production. It was preceded by the
      nationalisation of banks, big metallurgical plants, sugar
      refineries, coal and oil industries, water transport, etc. While
      establishing state ownership of large-scale industry, the
      Council of People’s Commissars left the nationalised
      enterprises, pending their transfer to Soviet economic bodies,
      “in the hands of their former owners for free use on lease
      terms”. The owners were held responsible for the
      maintenance and proper operation of the enterprises. The
      workers, technical staff and managers were brought into the
      service of the Soviet Republic. The Supreme Economic Council was
      obliged to draw up at short notice and circulate to all the
      nationalised enterprises detailed instructions on how to run
      them. Despite the enormous difficulties involved, the
      nationalisation was completed quickly due to the organisational
      measures of the Communist Party and the enthusiasm of the
      workers. By August 31 more than 3,000 enterprises had been
      nationalised. 

    

      The decree also announced the nationalisation of all
      privately-owned railways and communal services (water supply,
      gasworks, trams, etc.), which came under the control of local
      Soviets. 

    

[12]
      Black hundreds-monarchist gangs in tsarist Russia formed by the
      police to fight the revolutionary movement. They murdered
      revolutionaries, hounded progressives among the intellectuals
      and organised anti-Jewish pogroms.
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Congress Of Chairmen
Of Gubernia Soviets, July 30, 1918









Speech At A Congress Of Chairmen Of Gubernia Soviets July 30 1918



 Vladimir Lenin 

      Speech
 At A Congress Of Chairmen Of Gubernia Soviets[1]
 July 30 1918
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 30 July, 1918.
First Published: Izvestia No. 161, July 31, 1918; Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress 
      Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 34-36
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    


      Comrades, your job is one of administration, which plays a
      dominant part in the affairs of the Council of People’s
      Commissars. Quite naturally, many difficulties lie ahead of
      you. In the majority of gubernia Executive Committees it is
      evident that the masses are at last beginning to tackle the work
      of administration themselves. There are certainly bound to be
      difficulties. One of our greatest shortcomings has been that we
      still draw too little on the workers for our staffs. But it was
      never our intention to adapt the old apparatus to the new system
      of administration, and we do n  ot regret that with the
      abolition of the old apparatus everything has to be built anew
      with so much difficulty. The workers and peasants possess
      greater constructive abilities than might have been expected. It
      is to the revolution’s credit that it swept away the old
      administrative apparatus. Yet at the same time we must admit
      that the people’s chief shortcoming is their timidity and
      reluctance to take things into their own hands.
Some of our gubernia Soviets have been inefficient, but now the
    work is steadily improving. Information has been coming in from
    may parts of the country stating that the work is progressing
    without any misunderstandings or conflicts. Although only eight
    months have elapsed, the Russian revolution has proved that the
    new class which has taken administration into its own hands is
    capable of coping with the task. Although it is short-staffed, the
    administrative apparatus is running more smoothly every day.

    Our apparatus is till at a stage where no definite results are
    visible, a fact which the enemy keeps harping on. Nevertheless,
    quite a lot has already been done. The transfer of land and
    industry to the working people, the exchange of goods and the
    organisation of food supply are being carried into effect in face
    of fantastic difficulties. The working people must be promoted to
    independent work in building up and running the socialist
    state. Only practice will teach them that the old exploiting class
    is finished and done with.
Our chief and most urgent task is administration, organisation
    and control. This is a thankless and inconspicuous job; but it is
    in doing this job that the managerial and administrative talents
    of the workers and peasants will develop more and more
    effectively.
Now to the new Constitution.[2] It embodies what
    experience has already given, and will be corrected and
    supplemented as it is being put into effect. The main thing about
    the Constitution is that the Soviet government is completely
    dissociating itself from the bourgeoisie, preventing them from
    participating in building up the state.
The workers and peasants, upon whom the government has called
    to run the country, and who have remained remote from such affairs
    for so long, were bound to want to build the state by their own
    experience. The effect of the slogan "All Power to the Soviets!"
    was that the people in the localities wanted to gain experience in
    building the state by learning from their own mistakes. Such a
    transitional period was unavoidable, ad it has proved
    beneficial. In this tendency towards separatism, there was much
    that was healthy and wholesome in the sense that it displayed a
    creative spirit. The Soviet Constitution has defined the relations
    between the volost authority and the uyezd authority, between the
    uyezd authority and the gubernia authority, and between the latter
    and the centre.
Only large-scale, planned construction, which aims at evenly
    utilising economic ad business values, deserves to be called
    socialist. The Soviet government certainly does not intend to
    belittle the importance of the local authorities or kill their
    autonomy ad initiative. Even the peasants realise through their
    own experience the need for centralism.

    
      Now that the Constitution has been endorsed and is being put
      into effect, an easier period in our state affairs is
      beginning. But, unfortunately, it is hard for us just now to
      devote ourselves to an economic, business and agricultural
      policy. We have to divert all our attention to more elementary
      things-the food question. The condition of the working class in
      the hungry provinces is really drastic. Until the new harvest is
      brought in, every effort must be made to overcome somehow the
      food difficulties and other troubles.
Besides this, there are military tasks. You know that the Czech
    movement, financed and instigated by the British and French
    imperialists, has caught Russia in a semicircle. You also know
    that the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie and the kulak peasants
    are joining this movement. We have received news from the
    localities that Soviet Russia’s recent reverses have
    convinced the workers and the revolutionary peasants by their own
    experience that control is needed in the military sphere as well
    as in state development.
I am convinced that things will get better in future. I am
      convinced that the gubernia Executive Committees will create a
      strong socialist army by organising control over the commanding
      staff with the help of the peasants. The lessons of the revolution
      have at last taught the classes of the workers and exploited
      peasants the need to take up arms. The peasants and workers,
      besides having won the land, control, etc., base learnt to
      understand the need to control the army. By carrying their efforts
      into the sphere of military affairs, they will make the army of
      their creation fully worthy of the title of a socialist army, an
      army which will successfully fight the counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie and the imperialists until the international
      revolutionary proletariat comes to our aid. (Comrade Lenin
      ’s speech is greeted with stormy applause from all
      delegates.)
    

Endnotes
 [1]
      The Congress was held in Moscow from July 30 to August 1, 1918,
      There were 122 delegates, of whom 120 were
      Communists. G. I. Petrovsky, People's Commissar for the Interior
      of the R.S.F.S.R., delivered a report on the work of the
      Commissariat of the Interior and its immediate tasks. Other
      speakers at the Congress dealt with the activity of the local
      Soviets, the character, tasks and

      organisational forms of Soviet militia, housing and other
      subjects. Lenin spoke at the evening session on July 30. The
      resolutions called for the improvement of the Soviet apparatus
      and emphasised the need for greater harmony between all its
      parts, close contact with the centre and complete obedience to
      the Constitution. The Congress called on the workers and
      peasants of the Republic to rise in arms in defence of the
      socialist fatherland.
 [2]
    Reference is to the Constitution of the Russian Socialist
    Federative Soviet Republic, unanimously adopted at the Fifth
    All-Russia Congress of Soviets on July 10, 1918, and publisheden
    July 19 as the Fundamental Law which went into force on
    publication.

    
      It was the first Soviet Constitution. It gave force of law to
      the great gains of the October Revolution-the new, Soviet state
      system, the abolition of private capitalist property and landed
      proprietorship, equality of all nations inhabiting Russia,
      etc. It gave force of law to the dictatorship of the proletariat
      in the shape of Soviet power, provided for the participation of
      all working people in state administration and disfranchised the
      exploiters. Lenin pointed out:“The world has never known
      such a constitution as ours. It embodies the workers’
      experience of struggle and organisation against the exploiters
      both at home and abroad.”


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Speech at a Meeting of the Warsaw
Revolutionary Regiment, August 2, 1918.









Speech At A Meeting Of The Warsaw Revolutionary Regiment, August 2, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Meeting Of The
Warsaw Revolutionary Regiment
August 2, 1918[1]
 Newspaper Report 


Written: 2 August, 1918.
First Published:3 August in Vecherniye Izvesta Moskorskovo 
Soveto No. 15; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 
Volume 28, 1965, pages 37-39
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet 
Archive, 2002


 
(Comrade Lenin’s appearance In the hail is greeted with enthusiastic applause and the “Internationale".) We Polish and Russian revolutionaries are now burning with one desire to do everything to defend the gains of the first mighty socialist revolution, which will inevitably be followed by a series of revolutions in other countries. Our difficulty is that we had to take action much earlier than the workers of the more cultured, more civilised countries.
The world war was caused by the forces of international capital, of two coalitions of vultures. For four years the world has been drenched in blood in order to settle which of these two rapacious imperialist groups shall rule the globe. We feel and sense that this criminal war cannot end in victory for either of them. It is becoming clearer every day that a victorious workers’ revolution, not the imperialists, can end it. And the worse the position of the workers now becomes in all countries, and the more ferociously proletarian free speech is persecuted, the more desperate the bourgeoisie get, for they cannot cope with the growing movement. We have for a time forged ahead of the main body of the socialist army, which is full of hope as it watches us and says to its bourgeoisie: however much you rant and rage, we shall follow the Russian example and do what the Russian Bolsheviks have done.
We wanted peace. It was just because Soviet Russia proposed peace to the whole world that in February German troops attacked us. Now, however, we see with our own eyes that one imperialism is no better than the other. Both of them have lied, and lie now when they say they are waging a war of liberation. Anglo-French capital is showing itself up just as robber Germany once did with the utterly shameful Brest Peace. The British and French are now making their last bid to draw us into the war. For fifteen million, through generals and other officers, they have now bought new lackeys, the Czechs, so as to involve them in the rash adventure and turn the Czechoslovak revolt into a whiteguard-landlord movement. And strange to say, all this is apparently being done to “defend” Russia. The “freedomloving” and “fair” British oppress a]] and sundry, seize Murmansk, British cruisers come right lip to Archangel and bombard the coastal batteries—all to “defend” Russia. Quite obviously they want to encircle Russia in a ring of imperialist plunderers and crush her for having exposed and torn up their secret treaties.
Our revolution has resulted in the workers of Britain and France indicting heir governments. To Britain, where civil peace has prevailed and where the workers’ resistance to socialism has been strongest, for they too have had a hand in plundering the colonies, the workers are now veering round and breaking the civil peace with the bourgeoisie.
The workers of France are condemning the policy of intervention in Russia’s affairs. That is why the capitalists of those countries are staking everything they have.
The fact of Soviet Russia’s existence and vitality is driving them mad.
We know the war is coming to an end; we know they cannot finish it; we know we have a reliable ally. We must therefore exert all our energy and make a last effort. Either the rule of the proletariat or the rule of the kulaks, capitalists and the tsar, as was the case in the unsuccessful revolutions in the West. As you go to the front you must remember above all that this war alone, the war of the oppressed and exploited against the violators and plunderers, is legitimate, just and sacred.
An alliance is coming into being between the revolutionaries of different nations’something that the finest people have dreamt of; a real alliance of workers, and not intellectual dreamers.
The guarantee of victory lies in overcoming national hatred and mistrust.
It is your great privilege to uphold sacred ideas arms in hand, and to make international brotherhood of nations a reality by fighting together with your front-line enemies of yesterday—Germans, Austrians and Magyars.
And, comrades, I am confident that if you muster all your military forces and set up a mighty international Red Army, and hurl these iron battalions against the exploiters and oppressors, against the reactionary thugs of the whole world, making your battle cry “Victory or Death!”—no imperialist force will be able to hold us! (Lenin’s concluding words are drowned in prolonged and stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The Warsaw revolutionary regiment was formed from Polish volunteers and numbered 16,000 men. On many occasions it took art i the fight against whiteguard troops. On August 2, 1918, on the eve of departure for the ront, a regimental meeting addressed by Lenin was held at the former Commerical Institute in Moscow (now the Plekhanov Institute of the National Economy). The meeting was organised, among others, by Julian Marchlewski, a prominent figure in the Polish working-class movment.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Meeting in Butyrsky
District, August 2, 1918









Speech At A Meeting In Butyrsky District, August 2, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At
 A Meeting In Butyrsky District
August 2, 1918
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 2 August, 1918.
First Published: Brief report published August 3, 1918 In Izvestia No. 164; Published according to the text in the newspaper Soldat Revolytsii (Tsaritsyn) No. 14, August 23, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress 
Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 40-42
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



Comrades, today socialist Russia’s destiny is being discussed all over Moscow.[1]

The enemies of Soviet Russia surround us in a tight ring of iron to try to deprive the workers and peasants of everything they gained from the October Revolution. The highflying banner of the Russian social revolution is a thorn in the side of the imperialist vultures and they have gone to war against us, gone to war against the Soviet government, against the workers’ and peasants’ government.

You will remember, comrades, that at the beginning of the revolution the French and British never tired of insisting they were the “allies” of free Russia. And here we have these “allies” today in their true colours. By lies and deceit, saying they had no intention of fighting Russia, these people occupied Murmansk, then captured Kem and began to shoot our comrades, members of the Soviets. True enough, they are not fighting the Russian bourgeoisie, they are not fighting the Russian capitalists, they have declared war on the Soviets, they have declared war on the workers and peasants.

The French and Russian bourgeoisie have found ready accomplices in the Czechs. These mercenaries had reason to fight us. We know whose millions induced the Czechs to go to war against the Soviet government. It was Anglo-French gold. But besides the Czechs, there are other people who did not think twice about bringing down the Soviet government. Like the Czechs, our own “saviours of the fatherland”, Dutov, Alexeyev and the rest, are lining their pockets with British and French gold and waiting for a Russian shower of gold. The Soviet government has a lot of enemies. But are we alone, comrades?

You will recall what it was like in January, when the flame of social revolution had just been lit-there had been a mass strike movement in Germany; now, eight months later, we see mass strike; movements in various countries: there is a mass strike movement among the Austrian workers, our comrades in Italy are-on strike. The end is near for the oppressors of the workers. The imperialists of the world are digging their own graves.

 War for mutual plunder does not abate. Two serpents are grappling in the war of plunder: Anglo-French and German imperialism. To please them, for one side’s triumph, ten million peasants and workers have already been killed and twenty million maimed, and many millions of people are engaged in manufacturing weapons of death. In every country the strongest and healthiest people are being called up, the flower of humanity is perishing .... And for what? Just for one of these vultures to lord it over the other ....

The Soviet government said we do not want to fight the Germans, the British or the French. We do not want to kill workers and peasants like ourselves. They are not our enemies. We have a different enemy-the bourgeoisie, whether it be the German, the French, or the Russian who have now joined up with the British and French.

And, like our revolutionary banner, our slogans are being taken up all over the world. In America, the country that used to be called the land of the free, socialists are filling the gaols to overflowing. In Germany, the words of the German socialist Friedrich Adler are being spread far and wide among the workers and soldiers: “Turn your bayonets on your own bourgeoisie instead of on the Russian workers and peasants.” There is no end in sight to the slaughter started by the capitalists. The more Germany wins, the more the savages like her who tag on to the other side. America, too, is now fighting together with the British and French. Only the workers can put an end to the war: world revolution is inevitable. A “defeatist” movement like the one we had has already begun in Germany, mass strikes are taking place in Italy and Austria; and socialists are being arrested wholesale in America. Sensing their doom, the capitalists and landowners are making a last effort to crush the revolutionary movement. The Russian capitalists are stretching out a hand to the British and French capitalists and landowners.

Now there are two fronts: the workers and peasants on one side, and the capitalists on the other. The last, decisive battle is near. Now there can be no compromise with the bourgeoisie. Either them or us.

In 1871, the bourgeoisie overthrew the power of the Paris workers. But in those days there were very few class-conscious workers or revolutionary fighters. This time the workers are backed by the poor peasants and this time the bourgeoisie will not triumph as they did in 1871.

The workers are keeping a firm grip on the mills and factories, and the peasants will not surrender the land to the landowners. And in defence of these achievements we also declare war on all marauders and profiteers. Besides machine-guns and cannons, they are threatening us with famine.

As we declare war on the rich, we say: “Peace to the cottages!” We shall take all the stocks from the profiteers and never abandon the labouring poor to the mercy of fate. (Comrade Lenin’s speech is greeted with stormy applause.)


Endnotes
[1] Once a week, on Firdays, the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B) called big rallies of workers and Red Army men in various districts of  Moscow. On Lenin’s suggestion, members of the Central Committee and high-ranking officials regularly addressed these rallies. Lenin often spoke a the rallies, sometimes 3-4 times a day, and demanded that no high-ranking official shirk his duty of speaking before workers. He like to keep his ear to the ground and showed a keen interest in the question and proposals put to the speakers by the workers.

On August 2, 1918, rallies were held on the subject “The Soviet Republic in Dangers”.



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Rally of Red Army Men
At Khodynka, August 2, 1918









Speech At A Rally Of Red Army Men At Khodynka, August 2, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At
 A Rally Of Red Army Men At Khodynka
August 2, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report


Written: 2 August, 1918.
First Published: August 3, 1918; Izvestia No. 164, Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, page 43
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



(Enthusiastic applause.) The Russian revolution has charted the road to socialism for the whole world and has shown the bourgeoisie that their triumph is coming to an end. Our revolution is taking place amidst the frightful hardships of world slaughter.
Revolutions are not made to order; but there are sure signs that the whole world is ready for great events.
We are surrounded by enemies who have concluded a holy alliance for the overthrow of the Soviet government, but they will not get power themselves.
The rejoicing of the whiteguard bands is prematuretheir success will be short-lived; unrest is already spreading among them.
The Red Army reinforced by the revolutionary proletariat will help us raise on high the banner of the world social revolution.
Victory or death!
We shall vanquish the world kulak and uphold the socialist cause!


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Theses on the Food Question









Theses On The Food Question



Vladimir Lenin
Theses On The Food Question[1]
For The Commissariats Of Food, Agriculture; The Supreme Economic, Council, Finance, Trade And Industry


Written: 2 August, 1918.
First Published: 1931; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 44-46
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    

I propose that these Commissariats hurry to debate
    and formulate the following measures no later than today (August
    2) so that they can be put through the Council of People's
    Commissars today or tomorrow. 

    
      (Some of these measures should
be in decrees, others in unpublished decisions.)
(1) Out of the two schemes-lowering prices on manufactured and
    other goods or raising the purchasing price of grain-we must
    certainly choose the latter for, though the two are essentially
    the same, only the latter can help us in quickly getting more
    grain from a number of grain growing provinces like Simbirsk,
    Saratov, Voronezh, etc., and help us neutralise as many peasants
    as possible in the Civil War.
(2) I suggest raising the grain prices to 30 rubles a pood, and
    correspondingly (and even more) to raise prices on manufactured
    and other goods.
(3) I suggest for discussion: whether to make this a temporary
    rise (so that we can sum up the practical indications as to the
    correct principle on which our trade exchange should be
    organised), say, for a month or month and a half, promising to
    lower prices afterwards (thereby offering bonuses for
    quick collection).
(4) To enact several very urgent measures for
    requisitioning all the products of urban industry for
    exchange (and put up their prices after requisitioning to a
    greater extent than the rise in grain prices).
(5)To preface the decree on grain price rise with a popular
    elucidation of the measure connected with the trade exchange and
    the establishment of the correct correlation between the prices of
    grain, manufactured and other goods.
(6) The decree should immediately compel the co-operatives a)
    to set up a grain-collection point in each village shop; b) to
    give goods only according to the customers' ration books; c) not
    to give a single item to peasant-farmers except in exchange for
    grain.
To establish forms and means of control over the implementation
    of these measures and introduce stern punishment (confiscation of
    all property) for their violation.
(7) To confirm (or to formulate more precisely) the rules and
    regulations concerning property confiscation for not
    handing over to the state (or the co-operatives)
    grain surpluses and all ether food products for
    registration.
(8) To impose a tax in kind, in grain, on the rich
    peasants. This category could include those whose amount of grain
    (including the new harvest) is double or more than double their
    own consumption (taking into account needs for their family, lives
    to and sowing).
This is to be designated as an income and property tax
    and made progressive.
(9) To establish for workers of the hungry regions
    temporarily, let's say for one month, preferential carriage of 1.5
    poods of gain on condition of special certificate and special
    control.
The certificate must contain the exact address and authority a)
    from a factory committee; b) from a house committee; c) from a
    trade union; and control must establish that it is for
    personal consumption, with a very severe penalty to
    anyone who cannot prove the impossibility of its reselling.
(10) To make it a rule to issue a receipt, two or three copies,
    for literally every requisition (particularly in the
    countryside and on the railway). To print forms of the
    receipt. Shooting to be the penalty for not giving a receipt.
(11) To enforce the same penalty for members of all kinds of
    requisitioning, food and other teams for any blatantly unjust
    action towards the working people or any infringement of the rules
    and regulations or actions liable to rouse the indignation of the
    population, as well as for failure to keep a record and to hand
    over a copy to anyone who has already suffered requisitioning or
    punishment.
(12) To make it a rule that the workers and poor peasants in
    the hungry regions should have the right to have a goods train
    delivered to their station directly, under certain
    conditions: a) authorisation of local organisations (Soviet of
    Deputies plus the trade union without fail and others); b) making
    up a responsible team; c) inclusion in it of teams from
    other regions; d) participation of an inspector and Commissar from
    the Food, War, Transport and other Commissariats; e) their control
    of the train load and the distribution of grain. They must see
    that a compulsory part (a third to a half or more) goes
    to the Food Commissariat.
(13) As an exception, in view of the acute hunger among some
    railway workers and the particular importance of railways
    for grain delivery, to establish temporarily that:
    requisitioning or anti-profiteering teams, in
    requisitioning the grain, shall issue receipts to those from whom
    it has been taken, and put the grain into the goods waggons and
    dispatch these waggons to the Central Food Bureau, while
    observing the following forms of control: a) sending a telegram to
    the Food and Transport Commissariats notifying them about each
    goods waggon; b) summoning officials from both Commissariats to
    meet the goods waggon and distribute the grain under the Food
    Commissariat's supervision.

Endnotes
[1]
    Lenin wrote the theses a t the time when the country was in the
    grip of a very severe food crisis and was beating off the foreign
    interventionists and couter-revolutinaries at home.

      The theses provided the basis for the six decrees on the food
      question which were dicussed and adopted at the sessions of the
      Council of People’s Commissars on August 3, 4, 5 and 6,
      1918: On the Enlistment of the Service of the Workers’
      Organisations in Grain Collection; decree on Harvesting and
      Requisitioning Teams;Regulations on Guard Requisitioning Teams
      on Railways and Water Routes; Decree on Obligatory Commodity
      Exchange in the Grain-Growing Areas; On Fixed Prices for the
      Grain Harvested in 1918, and the appeal of the Council of
      People’s Commissars to all working people entitled "Join
      the Grain Campaign". The decrees were all published in
      Izvestia on August 6 and 8. 

    
      The decree on tax in kind mentioned in Clause 8 of the theses
      was drafted  later and adopted by the Council of People’s
      Commissars on October 26, 1918.
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Admission to Higher Educational
Institutions Of the Russian Federation.









Admission To Higher Educational Institutions Of The Russian Federation



Vladimir Lenin
Admission To Higher Educational Unstitutions Of The Russian Federation
Draft Decision Of The Council Of People’s Commissars[1]


Written: 2 August, 1918.
First Published:6 August, 1918 In  Izvestia No. 166; Published according to the manuscript

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, page 47
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002


The Council of People’s Commissars instructs the Commissariat of Education at once to prepare several decisions and measures so that in the event of the number of applicants to the higher educational institutions exceeding the usual number of places, extra-special measures be taken to ensure a chance to study for all who so desire, and to ensure there be no actual or legal privileges for the propertied classes. Priority must certainly go to workers and poor peasants, who are to be given grants on an extensive scale.


Endnotes
[1] The draft decision written by Lenin was adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars on August 2, 1918, together with the decree of the regulations governing admission to higher educational establishments of the R.S.F.S.R. The decree opened colleges and universities for all over 16 and abolished school leavers diplomas or certificates, competitive examinations and tuition fees. The decision and the decree were published in Izvestia on August 6, 1918.



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Letter to Yelelts Workers









Letter to Yelelts Workers



Vladimir Lenin
Letter To Yelets Workers[1]


Written: 6 August, 1918.
First Published: 11 August Sovetskaya Gazeta (Yelets) No. 78, 1918; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 48-50
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002




I have received a clipping from a Yelets newspaper containing a report of a special meeting of the Yelets branch of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party held on July 27. I see from it that Mochenov reported on the Saratov conference of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, where eight branches approved their Central Committee’s tactics which had been defended by Mr. Kolegayev, while thirteen branches demanded the party’s reorganisation and a change of tactics.

I note that at the Yelets meeting Comrade Rudakov insisted that “our party [the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries] be reorganised”and its name changed, that it be purged and that under no circumstances should it be allowed to fall apart and disappear. A certain Kryukov then alleged that he had spoken to representatives of the central government in Moscow and that Comrades Avanesov, Sverdlov and Bonch Bruyevich had declared that the Soviet government favoured the existence of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party. He also alleged that in a conversation with him I had said the same thing and had stated that the Communists too had come so far from their former theories, from their books, that they had no programme at all at present, while in their policies a great deal was being indirectly borrowed from Narodnik theory, and so on and so forth.

I consider it my duty to say this is pure fiction and that I have never spoken to this Kryukov. I earnestly request our comrades, the workers and peasants of the Yelets tJyezd, to be extremely wary of the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, who all too frequently tell lies.

A few words about my view of them. Types like Kolegayev and the others are certainly just pawns in the hands of the whiteguards, the monarchists and the Savinkovs, who in Yaroslavl showed who was “profiting”by the Left Socialist-Revolutionary revolt. Their stupidity and spinelessness brought Kolegayev and his friends to this degradation, and good riddance! They will go down in history as “Savinkov lackeys#8221;. But the facts show that among the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries there are people (and in Saratov they are in the majority) who were ashamed of this stupidity and spinelessness, of this servility to monarchism and the interests of the landowners. We can only welcome it if these people desire to change even their party’s name (I have heard they want to call themselves “Village Commune Communists”or “Narodnik Communists#8221;, etc.).

The pure ideological basis of this Narodism, an alliance with which the Bolshevik Communists have never rejected, is, firstly, disagreement with Marxism, and, secondly, complete agreement with the theory of “equal land tenure” (and with the law of equal land tenure).

We favour such an alliance, an agreement with the middle peasants, for we worker Communists have no grounds for quarrelling with the middle peasants and are prepared to make them a number of concessions. We have proved this, and proved it in deed, because we have been carrying out the law on the socialisation of land with absolutely good faith, despite the fact that we do not entirely agree with it.[2]Generally, we have been and are in favour of ruthless war on the kulaks, but we favour an agreement with the middle peasants and union with the poor peasants. An agreement with the middle peasants must not be construed as necessarily implying agreement with the Left SocialistRevolutionaries. Nothing of the kind.

We passed the socialisation law at a time when we had no agreement with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries; and this law, in fact, is an expression of our agreement with the middle peasants, with the peasant masses, and not with the Left Socialist-Revolutionary petty intellectuals.

Comrade workers and peasants, don’t seek an agreement with the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, for we have seen and experienced their unreliability. Spread communism among the poor peasants; the majority will be on our side. Try to make concessions to the middle peasants. Treat them as tactfully and as fairly as possible. We can and should make concessions to them. Be ruthless in your attitude towards the tiny handful of exploiters, including the kulaks and the grain profiteers, who are growing rich on the people’s misfortunes and the starvation of the workers-towards the handful of kuinks who are sucking the blood of the working people.

V. Ulyanov (N. Lenin)

Moscow, August 6, 1918 


Endnotes
[1]
Lenin wrote this letter in reply to the report about the meeting of the Yelets branch of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party, which appeared in the Yelets Sovetskaya Gazeta on Jylu 31, 1918. The copy of the newspaper carrying the report was delivered to Lenin by K. Grodner, a representative of the Yelets branch of the R.C.P.(B), who was sent to Moscow for the purpose of refuting the slander of the Left Socialist-Revolutionary Kryukov, with which Lenin deals in his letter. On August 11, Sovetskaya Gazeta carried Lenin’s letter and Grodner’s report, in which the latter said he had ascertained from talks with Y. M. Sverdlov, V. A. Avanesov and V. D. Bonch-Bruyevich that they did not say what Kryokov had charged them with saying.

Sovetskaya Gazeta—organ of the Yelets Uyez Executive Committee, Orel Gubernia. Appeared from May 16, 1918, to March 2, 1919.
[2]
Reference is to the decree on land adopted by the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets on October 26 (November 8), 1917. The decree abolished private ownership of land and proclaimed the nationialisation. However, the Peasant Mandate, which formed part of the decree, insisted on the distribution of land among working peasants “in conformity with a labour standard or a subsistence standard quota”, putting forward the idea of land socialistion. Lenin’s comment on the nationalisation of land and “equal land tenure” is to be found page 307-316 of this volume.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Meeting In Sokolniki
Distrtct, August 9, 1918









Speech At A Meeting In Sokolniki District, August 9, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At
A Meeting In Sokolniki District
August 9, 1918[1]
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 9 August, 1918.
First Published: 11 August, 1918Izvestia No. 171;  Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 51-52
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002




(Prolonged applause.) The war is already in its fifth year, and by now everyone can see who wanted it. The rich have grown richer, and the poor are literally choking under the yoke of capitalism. This war has cost the poor people many a bloody sacrifice, and all they have received in return is hunger, unemployment and the noose drawn tighter than ever around their necks.
The war was started by the British and German vultures who found themselves too cramped living together, and so each of them decided to drown the other in the blood of the workers of the world. Each of these vultures assures us he is inspired by the people's interests, but in fact he is working in the interests of his own pocket.
Britain is plundering the German colonies she has seized, part of Palestine and Mesopotamia, while Germany, in turn, is plundering Poland, Courland, Lithuania and the Ukraine. The millionaires of these countries have grown ten times richer; but, all the same, they have miscalculated.
Locked in mortal combat, these vultures are on the edge of a precipice. They can no longer stop the war, which is inevitably driving the peoples to revolution.
The Russian revolution has cast sparks into every country of the world, and has pushed the imperialists, who have gone too far, nearer to the edge of the precipice.
Comrades, we are in a very difficult position, but we must overcome every difficulty and hold fast the banner of socialist revolution we have raised aloft.
The workers of the world are looking hopefully towards us. We can hear their cry: “hold on a little longer! You are surrounded by enemies, but we shall come to your aid, and by our joint effort we shall finally hurl the imperialist vultures over the precipice.”
We hear this cry, and we swear we shall hold on, we shall stick to our post fighting with all our strength and not lay down our arms in face of the onslaught of world counter-revolution!

Endnotes
[1] 

The rally at which Lenin spoke was held in Sokolniki Krug (now Sokolniki Park) in Moscow. On that day rallies were held on the subject “The Fifth Year of the World Slaughter”.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Comrade Workers, Forward to the
Last, Decisive Fight!









Comrade Workers, Forward To The Last, Decisive Fight!



Vladimir Lenin
Comrade Workers, Forward To The Last, Decisive Fight!


Written: First part or August 1918
First Published: 17 January, 1925 in Rabochaya Moahva No. 14; Published according to the Manuscript

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 53-57
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002

    


      The Soviet Republic is surrounded by enemies. But it will defeat
      its enemies at home and abroad. A rising spirit which will
      ensure victory is already perceptible among the working
      people. We already see how frequent the sparks and explosions of
      the revolutionary conflagration in Western Europe have become,
      inspiring us with the assurance that the triumph of the world
      workers’ revolution is not far off.
The external foe of the Russian Soviet Socialist Republic at
    present is British, French, American and Japanese
    imperialism. This foe is attacking Russia, is plundering our
    territory, has seized Archangel and (if the French newspapers are
    to be believed) has advanced from Vladivostok to Nikolsk
    Ussuriisky. This foe has bribed the generals and officers of the
    Czechoslovak Corps. This enemy is attacking peaceful Russia with
    the ferocity and voracity of the Germans in February, the only
    difference being that the British and Japanese are out to seize
    and plunder Russian territory and to overthrow the Soviet
    government so as to “restore the front”, i.e., to draw
    Russia again into the imperialist (or more simply, the predatory)
    war between Britain and Germany.
The British and Japanese capitalists want to restore the power
    of the landowners and capitalists in Russia in order to share with
    them the booty captured in the war; they want to shackle the
    Russian workers and peasants to British and French capital, to
    squeeze out of them interest on the billions advanced in loans,
    and to extinguish the fire of socialist revolution which has
    broken out in our country and which is threatening to spread
    across the world. 
      





      The British and Japanese imperialist savages are not strong
      enough to occupy and subjugate Russia. Even neighbouring Germany
      is not strong enough for that, as was shown by her
      “experience” in the Ukraine. The British and
      Japanese counted on taking us unawares. They failed. The
      Petrograd workers, followed by the Moscow workers, and after
      Moscow the workers of the entire central industrial region, are
      rising more untidily, with growing persistence and courage and
      in ever larger numbers. That is a sure sign we shall win.
In launching their attack on peaceful Russia the British and
      Japanese capitalist robbers are also counting on alliance with the
      internal enemy of the Soviet government. We all know who that
      internal enemy is. It is the capitalists, the landowners, the
      kulaks, and their offspring, who hate the government of the
      workers and working peasants-the peasants who do not suck the
      blood of their fellow-villagers.
A wave of kulak revolts is sweeping across Russia. The kulak
    hates the Soviet government like poison and is prepared to
    strangle and massacre hundreds of thousands of workers. We know
    very well that if the kulaks were to gain the upper hand they
    would ruthlessly slaughter hundreds of thousands of workers, in
    alliance with the landowners and capitalists, restore
    back-breaking conditions for the workers, abolish the eight-hour
    day and hand back the mills and factories to the capitalists.
That was the case in all earlier European revolutions when, as
    a result of the weakness of the workers, the kulaks succeeded in
    turning back from a republic to a monarchy, from a working
    people’s government to the despotism of the exploiters, the
    rich and the parasites. This happened before our very eyes in
    Latvia, Finland, the Ukraine and Georgia. Everywhere the
    avaricious, bloated and bestial kulaks joined hands with the
    landowners and capitalists against the workers and against the
    poor generally. Everywhere the kulaks wreaked their vengeance on
    the working class with incredible ferocity. Everywhere they joined
    hands with the foreign capitalists against the workers of
    their own country. That is the way the Cadets, the Right
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks have been acting: we
    have only to remember their exploits in
    “Czechoslovakia”.[22] That is the way the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, in their crass stupidity and
    spinelessness, acted too when they revolted in Moscow, thus
    assisting the whiteguards in Yaroslavi and the Czechs and the
    Whites in Kazan. No wonder these Left Socialist-Revolutionaries
    were praised by Kerensky and his friends, the French
    imperialists.
There is no doubt about it. The kulaks are rabid foes of the
    Soviet government. Either the kulaks massacre vast numbers of
    workers, or the workers ruthlessly suppress the revolts of the
    predatory kulak minority of the people against the working
    people’s government. There can be no middle course. Peace is
    out of the question: even if they have quarrelled, the kulak can
    easily come to terms with the landowner, the tsar and the priest,
    but with the working class never.
That is why we call the fight against the kulaks the last,
    decisive fight. That does not mean there may not be many more
    kulak revolts, or that there may not be many more attacks on the
    Soviet government by foreign capitalism. The words, the last
    fight, imply that the last and most numerous of the exploiting
    classes has revolted against us in our country.
The kulaks are the most brutal, callous and savage exploiters,
    who in the history of other countries have time and again restored
    the power of the landowners, tsars, priests and capitalists. The
    kulaks are more numerous than the landowners and
    capitalists. Nevertheless, they are a minority.
Let us take it that there are about fifteen million peasant
    families in Russia, taking Russia as she was before the robbers
    deprived her of the Ukraine and other territories. Of these
    fifteen million, probably ten million are poor peasants who live
    by selling their labour power, or who are in bondage to the rich,
    or who lack grain surpluses and have been most impoverished by the
    burdens of war. About three million must be regarded as middle
    peasants, while barely two million consist of kulaks, rich
    peasants, grain profiteers. These bloodsuckers have grown rich on
    the want suffered by the people in the war; they have raked in
    thousands and hundreds of thousands of rubles by pushing up the
    price of grain and other products. These spiders have grown fat at
    the expense of the peasants ruined by the war, at the expense of
    the starving workers. These leeches have sucked the blood of the
    working people and grown richer as the workers in the cities and
    factories starved. These vampires have been gathering the landed
    estates into their hands; they continue to enslave the poor
      peasants.
      

      Ruthless war on the kulaks! Death to them! Hatred and contempt
      for the parties which defend them-the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Mensheviks, and today's Left
      Socialist-Revolutionaries! The workers must crush the revolts of
      the kulaks with an iron hand, the kulaks who are forming an
      alliance with the foreign capitalists against the working people
      of their own country.
    

      The kulaks take advantage of the ignorance, the disunity and
      isolation of the poor peasants. They incite them against the
      workers. Sometimes they bribe them while permitting them to
      "make a bit", a hundred rubles or so, by profiteering in grain
      (at the same time robbing the poor peasants of many thousands of
      rubles). The kulaks try to win the support of the middle
      peasants, and they sometimes succeed.
      

      But there is no reason why the working class should quarrel with
      the middle peasant. The workers cannot come to terms with the
      kulak, but they may seek, and are seeking, an agreement
      with the middle peasant. The workers' government, the Bolshevik
      government, has proved that in deed.

    
      We proved it by passing the law on the "socialisation of land"
      and strictly carrying it into effect. That law contains
      numerous concessions to the interests and views of the
      middle peasant.

    
      We proved it (the other day) by trebling grain prices";
      for we fully realise that the earnings of the middle peasant are
      often disproportionate to present-day prices for manufactured
      goods and must be raised.

    
      Every class-conscious worker will explain this to the middle
      peasant and will patiently, persistently, and repeatedly point
      out to him that socialism is infinitely more beneficial for him
      than a government of the tsars, landowners and capitalists.

    
      The workers' government has never wronged and never will wrong
      the middle peasant. But the government of the tsars, landowners,
      capitalists and kulaks not only always wronged the middle
      peasant, but stifled, plundered, and ruined him outright. And
      this is true of all countries without exception, Russia
      included.
The class-conscious worker’s programme is the closest
    alliance and complete unity with the poor peasants; concessions to
    and agreement with the middle peasants; ruthless suppression of
    the kulaks, those bloodsuckers, vampires, plunderers of the people
    and profiteers, who batten on famine. That is the policy of the
    working class.

Endnotes


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Draft Of Telegram to All Soviets
of Deputies Concerning the Worker-Peasant Alliance









Draft Of Telegram To All Soviets Of Deputies Concerning The Worker-Peasant Alliance



Vladimir Lenin
Draft Of Telegram To All Soviets Of Deputies Concerning The Worker-Peasant Alliance[1]

Delivered: 16 August, 1918.
First Published: 1931; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
    Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, page 58
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002


    The Poor Peasants’ Committees are necessary to fight the kulaks, the rich,the exploiters, who shackle the working peasants. But between the kulaks, who are a small minority, and the poor or semi-proletarians there is the section of the
middle peasants. The Soviet government has never declared or conducted any
struggle against them. Any steps or measures to the contrary must be condemned
most vigorously and stopped. The socialist government must pursue a policy of
agreement with the middle peasants. The Soviet government has time and again shown by its actions that it is firmly resolved to pursue this policy. The most
important of such actions are the adoption by a Communist (Bolshevik) majority of
the law on the socialisation of land and its strictly faithful enforcement,
followed by the trebling of grain prices (decree of August..., 1918). The purport
of the decree on  agricultural machinery,[2]
 etc., is the same. The policy set forth above is strictly binding
    on everyone.

Endnotes
 [1]
    24 The draft of the telegram was written by Lenin after reports from the localities had mentioned distortions by Party and government bodies
of the policy towards the Poor Peasants’ Committees. In a number of areas
the slogan calling for the organisation of the Committees was taken to mean that
the poor peasants should be opposed to the rest of the peasants, that is, to the
kulaks and the middle peasants. The latter were barred from elections to the Poor
Peasants’ Committees and there were even cases of the Committees being
appointed by volost Soviets instead of being elected. On August 17, the telegram
based on this draft and signed by Lenin and Tsyurupa, the People’s Commissar
for Food, was sent to all the gubernia Soviets and food committees. On August 18 it was published in
    Izvestia.

[2] On August 6, 1918, the Council of People's Commissars adopted a decision to raise grain procurement prices and a decree On the Supply of Agriculture with Implements and Metal. The draft of the decree submitted to the Council of People's Commissars for approval was supplemented by Lenin and in this final form was endorsed on April 24. Three days later it appeared in Izvestia. 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speeches at a Meeting Of the
Moscow Party Committee On Organising Groups of Sympathisers, August 16,
  1918.









Speeches At A Meeting Of The Moscow Party Committee On Organising Groups Of Sympathisers, August 16, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speeches At A Meeting
Of The Moscow Party Committee
On Organising Groups Of Sympathisers
August 16, 1918[1]
Minutes

Delivered: 16 August, 1918.
First Published: 22 January, 1928 in Pravda No. 19; Published according to the handwritten copy of the minutes
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
    Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 59-60
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002

I

We are experiencing a great shortage of forces, yet forces are to be had among the people, forces that can be utilised. Greater confidence must be shown in the working people and we must learn to draw forces from their midst. This can be done by enlisting sympathisers among the young people and the trade unions into the Party. Never mind if their membership dues are in arrears-there is no danger in that. There is no great danger in assigning six thousand for the front and taking on twelve thousand others in their place. We must utilise our moral influence to enlarge our Party.
All too few new people get up and speak at our meetings, yet we want new people because there would be a live note in their speeches. We should organise this in some way or other. The young people must be taken from among the workers so that there is control by the workers. The exigencies of the situation demand that large numbers of Party members be sent to the front, before the Japanese and the Americans can consolidate their position in Siberia. These old forces must be replaced by new forces, by young people.
2

Party members must carry on energetic agitation among the workers. Comrades who are capable of doing anything at all must not be kept in office jobs.
We must broaden our sphere of influence among the workers. The nuclei are displaying too little initiative; their activities could be very useful in influencing non-Party people on the spot. Attention should be paid to the clubs, Party workers recruited from the masses.
We must not accept people who try to join from careerist motives; people like this should be driven out of the Party.


Endnotes
[1]
The meeting of the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) discussed the question of setting up groups of sympathisers, which had been raised by Lenin. This was dictated by the need to enlist new forces for the Party from among the advanced and politically-conscious working people. Lenin spoke twice during the debate. On Lenin's suggestion it was decided to start creating the groups and to work out rules of organisation.

On August 22, Pravda and Izvestia published the rules approved by the Executive Commission of the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B.). The rules set out the procedure for admittance and the rights and duties of members of the groups. On August 31, the rules were ratified at the Moscow City Conference of the R.C.P.(B.) which by an overwhelming majority declared itself in favour of setting up the groups. This step strengthened the ties between the Party and the masses and drew broad sections of the working people into political life. Later on, the groups of sympathisers developed into the system of candidature for Party membership. 



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Letter to American
Workers









Letter To American Workers



V. I. Lenin
Letter To American Workers[1]


Written: 20 August, 1918.
First Published: Pravda No. 178 August 22, 1918; Published according to the Pravda text checked with the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 62-75
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    


      Comrades! A Russian Bolshevik who took part in the 1905 Revolution,
      and who lived in your country for many years afterwards, has
      offered to convey my letter to you. I have accepted his proposal
      all the more gladly because just at the present time the
      American revolutionary workers have to play an exceptionally
      important role as uncompromising enemies of American
      imperialism—the freshest, strongest and latest in joining
      in the world-wide slaughter of nations for the division of
      capitalist profits. At this very moment, the American
      multimillionaires, these modern slaveowners have turned an
      exceptionally tragic page in the bloody history of bloody
      imperialism by giving their approval—whether direct or
      indirect, open or hypocritically concealed, makes no
      difference—to the armed expedition launched by the brutal
      Anglo-Japanese imperialists for the purpose of throttling the
      first socialist republic. 
 The history of modern, civilised America opened with one of
    those great, really liberating, really revolutionary wars of which
    there have been so few compared to the vast number of wars of
    conquest which, like the present imperialist war, were caused by
    squabbles among kings, landowners or capitalists over the division
    of usurped lands or ill-gotten gains. That was the war the
    American people waged against the British robbers who oppressed
    America and held her in colonial slavery, in the same way as these
    “civilised” bloodsuckers are still oppressing and
    holding in colonial slavery hundreds of millions of people in
    India, Egypt, and all parts of the world. 
 About 150 years have passed since then. Bourgeois civilisation
    has borne all its luxurious fruits. America has taken first place
    among the free and educated nations in level of development of the
    productive forces of collective human endeavour, in the
    utilisation of machinery and of all the wonders of modern
    engineering. At the same time, America has become one of the
    foremost countries in regard to the depth of the abyss which lies
    between the handful of arrogant multimillionaires who wallow in
    filth and luxury, and the millions of working people who
    constantly live on the verge of pauperism. The American people,
    who set the world an example in waging a revolutionary war against
    feudal slavery, now find themselves in the latest, capitalist
    stage of wage-slavery to a handful of multimillionaires, and find
    themselves playing the role of hired thugs who, for the benefit of
    wealthy scoundrels, throttled the Philippines in 1898 on the
    pretext of “liberating” them, and are throttling the
    Russian Socialist Republic in 1918 on the pretext of
    “protecting” it from the Germans. 
 The four years of the imperialist slaughter of nations,
    however, have not passed in vain. The deception of the people by
    the scoundrels of both robber groups, the British and the German,
    has been utterly exposed by indisputable and obvious facts. The
    results of the four years of war have revealed the general law of
    capitalism as applied to war between robbers for the division of
    spoils: the richest and strongest profited and grabbed most, while
    the weakest were utterly robbed, tormented, crushed and strangled.

    
      The British imperialist robbers were the strongest in number of
      “colonial slaves”. The British capitalists have not
      lost an inch of “their” territory (i.e., territory
      they have grabbed over the centuries), but they have grabbed all
      the German colonies in Africa, they have grabbed Mesopotamia and
      Palestine, they have throttled Greece, and have begun to plunder
      Russia. 
 The German imperialist robbers were the strongest in
    organisation and discipline of “their” armies, but
    weaker in regard to colonies. They have lost all their colonies,
    but plundered half of Europe and throttled the largest number of
    small countries and weak nations. What a great war of
    “liberation” on both sides! How well the robbers of
    both groups, the Anglo-French and the German capitalists, together
    with their lackeys, the social-chauvinists, i.e., the socialists
    who went over to the side of “their own ”
    bourgeoisie, have “defended their country”! 
 The American multimillionaires were, perhaps, richest of all,
    and geographically the most secure. They have profited more than
    all the rest. They have converted all, even the richest, countries
    into their tributaries. They have grabbed hundreds of billions of
    dollars. And every dollar is sullied with filth: the filth of the
    secret treaties between Britain and her “allies”,
    between Germany and her vassals, treaties for the division of the
    spoils, treaties of mutual “aid” for oppressing the
    workers and persecuting the internationalist socialists. Every
    dollar is sullied with the filth of “profitable” war
    contracts, which in every country made the rich richer and the
    poor poorer. And every dollar is stained with blood—from
    that ocean of blood that has been shed by the ten million killed
    and twenty million maimed in the great, noble, liberating and holy
    war to decide whether the British or the German robbers are to get
    most of the spoils, whether the British or the German thugs are to
    be foremost in throttling the weak nations all over the
    world. 
 While the German robbers broke all records in war atrocities, the
      British have broken all records not only in the number of colonies
      they have grabbed, but also in the subtlety of their disgusting
      hypocrisy. This very day, the Anglo-French and American bourgeois
      newspapers are spreading, in millions and millions of copies, lies and
      slander about Russia, and are hypocritically justifying their
      predatory expedition against her on the plea that they want to
      “protect” Russia from the Germans! 
 It does not require many words to refute this despicable and
    hideous lie; it is sufficient to point to one well-known fact. In
    October 1917, after the Russian workers had overthrown their
    imperialist government, the Soviet government, the government of
    the revolutionary workers and peasants, openly proposed a just
    peace, a peace without annexations or indemnities, a peace that
    fully guaranteed equal rights to all nations—and it proposed
    such a peace to all the belligerent countries. 
 It was the Anglo-French and the American bourgeoisie who
    refused to accept our proposal; it was they who even refused to
    talk to us about a general peace! It was they who
    betrayed the interests of all nations; it was they who prolonged
    the imperialist slaughter! 
 It was they who, banking on the possibility of dragging Russia
    back into the imperialist war, refused to take part in the peace
    negotiations and thereby gave a free hand to the no less predatory
    German capitalists who imposed the annexationist and harsh Brest
    Peace upon Russia! 
 It is difficult to imagine anything more disgusting than the
    hypocrisy with which the Anglo-French and American bourgeoisie are
    now “blaming” us for the Brest Peace
    Treaty. The very capitalists of those countries which could have
    turned the Brest negotiations into general negotiations for a
    general peace are now our “accusers”! The Anglo-French
    imperialist vultures, who have profited from the plunder of
    colonies and the slaughter of nations, have prolonged the war for
    nearly a whole year after Brest, and yet they “accuse”
    us, the Bolsheviks, who proposed a just peace to all
    countries, they accuse us, who tore up, published and
    exposed to public disgrace the secret, criminal treaties concluded
    between the ex-tsar and the Anglo-French capitalists. 
 The workers of the whole world, no matter in what country they
    live, greet us, sympathise with us, applaud us for breaking the
    iron ring of imperialist ties, of sordid imperialist treaties, of
    imperialist chains—for breaking through to freedom, and
    making the heaviest sacrifices in doing so—for, as a
    socialist republic, although torn and plundered by the
    imperialists, keeping out of the imperialist war and
    raising the banner of peace, the banner of socialism for the whole
    world to see. 
 Small wonder that the international imperialist gang hates us
    for this, that it “accuses” us, that all the lackeys
    of the imperialists, including our Right Socialist-Revolutionaries
    and Mensheviks, also “accuse” us. The hatred these
    watchdogs of imperialism express for the Bolsheviks, and the
    sympathy of the class-conscious workers of the world, convince us
    more than ever of the justice of our cause. 
 A real socialist would not fail to understand that for the
    sake of achieving victory over the bourgeoisie, for the sake of
    power passing to the workers, for the sake of starting
    the world proletarian revolution, we cannot and must
    not hesitate to make the heaviest sacrifices, including
    the sacrifice of part of our territory, the sacrifice of heavy
    defeats at the hands of imperialism. A real socialist would have
    proved by deeds his willingness for “his”
    country to make the greatest sacrifice to give a real push forward
    to the cause of the socialist revolution. 
 For the sake of “their” cause, that is, for the
    sake of winning world hegemony, the imperialists of Britain and
    Germany have not hesitated to utterly ruin and throttle a whole
    number of countries, from Belgium and Serbia to Palestine and
    Mesopotamia. But must socialists wait with “their”
    cause, the cause of liberating the working people of the whole
    world from the yoke of capital, of winning universal and lasting
    peace, until a path without sacrifice is found? Must they fear to
    open the battle until an easy victory is “guaranteed”?
    Must they place the integrity and security of “their”
    bourgeois-created “fatherland” above the interests of
    the world socialist revolution? The scoundrels in the
    international socialist movement who think this way, those lackeys
    who grovel to bourgeois morality, thrice stand condemned. 
 The Anglo-French and American imperialist vultures
    “accuse” us of concluding an “agreement”
    with German imperialism. What hypocrites, what scoundrels they are
    to slander the workers’ government while trembling because
    of the sympathy displayed towards us by the workers of
    “their own” countries! But their hypocrisy will be
    exposed. They pretend not to see the difference between an
    agreement entered into by “socialists” with the
    bourgeoisie (their own or foreign) against the workers,
    against the working people, and an agreement entered into for
    the protection of the workers who have defeated their
    bourgeoisie, with the bourgeoisie of one national colour
    against the bourgeoisie of another colour in order that
    the proletariat may take advantage of the antagonisms between the
    different groups of bourgeoisie. 
 In actual fact, every European sees this difference very well,
    and, as I shall show in a moment, the American people have had a
    particularly striking “illustration” of it in their
    own history. There are agreements and agreements, there are
    fagots et fagots, as the French say. 
 When in February 1918 the German imperialist vultures hurled
    their forces against unarmed, demobilised Russia, who had relied
    on the international solidarity of the proletariat before the
    world revolution had fully matured, I did not hesitate for a
    moment to enter into an “agreement” with the French
    monarchists. Captain Sadoul, a French army officer who, in words,
    sympathised with the Bolsheviks, but was in deeds a loyal and
    faithful servant of French imperialism, brought the French officer
    de Lubersac to see me. “I am a monarchist. My only aim is to
    secure the defeat of Germany,” de Lubersac declared to
    me. “That goes without saying (cela va sans dire
    ),” I replied. But this did not in the least prevent me
    from entering into an “agreement” with de Lubersac
    concerning certain services that French army officers, experts in
    explosives, were ready to render us by blowing up railway lines in
    order to hinder the German invasion. This is an example of an
    “agreement” of which every class-conscious worker will
    approve, an agreement in the interests of socialism. The French
    monarchist and I shook hands, although we knew that each of us
    would willingly hang his “partner”. But for a time our
    interests coincided. Against the advancing rapacious Germans,
    we, in the interests of the Russian and the world
    socialist revolution, utilised the equally rapacious
    counter-interests of other imperialists. In this way we
    served the interests of the working class of Russia and of other
    countries, we strengthened the proletariat and weakened the
    bourgeoisie of the whole world, we resorted to the methods, most
    legitimate and essential in every war, of manoeuvre,
    stratagem, retreat, in anticipation of the moment when the rapidly
    maturing proletarian revolution in a number of advanced countries
    completely matured. 
 However much the Anglo-French and American imperialist sharks
    fume with rage, however much they slander us, no matter how many
    millions they spend on bribing the Right Socialist-Revolutionary,
    Menshevik and other social-patriotic newspapers, I shall not
    hesitate one second to enter into a similar
    “agreement” with the German imperialist vultures if an
    attack upon Russia by Anglo-French troops calls for it. And I know
    perfectly well that my tactics will be approved by the
    class-conscious proletariat of Russia, Germany, France, Britain,
    America—in short, of the whole civilised world. Such tactics
    will ease the task of the socialist revolution, will hasten it,
    will weaken the international bourgeoisie, will strengthen the
    position of the working class which is defeating the
    bourgeoisie. 
 The American people resorted to these tactics long ago to the
    advantage of their revolution. When they waged their great war of
    liberation against the British oppressors, they had also against
    them the French and the Spanish oppressors who owned a part of
    what is now the United States of North America. In their arduous
    war for freedom, the American people also entered into
    “agreements” with some oppressors against others for
    the purpose of weakening the oppressors and strengthening those
    who were fighting in a revolutionary manner against oppression,
    for the purpose of serving the interests of the oppressed
    people. The American people took advantage of the strife
    between the French, the Spanish and the British; sometimes they
    even fought side by side with the forces of the French and Spanish
    oppressors against the British oppressors; first they defeated the
    British and then freed themselves (partly by ransom) from the
    French and the Spanish. 
 
      Historical action is not the pavement of Nevsky Prospekt, said
      the great Russian revolutionary Chernyshevsky.[2] A
      revolutionary would not “agree” to a proletarian
      revolution only “on the condition” that it proceeds
      easily and smoothly, that there is, from the outset, combined
      action on the part of the proletarians of different countries,
      that there are guarantees against defeats, that the road of the
      revolution is broad, free and straight, that it will not be
      necessary during the march to victory to sustain the heaviest
      casualties, to “bide one’s time in a besieged
      fortress”, or to make one’s way along extremely
      narrow, impassable, winding and dangerous mountain tracks. Such
      a person is no revolutionary, he has not freed himself from the
      pedantry of the bourgeois intellectuals; such a person will be
      found constantly slipping into the camp of the
      counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, like our Right
      Socialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and even (although more
      rarely) Left Socialist-Revolutionaries. 
 Echoing the bourgeoisie, these gentlemen like to blame us for
    the “chaos” of the revolution, for the
    “destruction” of industry, for the unemployment and
    the food shortage. How hypocritical these accusations are, coming
    from those who welcomed and supported the imperialist war, or who
    entered into an “agreement” with Kerensky who
    continued this war! It is this imperialist war that is the cause
    of all these misfortunes. The revolution engendered by the war can
    not avoid the terrible difficulties and suffering bequeathed it by
    the prolonged, ruinous, reactionary slaughter of the nations. To
    blame us for the “destruction” of industry, or for the
    “terror”, is either hypocrisy or dull-witted pedantry;
    it reveals an inability to understand the basic conditions of the
    fierce class struggle, raised to the highest degree of intensity
    that is called revolution. 
 Even when “accusers” of this type do
    “recognise” the class struggle, they limit themselves
    to verbal recognition; actually, they constantly slip into the
    philistine utopia of class “agreement” and
    “collaboration”; for in revolutionary epochs the class
    struggle has always, inevitably, and in every country, assumed the
    form of civil war, and civil war is inconceivable without
    the severest destruction, terror and the restriction of formal
    democracy in the interests of this war. Only unctuous
    parsons—whether Christian or “secular” in the
    persons of parlour, parliamentary socialists— cannot see,
    understand and feel this necessity. Only a life less “man in
    the muffler”[3] can shun the revolution for this
    reason instead of plunging into battle with the utmost ardour and
    determination at a time when history demands that the greatest
    problems of humanity be solved by struggle and war. 
 The American people have a revolutionary tradition which has
    been adopted by the best representatives of the American
    proletariat, who have repeatedly expressed their complete
    solidarity with us Bolsheviks. That tradition is the war of
    liberation against the British in the eighteenth century and the
    Civil War in the nineteenth century. In some respects, if we only
    take into consideration the “destruction” of some
    branches of industry and of the national economy, America in 1870
    was behind 1860. But what a pedant, what an idiot would anyone be
    to deny on these grounds the immense, world-historic, progressive
    and revolutionary significance of the American Civil War of
    1863-65! 
 The representatives of the bourgeoisie understand that for the
    sake of overthrowing Negro slavery, of overthrowing the rule of
    the slaveowners, it was worth letting the country go through long
    years of civil war, through the abysmal ruin, destruction and
    terror that accompany every war. But now, when we are confronted
    with the vastly greater task of overthrowing capitalist
    wage-slavery, of overthrowing the rule of the
    bourgeoisie—now, the representatives and defenders of the
    bourgeoisie, and also the reformist socialists who have been
    frightened by the bourgeoisie and are shunning the revolution,
    cannot and do not want to understand that civil war is necessary
    and legitimate. 
 The American workers will not follow the bourgeoisie. They
    will be with us, for civil war against the bourgeoisie. The whole
    history of the world and of the American labour movement
    strengthens my conviction that this is so. I also recall the words
    of one of the most beloved leaders of the American proletariat,
    Eugene Debs, who wrote in the Appeal to Reason,[4] I believe towards the end of 1915, in
    the article “What Shall I Fight For” (I quoted this
    article at the beginning of 1916 at a public meeting of workers in
    Berne, Switzerland)[5]—that he, Debs, would rather be
    shot than vote credits for the present criminal and reactionary
    war; that he, Debs, knows of only one holy and, from the
    proletarian standpoint, legitimate war, namely: the war against
    the capitalists, the war to liberate mankind from
    wage-slavery. 
 I am not surprised that Wilson, the head of the American
    multimillionaires and servant of the capitalist sharks, has thrown
    Debs into prison. Let the bourgeoisie be brutal to the true
    internationalists, to the true representatives of the
    revolutionary proletariat! The more fierce and brutal they are,
    the nearer the day of the victorious proletarian revolution. 
 We are blamed for the destruction caused by our
    revolution. . . . Who are the accusers? The hangers-on of the
    bourgeoisie, of that very bourgeoisie who, during the four years
    of the imperialist war, have destroyed almost the whole of
    European culture and have reduced Europe to barbarism, brutality
    and starvation. These bourgeoisie now demand we should not make a
    revolution on these ruins, amidst this wreckage of culture, amidst
    the wreckage and ruins created by the war, nor with the people who
    have been brutalised by the war. How humane and righteous the
    bourgeoisie are! 
 
      Their servants accuse us of resorting to terror. . . . The
      British bourgeoisie have forgotten their 1649, the French
      bourgeoisie have forgotten their 1793. Terror was just and
      legitimate when the bourgeoisie resorted to it for their own
      benefit against feudalism. Terror became monstrous and criminal
      when the workers and poor peasants dared to use it against the
      bourgeoisie! Terror was just and legitimate when used for the
      purpose of substituting one exploiting minority for another
      exploiting minority. Terror became monstrous and criminal when
      it began to be used for the purpose of overthrowing
      every exploiting minority, to be used in the interests
      of the vast actual majority, in the interests of the proletariat
      and semi-proletariat, the working class and the poor peasants!
      
 The international imperialist bourgeoisie have slaughtered ten
    million men and maimed twenty million in “their” war,
    the war to decide whether the British or the German vultures are
    to rule the world. 
 If our war, the war of the oppressed and exploited
    against the oppressors and the exploiters, results in half a
    million or a million casualties in all countries, the bourgeoisie
    will say that the former casualties are justified, while the
    latter are criminal. 
 The proletariat will have something entirely different to say. 
 Now, amidst the horrors of the imperialist war, the
    proletariat is receiving a most vivid and striking illustration of
    the great truth taught by all revolutions and bequeathed to the
    workers by their best teachers, the founders of modern
    socialism. This truth is that no revolution can be successful
    unless the resistance of the exploiters is crushed. When
    we, the workers and toiling peasants, captured state power, it
    became our duty to crush the resistance of the exploiters. We are
    proud we have been doing this. We regret we are not doing it with
    sufficient firmness and determination. 
 We know that fierce resistance to the socialist revolution on the
      part of the bourgeoisie is inevitable in all countries, and that this
      resistance will grow with the growth of this revolution. The
      proletariat will crush this resistance; during the struggle against
      the resisting bourgeoisie it will finally mature for victory and for
      power. 
Let the corrupt bourgeois press shout to the whole world about
      every mistake our revolution makes. We are not daunted by our
      mistakes. People have not become saints because the revolution
      has begun. The toiling classes who for centuries have been
      oppressed, downtrodden and forcibly held in the vice of poverty,
      brutality and ignorance cannot avoid mistakes when making a
      revolution. And, as I pointed out once before, the corpse of
      bourgeois society cannot be nailed in a coffin and buried.[*]
      The corpse of capitalism is decaying and disintegrating in our
      midst, polluting the air and poisoning our lives, enmeshing that
      which is new, fresh, young and virile in thousands of threads
      and bonds of that which is old, moribund and decaying. 
 For every hundred mistakes we commit, and which the
    bourgeoisie and their lackeys (including our own Mensheviks and
    Right Socialist-Revolutionaries) shout about to the whole world,
    10,000 great and heroic deeds are performed, greater and more
    heroic because they are simple and inconspicuous amidst the
    everyday life of a factory district or a remote village, performed
    by people who are not accustomed (and have no opportunity) to
    shout to the whole world about their successes. 
 But even if the contrary were true—although I know such
    an assumption is wrong—even if we committed 10,000 mistake
    for every 100 correct actions we performed, even in that case our
    revolution would be great and invincible, and so it will be in
    the eyes of world history, because, for the first
    time, not the minority, not the rich alone, not the educated
    alone, but the real people, the vast majority of the working
    people, are themselves building a new life, are by
    their own experience solving the most difficult problems of
    socialist organisation . 
 Every mistake committed in the course of such work, in the
    course of this most conscientious and earnest work of tens of
    millions of simple workers and peasants in reorganising their
    whole life, every such mistake is worth thousands and millions of
    “lawless” successes achieved by the exploiting
    minority—successes in swindling and duping the working
    people. For only through such mistakes will the workers
    and peasants learn to build the new life, learn to do
    without 

      capitalists; only in this way will they hack a path for
      themselves—through thousands of obstacles—to
      victorious socialism. 
 Mistakes are being committed in the course of their
    revolutionary work by our peasants, who at one stroke, in one
    night, October 25-26 (old style), 1917, entirely abolished the
    private ownership of land, and are now, month after month,
    overcoming tremendous difficulties and correcting their mistakes
    themselves, solving in a practical way the most difficult tasks of
    organising new conditions of economic life, of fighting the
    kulaks, providing land for the working people (and not
    for the rich), and of changing to communist large-scale
    agriculture. 
 Mistakes are being committed in the course of their
    revolutionary work by our workers, who have already, after a few
    months, nationalised almost all the biggest factories and plants,
    and are learning by hard, everyday work the new task of managing
    whole branches of industry, are setting the nationalised
    enterprises going, overcoming the powerful resistance of inertia,
    petty-bourgeois mentality and selfishness, and, brick by brick,
    are laying the foundation of new social ties, of a
    new labour discipline, of a new influence of the
    workers’ trade unions over their members. 
 Mistakes are committed in the course of their revolutionary
    work by our Soviets, which were created as far back as 1905 by a
    mighty upsurge of the people. The Soviets of Workers and Peasants
    are a new type of state, a new and higher type
    of democracy, a form of the proletarian dictatorship, a means of
    administering the state without the bourgeoisie and
    against the bourgeoisie. For the first time democracy is
    here serving the people, the working people, and has ceased to be
    democracy for the rich as it still is in all bourgeois republics,
    even the most democratic. For the first time, the people are
    grappling, on a scale involving one hundred million, with the
    problem of implementing the dictatorship of the proletariat and
    semi-proletariat—a problem which, if not solved, makes
    socialism out of the question. 
 Let the pedants, or the people whose minds are incurably
    stuffed with bourgeois-democratic or parliamentary prejudices,
    shake their heads in perplexity about our Soviets, about the
    absence of direct elections, for example. These people have
    forgotten nothing and have learned nothing during the period of
    the great upheavals of 1914-18. The combination of the proletarian
    dictatorship with the new democracy for the working
    people—of civil war with the widest participation of the
    people in politics—such a combination cannot be brought
    about at one stroke, nor does it fit in with the outworn modes of
    routine parliamentary democracy. The contours of a new world, the
    world of socialism, are rising before us in the shape of the
    Soviet Republic. It is not surprising that this world does not
    come into being ready-made, does not spring forth like Minerva
    from the head of Jupiter. 
 The old bourgeois-democratic constitutions waxed eloquent
    about formal equality and right of assembly; but our proletarian
    and peasant Soviet Constitution casts aside the hypocrisy of
    formal equality. When the bourgeois republicans overturned thrones
    they did not worry about formal equality between monarchists and
    republicans. When it is a matter of overthrowing the bourgeoisie,
    only traitors or idiots can demand formal equality of rights for
    the bourgeoisie. “Freedom of assembly” for workers and
    peasants is not worth a farthing when the best buildings belong to
    the bourgeoisie. Our Soviets have confiscated all the
    good buildings in town and country from the rich and have
    transferred all of them to the workers and peasants for
    their unions and meetings. This is our freedom
    of assembly—for the working people! This is the meaning and
    content of our Soviet, our socialist Constitution! 
 That is why we are all so firmly convinced that no matter what
    misfortunes may still be in store for it, our Republic of Soviets
    is invincible. 
 It is invincible because every blow struck by frenzied
    imperialism, every defeat the international bourgeoisie inflict on
    us, rouses more and more sections of the workers and peasants to
    the struggle, teaches them at the cost of enormous sacrifice,
    steels them and engenders new heroism on a mass scale. 
 We know that help from you will probably not come soon,
    comrade American workers, for the revolution is developing in
    different countries in different forms and at different tempos
    (and it cannot be otherwise). We know that although the European
    proletarian revolution has been maturing very rapidly lately, it
    may, after all, not flare up within the next few weeks. We are
    banking on the inevitability of the world revolution, but this
    does not mean that we are such fools as to bank on the revolution
    inevitably coming on a definite and early date. We have
    seen two great revolutions in our country, 1905 and 1917, and we
    know revolutions are not made to order, or by agreement. We know
    that circumstances brought our Russian detachment of the
    socialist proletariat to the fore not because of our merits, but
    because of the exceptional backwardness of Russia, and that
    before the world revolution breaks out a number of
    separate revolutions may be defeated. 
 In spite of this, we are firmly convinced that we are
    invincible, because the spirit of mankind will not be broken by
    the imperialist slaughter. Mankind will vanquish it. And the first
    country to break the convict chains of the imperialist
    war was our country. We sustained enormously heavy
    casualties in the struggle to break these chains, but we
    broke them. We are free from imperialist
    dependence, we have raised the banner of struggle for the complete
    overthrow of imperialism for the whole world to see. 
 We are now, as it were, in a besieged fortress, waiting for
    the other detachments of the world socialist revolution to come to
    our relief. These detachments exist, they are more
    numerous than ours, they are maturing, growing, gaining more
    strength the longer the brutalities of imperialism continue. The
    workers are breaking away from their social traitors—the
    Gomperses, Hendersons, Renaudels, Scheidemanns and Renners. Slowly
    but surely the workers are adopting communist, Bolshevik tactics
    and are marching towards the proletarian revolution, which alone
    is capable of saving dying culture and dying mankind. 
 In short, we are invincible, because the world proletarian
      revolution is invincible.
N. Lenin
August 20, 1918

Endnotes
[1]
      The dispatch of the letter to America was organised by the
      Bolshevik M. M. Borodin, who had recently been there. With the
      foreign military intervention and the blockade of Soviet Russia
      this involved considerable difficulties. The letter was
      delivered to the United States by P. I. Travin (Sletov). Along
      with the letter he brought the Constitution of the
      R.S.F.S.R. and the Soviet Government’s Note to President
      Wilson containing the demand to stop the intervention. The
      well-known American socialist and journalist John Reed secured
      the publication of all these documents in the American
      press. 
In December 1918 a slightly abridged version of
    the letter appeared in the New York magazine The Class
    Struggle and the Boston weekly The Revolutionary
    Age, both organs of the Left wing of the American Socialist
    Party. The Revolutionary Age was brought out by John Reed
    and Sen Katayama. The letter evoked keen interest among readers
    and it was published as a reprint from The Class Struggle
    in a large number of copies. Subsequently it was published many
    times in the bourgeois and socialist press of the U.S.A. and
    Western Europe, in the French socialist magazine Demain
    No. 28-29, 1918, in No. 138 of the Call, organ of the
    British Socialist Party, the Berlin magazine Die Aktion
    No. 51-52, 1918, and elsewhere. In 1934 the letter was brought out
    in New York in the form of a pamphlet, which contained the
    passages omitted in earlier publications. 
 The letter was widely used by the American
    Left Socialists and was instrumental in aiding the development of
    the labour and communist movement in the U.S. and Europe. It
    helped advanced workers to appreciate the nature of imperialism
    and the great revolutionary changes effected by the Soviet
    government. Lenin’s letter aroused a mounting protest in the
    U.S. against the armed intervention.
[2]
      Lenin quotes from Chernyshevsky’s review of the book by
      the American economist H. Ch. Carey, Letters to the
      President on the Foreign and Domestic Policy of the Union, and
      its Effects. Chernyshevsky wrote: “The path of
      history is not paved like Nevsky Prospekt; it runs across
      fields, either dusty or muddy, and cuts through swamps or forest
      thickets. Anyone who fears being covered with dust or muddying
      his boots, should not engage in social activity.”
    
[3]
Man in the muffler—a character from
      Chekhov’s story of the same title, personifying a
      narrow-minded philistine scared of initiative and new ideas.
      
[4]
Appeal to Reason—American socialist newspaper,
      founded in Girard, Kansas, in 1895. The newspaper propagated
      socialist ideas and was immensely popular among the
      workers. During the First World War it pursued an
      internationalist policy.
 Debs’s article appeared in the paper on
    September 11, 1915. Its title, which Lenin most probably quoted
    from memory, was “When I Shall Fight”.
    
[5]
    See present edition, Volume 22, page 125. Speech Delivered at
    an International Meeting in Berne.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Meeting in the
Alexeyev People’s House. August 23,1918









Speech At A Meeting In The Alexeyev People's House, August 23, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Meeting In
The Alexeyev People’s  House
August 23, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 23 August, 1918.
First Published: 24 August, 1918Izvestia No. 182, Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,

    Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 59-60
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet

    Archive, 2002

(Comrade Lenin's appearance is greeted with
stormy, prolonged applause.) Comrades, today our Party is
arranging meetings to explain what we Communists are fighting
for.
The most concise answer to this question would be that we are
      fighting for the termination of the imperialist war and for
      socialism.
Right at the very outbreak of the war, when reaction and
      tsarism held sway, we called the war criminal and said that the
      only way out was to convert it from imperialist into civil
      war.
In those days many were uncertain about the connection between
      the imperialist war and socialism; even many socialists thought
      that this war, like any other, would end by the conclusion of
      peace.
But four years of war have taught people a lot. It is now
      becoming clearer and clearer that there is no other way out. The
      Russian revolution is being followed by the growth of revolution
      in all the belligerent countries. Why is this so? To answer that
      question we must explain the attitude of Communists towards war,
      give our appraisal of it. We regard all wars which are the
      result of the rapacious ambitions of kings and capitalists as
      criminal, because they are fatal to the labouring classes and
      bring rich spoils to the ruling bourgeoisie.
But there are some wars which the working class must regard as
      the only just wars. These are wars for emancipation from
      slavery, from capitalist oppression. And such wars are bound to
      occur, for we cannot secure our emancipation without
      struggle. 
When the war broke out in 1914 between the Germans on the one
      hand and the British and French on the other to determine how
      they were to divide up the earth among themselves, who was to
      have the right to oppress the whole world, the capitalists of
      both camps tried to disguise their predatory aims by talking
      about "national defence"; that is how they tried to pull the
      wool over the eyes of the people.
Millions of people have been killed and millions crippled in
      this war. It has become world-wide. And more and more
      insistently people are asking what is the purpose of these
      unnecessary sacrifices.
Britain and Germany are drenched in blood, yet there is no way
      out of the war; even if some of the imperialist countries were to
      stop fighting, others would continue.
The capitalists have overreached themselves, they have grabbed
      more than they can hold. Meanwhile, the armies are becoming
      demoralised; there are deserters everywhere. The mountains of
      Italy are swarming with them; in France soldiers are refusing to
      fight, and even in Germany the old discipline has fallen
      apart.
French and German soldiers are beginning to realise they must
      reverse their front and turn their guns against their own
      governments, as it is impossible to end this bloody war under
      the capitalist system. Hence the realisation that the workers of
      the world must take up the struggle against the capitalists of
      the world.
It is no easy matter to create a socialist system. The Civil
      War is bound to continue for many a long month, perhaps for many
      a long year. This should be clear to a Russian, for he knows how
      difficult it is to overthrow the ruling class and what desperate
      resistance the Russian landowners and capitalists are putting
      up.
There is no country in Europe in which the workers are not in
      sympathy with the Bolsheviks and are not convinced that the time
      will come when they will overthrow their own government, just as
      the Russian workers have overthrown theirs.
We Russian Communists so far stand alone, because our
      detachment has proved to be ahead of all the others. We have
      been cut off from our comrades; but we had to act first because
      our country was the most backward. Our revolution was begun as a
      general revolution, and we shall tackle our tasks with the help
      of the workers and peasants of the world.
Our tasks are hard and difficult; many undesirable and
    pernicious elements are joining our ranks. But the work has begun,
    and even if we do make mistakes, we should remember that every
    mistake is an education and a lesson.
Capitalism is an international force, and it can therefore be
      completely destroyed only through victory in all countries, not
      in one alone. The war against the Czechs is a war against the
      capitalists of the whole world.
The workers are rising and joining this struggle; the Petrograd
      and Moscow workers are joining the army and bringing with them the
      idea of fighting for the victory of socialism.
The workers will ensure the victory of the Soviet Republic over
      the Czechs and give it a chance to hold out until the world
      socialist revolution breaks out. (Comrade Lenin concludes
      his speech amidst stormy applause.)



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech In Polytechnical Museum,
August 23, 1918









Speech In Polytechnical Museum, August 23, 1918



Vladimir Lenin 
Speech In Polytechnical  Museum
August 23, 1918


Delivered: 23 August, 1918.
First Published: Short report published in Izvestia No. 182, August 24, 1918; First published in full in 1926; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 78-83
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002




(Stormy applause.) What is the essence of our
      programme? Winning socialism. There is no way out of the world
      war at this moment except by the victory of socialism. But many
      do not realise this. Most people all over the world now oppose
      this bloody slaughter, but they cannot see its direct connection
      with the capitalist system. The horrors of this war are obvious
      even to the bourgeoisie, but you cannot expect them to associate
      the end of the war with the end of capitalism .... This,
      however, is the fundamental idea which has always distinguished
      the Bolsheviks, and the revolutionary socialists of all other
      countries, from those who would like to bring peace on earth
      while leaving the capitalist system intact.
What are wars fought for? We know the majority of wars were
      fought in the interests of dynasties, and were called dynastic
      wars. But some wars were fought in the interests of the
      oppressed. Spartacus set off a war in defence of the enslaved
      class. Wars of this nature were waged in the period of colonial
      oppression continuing to this day, in the period of slavery,
      etc. These wars were just wars and must not be condemned.
But when we talk about the present European war and condemn it,
      we do so only because it is being waged by the oppressor
      class.
What is the aim of the present war? If we are to believe the
      diplomats of all countries, it is being fought by France and
      Britain to defend the small nations from the barbarians, the
      German Huns. Germany, for her part, is fighting the Cossack
      barbarians who are menacing the civilised German people, and is
      defending the fatherland from the enemy attack.
But we know this war was carefully prepared, it matured and
    became inevitable. It was just as inevitable as war is between
    America and Japan. Why?
Because capitalism has concentrated the earth's wealth in the
      hands of a few states and divided the world up to the last
      little bit. Any further division, any further enrichment could
      take place only at the expense of others, as the enrichment of
      one state at the expense of another. The issue could only be
      settled by force-and, accordingly, war between the world
      marauders became inevitable.
This war has up to now been headed by two principal
      firms-Britain and Germany. Britain was the strongest of the
      colonialist countries. Although her population is not more than
      40,000,000, that of her colonies exceeds 400,000,000. Long ago
      she took by force the colonies of others; she seized vast
      territories and exploited them. But economically she fell behind
      Germany during the last fifty years. German industry overhauled
      British industry. Germany's large-scale state capitalism
      combined with the bureaucracy-and Germany beat all records.
The rivalry for supremacy between these two giants could only
      be settled by force.
There was a time when Britain, by dint of her might, seized
      territory from Holland, Portugal and other countries. Then Germany
      appeared on the scene and declared that it was now her turn to enrich
      herself at the expense of others.
 That is the root of the matter--the struggle between the strongest
      powers for the division of the world. And as both sides posses
      hundreds of millions of capital, their struggle has become
      world-wide.
We know how many secret crimes have been committed in
      connection with this war. The secret treaties we have published
      show that the lofty reasons given for the war are just a lot of
      empty talk, and that, just like Russia, all the states were
      involved in sordid treaties for getting rich at the expense of
      small and weak nations. The result was that those who were
      strong grew richer still, while those who were weak were
      crushed.
Individuals cannot be blamed for starting the war; it would be
      wrong to blame kings and tsars for having brought about this
      holocaust-it was brought about by capital. Capitalism has turned
      into a blind alley. This blind alley is imperialism, which
      dictated war among the rivals for world supremacy.
The claim that the war is being waged for the liberation of
      small nations is a monstrous lie. Both sets of marauders
      continue to stand glaring bloodthirstily at each other, while
      about them many a small nation lies crushed.
And we say there is no way out of the imperialist holocaust
      except by civil war.
When we said this in 1914 we were told it was like a straight
      line extending into space; but our analysis has been
      corroborated by the whole subsequent course of events. Today we
      find chauvinism's generals being left without an army. In
      France, which suffered most from the war and was most responsive
      to the call to defend the fatherland-for the enemy stood at the
      gates of Paris-the defence advocates have recently suffered a
      fiasco. True enough, it was at the hands of people like Longuet,
      who do not know whether they are coming or going, but that is
      not important.
We know that in the early days of the revolution in Russia
      power fell into the hands of people who spouted all sorts of
      words but kept the old tsarist treaties in their pockets. And if
      in Russia parties veered to the left more rapidly, this was due
      to the accursed regime that existed before the revolution and to
      our Revolution of 1905.
In Europe, though, where a shrewd and calculating capitalism
      rules, where it possesses a powerful and well-knit organisation,
      the fumes of nationalism are wearing off more
      slowly. Nevertheless, we can unmistakably see that the
      imperialist war is dying a slow and painful death.
There is quite reliable information to show that the German
      army is becoming demoralised, and has taken to profiteering. It
      could hardly be otherwise. The moment the soldier wakes up and
      begins to understand that he is being maimed and killed solely
      in the interests of the bourgeoisie, demoralisation is bound to
      spread among the mass of soldiers.
The French army, which kept its morale longer and more
      persistently than any of the others, likewise shows that it is
      not immune to demoralisation. The Malvy trial has somewhat
      lifted the curtain over the scene in France, too, and has
      revealed that thousands of soldiers have refused to go to the
      front.[1]
All this is but the herald of events similar to those in
      Russia, except that in the civilised countries the civil war
      will be far more brutal than in Russia. We can see that in the
      case of Finland, the most democratic country in Europe, the
      first country to give women the vote. Yet this country took
      savage and ruthless reprisals on the Red Army men; and the
      latter did not surrender easily. This shows what a terrible fate
      awaits these civilised countries.
You can see for yourselves how absurd it was to accuse the
      Bolsheviks of demoralising the Russian army.
We represent only one detachment, a detachment which has
      advanced some way ahead of the other workers'
      detachments—not because it is any better than the others,
      but because the stupid policy of our bourgeoisie enabled the
      working class of Russia to throw off its chains sooner. Today,
      in fighting for a socialist system in Russia, we are fighting
      for socialism all over the world. Today, the Bolsheviks are the
      sole subject of discussion at all workers' meetings and
      gatherings in all countries. They know us; they know that what
      we are now doing is furthering the cause of the whole world,
      that we are working for them.
When we abolish private ownership of land, nationalise the
      factories and the banks, which are now engaged in organising
      industry, cries are raised on all sides that we are committing
      hosts of mistakes. That may be true, but the workers are
      creating socialism themselves, and no matter what mistakes we
      make we are learning from experience and paving the way for the
      art of making revolution without mistakes.
That is why we are the objects of such savage hatred. That is
      why the French imperialists do not begrudge hundreds of millions
      to support counter-revolution, since this would bring the
      repayment to France of the Russian debts, running into billions,
      which the workers and peasants have annulled. 

    
      Today the whole
      bourgeois press is amusing itself by filling its columns with
      such lies as that the Council of People's Commissars has moved
      to Tula, that it was seen ten days ago in Kronstadt, and so on,
      that Moscow is about to fall and that the Soviet Government has
      fled.
The whole bourgeoisie, all the Romanovs, all the capitalists
      and landowners support the Czechs, whose revolt they associate
      with the possible fall of the Soviet government. The Allies know
      this, and they are launching one of their fiercest attacks. What
      they lacked in Russia was a nucleus, and now they have found it
      in the Czechs. The Czech revolt therefore must not be treated
      lightly. This revolt was the signal for a number of
      counter-revolutionary risings; our revolutionary history has
      recently been marked by many kulak and whiteguard revolts.
The position of the Soviet government is grave, and we must not
      close our eyes to the fact. But you have only to look around you
      to be filled with confidence in our victory.
Germany has suffered a number of defeats, and it is no secret that
      these defeats are the result of "treason" on the part of German
      soldiers; French soldiers refused to go to the front at a very
      critical moment because of the arrest of Comrade Andrieux whom the
      government was compelled to release to get the troops to move, and so
      on and so forth.
We have made many sacrifices. The Brest-Litovsk Peace was one
      painful wound; we expected a revolution in Germany, but the time
      for it was not yet ripe. It is ripening now; revolution is
      undoubtedly brewing and is inevitable. But only a fool can ask
      when revolution will break out in the West. Revolution can never
      be forecast; it cannot be foretold; it comes of
      itself. Revolution is brewing and is bound to flare up. Did
      anybody know a week before the February revolution it was about
      to break out? When the mad priest led the people to the
      palace,[2] did anybody think the Revolution of
      1905 was about to break out? But revolution is brewing and is
      bound to come.
And we must keep the Soviet government intact until it
      begins. Our mistakes must serve as a lesson to the proletariat
      in the West, to the world socialist movement. The salvation of
      the world revolution as well as of the Russian revolution lies
      on the Czech front. And we already have news that the army which
      time and again was betrayed by the generals, which is terribly
      exhausted, that this army, with the coming of our comrades, the
      Communists, the workers, is beginning to win victories, is
      beginning to display revolutionary enthusiasm in the struggle
      against the world bourgeoisie.
We believe that victory will be ours and that by our victory we
      shall save the cause of socialism. (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
      In the spring and summer of 1917 there was mounting discontent
      in the French army against the continuation of the war, inspired
      by the growth of an anti-war revolutionary movement among the
      French workers under the impact of the bourgeois-democratic
      revolution in Russia in February 1917. The presence of Russian
      soldiers in France, who had been seat there in 1916, also added
      to the ferment in the French armed forces. After the February
      1917 revolution the Russian army units stationed in France set
      up Soviets of Soldiers' Deputies to control the actions of the
      offi- cers. Most Russian soldiers refused to fight and demanded
      from the Provisional Government that they be sent home. This had
      its inevitable effect on the French units. In mid-May, after the
      French offensive had failed and scores of thousands of French
      soldiers had been killed, a revolutionary movement began in the
      army and continued to the end of June. War-weary soldiers did
      not want to stay in the trenches and organised rallies demanding
      better conditions and cessation of the imperialist
      war. According to official data, the movement involved 75
      infantry regiments, 23 rifle battalions and 12 artillery
      regiments. The soldiers not only refused to obey officers but
      even turned their weapons against the govern- ment. However, the
      soldiers were not prepared for consistent revolutionary action
      against the war, one reason being the absence of a workers'
      revolutionary party. The French Government quelled the unrest
      with the help of social-chauvinists and
      anarcho-syndicalists. Following this, the French Home Minister
      Malvy was brought for trial on the charge of failure to deal
      firmly enough with the "defeatists.
[2]
    Lenin refers to the priest Gapon, an agent of the secret
    police. Bent on provocation, he proposed to hold a peaceful march
    to the Winter Palace to submit a petition to the tsar on January
    9,1905. The tsar gave the order to open fire on the unarmed
    workers, their wives and children. Over 1,000 were killed and some
    5,000 wounded. On that very day barricades were thrown in in
    Petrograd and there were armed skirmishes between the workers, and
    the police and troops. January 9 marked the beginning of the
    First Russian Revolution. 
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at the First All-Russia
Congress On Education, August 28, 1918









Speech At The First All-Russia Congress On Education, August 28, 1918



Vladimir Lenin


Speech At The First All-Russia Congress On Education[1]
August 28, 1918


Delivered: 28 August, 1918.
First Published:Short report published August 29, 1918 in Vecherniye Izvestia Moskovshovo Soveta No. 39; First published in full in 1919 in the book minutes of the First All-Russia Congress on Education, Moscow; Published according to the text of the book  
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 84-87
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002




(All rise as Comrade Lenin appears in the hail. Stormy, prolonged applause.) Comrades, we are passing through one of the most critical, important and interesting moments of history—a moment when the world socialist revolution is in the making. It is now becoming apparent even to those who stood remote from socialist theories and forecasts that this war will not end as it began, that is, by the conclusion of peace in the usual way between the old imperialist governments. The Russian revolution has shown that the war is inevitably leading to the disintegration of capitalist society in general, that it is being converted into a war of the working people against the exploiters. Therein lies the significance of the Russian revolution.
The workers of the world feel that the cause of the Russian revolution is their own cause no matter how great the obstacles in our way, no matter how many tens of millions in money are lavished in all countries to disseminate lies and slander about the Russian revolution. Parallel with the war between the two groups of imperialists, another war is beginning everywhere, the war which the working class, inspired by the example of the Russian revolution, is declaring against its own bourgeoisie. All the signs go to show that Austria and Italy are on the verge of revolution. The old order in these countries is disintegrating rapidly. In the stronger and more stable countries such as Germany, Britain and France, the same process is going on, although in a somewhat different and less noticeable form. The collapse of the capitalist system and the capitalist war is inevitable.
The German imperialists have been unable to stifle the socialist revolution. The price Germany had to pay for crushing the revolution in Red Latvia, Finland and the Ukraine was the demoralisation of her army. The defeat of Germany on the Western front is largely due to the fact that her old army no longer exists. What the German diplomats joked aboutthe "Russification" of the German soldiers-now turns out to be no joke at all, but the bitter truth. The spirit of protest is rising, "treason" is becoming a common thing in the German army.
On the other hand, Britain and France are making a last effort to save their own situation. They are hurling themselves on the Russian Republic and straining capitalism to breaking point. Even the bourgeois papers have to admit that a definite change of spirit has appeared among the working people: in France, the idea of "national defence" is breaking down; in Britain, the working class is denouncing the "civil truce". That means the British and French imperialists have staked their last card-and we can say with the utmost confidence that that card will be trumped. (Stormy applause.) No matter how loudly certain groups cry that the Bolsheviks are backed by a minority, they have to admit they cannot find the forces inside Russia to fight the Bolsheviks, and are compelled to resort to foreign intervention. The working class of France and Britain is thus being forced to take part in a blatant war of conquest, whose purpose is to crush the Russian revolution. That means that British and French, and, consequently, world imperialism is at its last gasp. (Stormy applause.)
We have surmounted all difficulties, even though it was hard to declare martial law again in a country where the people themselves had suppressed the war and smashed the old army, and even though it was hard to form an army in the midst of acute civil war. The army has been formed, and victory over the Czechs, the whiteguards, the landowners, the capitalists and the kulaks is assured. (Stormy applause.) The working people realise they are fighting for their own cause and not in the interests of a handful of capitalists. The Russian workers and peasants have for the first time got a chance to run the factories and dispose of the land themselves, and that experience was bound to have its effect. Our army has been formed from chosen people, from the classconscious peasants and workers. Each of them goes to the front aware that he is fighting for the destiny of the world revolution as well as the Russian revolution; for we may rest assured that the Russian revolution is only a sample, only the first step in the series of revolutions in which the war is bound to end.
Education is one of the component parts of the struggle we are now waging. We can counter hypocrisy and lies with the complete and honest truth. The war has shown plainly enough what the "will of the majority" means, a phrase used as a cover by the bourgeoisie. It has shown that a handful of plutocrats drag whole nations to the slaughter in their own interests. The belief that bourgeois democracy serves the interests of the majority has now been utterly discredited. Our Constitution, our Soviets, which were something new to Europe, but with which we were already acquainted from the experience of the 1905 Revolution, serve as splendid agitation and propaganda material, completely exposing the lying and hypocritical nature of bourgeois democracy. We have openly proclaimed the rule of the working and exploited peopleand there lies the source of our strength and invincibility.
The same is true of education: the more cultured the bourgeois state, the more subtly it lied when declaring that schools could stand above politics and serve society as a whole.
In fact the schools were turned into nothing but an instrument of
 the class rule of the bourgeoisie. They were thoroughly imbued with
 the bourgeois caste spirit. Their purpose was to supply the
 capitalists with obedient lackeys and able workers. The war has shown
 that the marvels of modern technology are being used as a means of
 exterminating millions of workers and creating fabulous profits for
 the capitalists who are making fortunes out of the war. The war has
 been internally undermined, for we have exposed their lies by
 countering them with the truth. We say that our work in the sphere of
 education is part of the struggle for overthrowing the
 bourgeoisie. We publicly declare that education divorced from life
 and politics is lies and hypocrisy. What was the meaning of the
 sabotage resorted to by the best educated representatives of the old
 bourgeois culture? This sabotage showed better than any agitator,
 better than all our speeches, better than thousands of pamphlets that
 these people regard learning as their monopoly and have turned it
 into an instrument of their rule over the so-called common
 people. They used their education to frustrate the work of socialist
 construction, and came out openly against the working people.
The revolutionary struggle has been the finishing school for the Russian workers and peasants. They have seen that our system alone assures their genuine rule, they have been able to convince themselves that the state is doing everything to assist the workers and the poor peasants in completely crushing the resistance of the kulaks, the landowners and the capitalists.
The working people are thirsting for knowledge because they need it to win. Nine out of ten of the working people have realised that knowledge is a weapon in their struggle for emancipation, that their failures are due to lack of education, and that now it is up to them really to give everyone access to education. Our cause is assured because the people have themselves set about building a new, socialist Russia. They are learning from their own experience, from their failures and mistakes, and they see how indispensable education is for the victorious conclusion of their struggle. In spite of the apparent collapse of many institutions and the jubilation of the intellectuals carrying out sabotage, we find that experience in the struggle has taught the people to take their fate into their own hands. All who
really sympathise with the people, all the best teachers will come to our aid, and that is a sure pledge that the socialist cause will triumph. (Ovation.)

Endnotes
[1]

The Congress was held in Moscow in the building of the Higher Women's Courses from August 26 to September 4, 1918. The 700-odd delegates represented departments of education, teachers and educationalists. Lenin was elected honorary chairman and invited to attend. He spoke at the Congress on August 28, the third day of the proceedings. The Congress discussed the Regulations on the Single Labour School of the R.S.F.S.R., which were later endorsed by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and published in Izvestia on October 10. The regulations played a very important part in building the Soviet education system.


In connection with the attempt on Lenin's life made by the Socialist-Revolutionary terrorist Fanny Kaplan on August 30, 1918, the Congress met in emergency plenary session the next day and adopted a resolution conveying a message of sympathy to Lenin and Krupskaya and expressing firm conviction in the triumph of the revolutionary cause.

 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Meeting in Basmanny
District, August 30, 1918.









Speech At A Meeting In Basmanny District, August 30, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Meeting In Basmanny District
August 30, 1918[1]
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 30 August, 1918.
First Published:  31 August 1918Pravda No. 185; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 51-52
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



The bourgeoisie made themselves masters of revolutionary Russia for a time, ruling from February to October with the support of the social-compromisers.
With the first steps taken by the Milyukov-Guchkov government, the people began to realise where the bourgeoisie were leading them. But the dirty work of the Russian capitalists and landowners, who were in fact continuing the policy of the tsar the people had overthrown, was covered up by the Mensheviks and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who pretended to be socialists while actually betraying socialism in the interests of the British and French stock exchanges.
Swept aside by the October uprising, and ousted from the revolution, the compromisers set about their customary work in the Ukraine, the Caucasus, in Siberia and on the Volga. They eventually succeeded in getting the local Soviets overthrown and the Bolshevik members turned over to the tender mercies of the Czech hirelings and the Russian whiteguards.
But what do we find in these places rising out of the ruins of the Soviets? The complete triumph of the capitalists and landowners, and groans and curses from the workers and peasants. The land has been returned to the nobility and the mills and factories to their former owners. The eight-hour day has been abolished, the workers’ and peasants’ organisations suppressed, and the tsarist Zemstvos and the old police regime restored instead.
Let every worker and peasant who is still undecided about his choice of government take a look at the Volga, Siberia, and the Ukraine, and the answer will be clear and unmistakable. (Stormy, prolonged applause.)

Endnotes
[1]

The Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) asked Lenin to speak at a mass rally in Basmanny District of  Moscow on the subject

“'Two Governments (the Dictat  __garbage__ __rjc__ __20020614__





Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Speech at a Meeting at the Former
Michelson Works, August 30, 1918









Speech At A Meeting At The Former Michelson Works, August 30, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Meeting
At The Former Michelson Works
August 30. 1918[1]
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 30 August, 1918.
First Published:  1 September, 1918 Izvestia No. 188, ; Published according to the Izvestia text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, pages 51-52
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



(Stormy applause passing into ovation.) We Bolsheviks are constantly being accused of forsaking the slogans of equality and fraternity. Let us now put things straight.
What government replaced the tsar? The Guchkov-Milyukov government,
 which set about convening a Constituent Assembly in Russia. What was
 behind these activities supposed to be in favour of the people
 liberated from their millennial oppression? It was that Guchkov and
 other champions were backed by a gang of capitalists, pursuing their
 own imperialist ends. And when Kerensky, Chernov and Co. were in the
 saddle, this government, tottering and without any foundation, was
 only concerned with the vested interests of their friends, the
 bourgeoisie. Power in fact passed into the hands of the kulaks, and
 the working people got nothing. We find the same thing in other
 countries. Take America, the freest and most civilised country. There
 you have a democratic republic. But what do we find? The brazen rule
 of a handful, not even of millionaires, but multimillionaires, while
 the people are in slavery and servitude. Where is your much vaunted
 equality and fraternity if the mills, factories, banks, and all the
 country’s wealth belong to the capitalists, and side by side
 with the democratic republic you have feudal servitude for millions
 of workers and unrelieved destitution?
No, wherever “democrats” are in power, you have real, barefaced robbery. We know the true nature of the so-called democracies.
The secret treaties of the French Republic, of Britain and the other democracies have clearly revealed the underlying nature and essence of this whole business. Their aims and interests are as criminal and predatory as Germany’s. The war has opened our eyes, and we clearly see the barefaced robber and plunderer in the guise of the defender of the fatherland. This robbers’ raid must be countered by revolutionary action, by revolutionary creative effort. True, it is not easy to achieve unity at such a difficult time, especially among the revolutionary peasants; but we believe in the creative power and public-mindedness of the industrial workers, the vanguard of the revolution. The workers are now fully aware that as long as minds are swayed by the fairy-tale of a democratic republic and a Constituent Assembly, fifty million rubles will continue to be spent daily for war purposes that are disastrous to them, and they will never secure their liberation from capitalist oppression. It was because they realised this that the workers created their Soviets.
Similarly, the realities of life have taught the workers to realise that as long as the landowners are snugly installed in their mansions and magic castles, the right of assembly will not exist, and will mean, if anything, the right to assemble only in the world to come. You will agree that to promise the workers freedom while leaving the mansions, the land, the factories and all wealth in the hands of the capitalists and landowners has hardly anything to do with liberty and equality. We have only one maxim, one slogan: All who work have the right to enjoy the benefits of life. Idlers and parasites who suck the blood of the working people must be deprived of these benefits. And we proclaim: Everything for the workers, everything for the working people!
We know how hard all this is to achieve, we know the furious resistance the bourgeoisie are putting up; but we believe in the ultimate victory of the workers, for they are bound to win if they were capable of extricating themselves from the terrible hardships of the imperialist holocaust and of erecting the edifice of socialist revolution on the ruins of the edifice they destroyed.
And, in fact, forces are uniting everywhere. Now that we have abolished private ownership of land, the workers of town and country are rapidly coming together. And in the West, too, we see the workers’ class-consciousness awakening.
The British, French, Italian and other workers are making more and more appeals and demands indicating the approaching triumph of the world revolution. And our task today is to carry on our revolutionary work and to scorn the hypocrisy, the insolent outcries and lamentations of the predatory bourgeoisie. We must pit all we have on the Czech front so as to crush this whole gang who put up liberty and equality as a smokescreen to conceal the shooting down of hundreds and thousands of workers and peasants. We have only one alternative: victory or death!

Endnotes
[1] The meeting was held in a hand-grenade shop of the works. Lenin came straight from the rally in Basmanny District and spoke on the subject “Two Governments (the Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Dictatorship of the Bourgeoisie)”. At 7.30 p.m., as he was leaving the premises, the Socialist-Revolutionary Fanny Kaplan shot him. Two bullets found their mark.



The news of the attempt on Lenin’s life aroused a storm of indignation throughout the country. People demanded that terrorists and the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie and landowners be ruthlessly dealt with, and pledged to devote all their strength to defeating the enemy. The men at the front went into battle eager to take revenge on the enemy for the attempt on Lenin’s life. The Soviet people rallied behind the Communist Party and the Soviet Government and doubled their war efforts.



On September 4, 1918, Izvestia carried a report that Kaplan had been shot by decision of the Cheka. 

 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Greetings to the Red Army On the
Capture Of Kazan









Greetings To The Red Army On The Capture Of Kazan



Vladimir Lenin
Greetings To The Red Army
On The Capture Of Kazan


Written: 11 September, 1918.
First Published: 12 September, 1918 in Pravda No. 195; Published according to the manuscript text 

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, page 92
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002

    



Hearty greetings to the Red Army on its wonderful victory.
May it serve as a pledge that the alliance of workers and revolutionary peasants will finish off the bourgeoisie, break down all and every resistance by the exploiters and ensure the victory of socialism all over the world.
Long live the world workers' revolution!

Lenin


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Letter to the Presidium Of the
Conference Of Proletarian Cultural And Educational Organisations









Letter To The Presidium Of The Conference Of Proletarian Cultural And Educational Organisations



Vladimir Lenin
Letter To The Presidium Of The Conference Of Proletarian Cultural
      And Educational
      Organisations[1]



Written: 17 September, 1918
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, page 93
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    

17.9.18

      Dear Comrades,
    

      Many thanks for your good wishes, and the very best of luck in your work.

    
      One of the chief conditions for the socialist revolution's
      victory is that the working class must realise it has to rule
      and that its rule should be carried through during the
      transition period from capitalism to socialism. The
      rule of the proletariat, the vanguard of all the
      working and exploited people, is essential in this transition
      period if classes are to be completely abolished, if the
      resistance of the exploiters is to be suppressed, and if the
      entire mass of the working and exploited people—crushed,
      downtrodden and disunited by capitalis—are to be
      united around the urban workers and brought in close
      alliance with them.
All our successes have been due to the workers grasping this and governing the state through their Soviets.

    
      But the workers have not yet grasped this
      sufficiently and are often too timid in promoting workers to
      governing the state.

      Fight for this, comrades! Let the proletarian cultural and
      educational organisations help in this. That will be a pledge of
      further success and the final victory of the socialist
      revolution.

      Greetings,
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

Endnotes
[1]
    Lenin wrote this letter in reply to the message of greetings sent
    by the Conference.

    
      The First All-Russia Conference of Proletarian Cultural and
      Educational Organisations was held in Moscow from September
      15-20, 1918. According to the figures supplied by the mandate
      commission, 330 delegates attended. Lenin's letter was read at
      the fifth session, on September 19. The speakers at the
      Conference included N. K. Krupskaya, M. N. Pokrovsky and
      Proletkult leaders A. A. Bogdanov, P. I. Lebedev-Polyansky,
      F. I. Kalinin and others.

    
      The Conference resolutions reflected the erroneous stand of the
      Proletkult leaders who attempted to shirk the tasks of mass
      cultural and educational work, to build up a "proletarian
      culture" in isolation from past culture, a culture divorced from
      life and the people.

    
      recalling the conditions that gave rise to the letter, Krupskaya
      wrote: “The Proletkult was a great influence in those
      days. A shortcoming of the Proletkult, in Ilyich's opinion, was
      that its work was insufficiently linked with the general
      political tasks of the struggle, that it did not do enough
      towards stimulating the people, promoting workers and preparing
      them for state administration through the medium of the
      Soviets. In his message of greetings to the Conference he made
      it a point of mentioning the political tasks that confronted the
      Proletkult.” (N. K. Krupskaya, Reminiscences of
      Lenin, Moscow, 1959, p. 483.)


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Telegram to Officer Cadets In
Petrograd









Telegram To Officer Cadets In Petrograd



Vladimir Lenin
Telegram To Officer Cadets In Petrograd


Written: 2 August, 1918.
 First Published 19 September, 1918 Pravda No. 201; Published according to the manuscript

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1965, page 94
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    

September 18, 1918

      To the District Commissar, 3 Cadet Line, Vasilyevsky Island, Petrograd
Greetings to the 400 comrade workers who pass out today as Red
      Army officers and go to join the ranks. The success of the Russian
      and world socialist revolution depends on the degree of energy the
      workers display in running the state and commanding the army of
      working and exploited people fighting to overthrow the rule of
      capital. I am sure therefore that thousands and thousands of
      workers will follow the example of the four hundred; with such
      administrators and commanders the victory of communism is assured.
    

      Lenin

      Chairman of the Council
      of People—s Commissars


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## The Character Of Our
Newspapers









The Character Of Our Newspapers



Vladimir Lenin
The Character Of Our Newspapers

Delivered: 8 November, 1918
First Published: 20 September, 1918; Pravda No. 202. Published according to
the Pravda text
    text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
    Volume 28, 1974, pages 171-178
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002


Far too much space is being allotted to political agitation on outdated themes—to political ballyhoo—and far too little to the building of the new life, to the facts about it.
Why instead of turning out 200-400 lines, don’t we write twenty or even ten lines on such simple, generally known, clear topics with which the people are already fairly well acquainted, like the foul treachery of the Mensheviks—the lackeys of the bourgeoisie—the Anglo-Japanese invasion to restore the sacred rights of capital, the American multimillionaires baring their fangs against Germany, etc., etc.? We must write about these things and note every new fact in this sphere, but we need not write long articles and repeat old arguments; what is needed is to condemn in just a few lines, “in telegraphic style”,  the latest manifestation of the old, known and already evaluated politics.
The bourgeois press in the “good old bourgeois times” never mentioned the “holy of holies"—the conditions in privately-owned factories, in the private enterprises. This custom fitted in with the interests of the bourgeoisie. We must radically break with it. We have not broken with it. So far our type of newspaper has not changed as it should in a society in transition from capitalism to socialism.
Less politics. Politics has been “elucidated” fully and reduced to a struggle between the two camps: the insurrectionary proletariat and the handful of capitalist slaveowners (with the whole. gang, right down to the Mensheviks and others). We may, and, I repeat, we must, speak very briefly about these politics.
More economics. But not in the sense of “general” discussions, learned reviews, intellectual plans and similar piffle, for, I regret to say, they are all too often just piffle and nothing more. By economics we mean the gathering, careful checking and study of the facts of the actual organisation of the new life. Have real successes been achieved by big factories, agricultural communes, the Poor Peasants’ Committees, and local Economic Councils in building up the new economy? What, precisely, are these successes? Have they been verified? Are they not fables, boasting, intellectual proinises ("things are moving”,  “the plan has been drawn up”,  “we are getting under way”,  “we now vouch for”,  “there is undoubted improvement”,  and other charlatan phrases of which “we” are such masters)? How have the successes been achieved? What must be done to extend them?
Where is the black list with the names of the lagging factories which since nationalisation have remained models of disorder, disintegration, dirt, hooliganism and parasitism? Nowhere to be found. But there are such factories. We shall not be able to do our duty unless we wage war against these “guardians of capitalist traditions”.  We shall be jellyfish, not Communists, as long as we tolerated such factories. We have not learned to wage the class struggle in the newspapers as skilfully as the bourgeoisie did. Remember the skill with which it hounded its class enemies in the press, ridiculed them, disgraced them, and tried to sweep them away. And we? Doesn’t the class struggle in the epoch of the transition from capitalism to socialism take the form of safeguarding the interests of the working class against the few, the groups and sections of workers who stubbornly cling to capitalist traditions and continue to regard the Soviet state in the old way: work as little and as badly as they can and grab as much money as possible from the state. Aren’t there many such scoundrels, even among the compositors in Soviet printing works, among the Sormovo and Putilov workers, etc.? How many of them have we found, how many have we exposed and how many have we pilloried?
The press is silent. And if it mentions the subject at all it does so in a stereotyped, official way, not in the manner of a revolutionary press, not as an organ of the dictatorship of a class demonstrating that the resistance of the capitalists and of the parasites-the custodians of capitalist traditionswill be crushed with an iron hand.
The same with the war. Do we harass cowardly or inefficient officers? Have we denounced the really bad regiments to the whole of Russia? Have we “caught” enough of the bad types who should be removed from the army with the greatest publicity for unsuitability, carelessness, procrastination, etc.? We are not yet waging an effective, ruthless and truly revolutionary war against the specific wrongdoers. We do very little to educate the people by living, concrete examples and models taken from all spheres of life, although that is the chief task of the press during the transition from capitalism to communism. We give little attention to that aspect of everyday life inside the factories, in the villages and in the regiments where, more than anywhere else, the new is being built, where attention, publicity, public criticism, condemnation of what is bad and appeals to learn from the good are needed most.
Less political ballyhoo. Fewer highbrow discussions. Closer to life. More attention to the way in which the workers and peasants are actually building the new in their everyday work, and more verification so as to ascertain the extent to which the new is communistic.
 N. Lenin


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Telegram to the Penza Gubernia
Executive Committee And the Revolutionary War Council Of the First Army









Telegram To The Penza Gubernia Executive Committee And The Revolutionary War Council Of The First Army



Vladimir Lenin
Telegram To The Penza Gubernia Executive Committee And The Revolutionary War Council Of The First Army[1]


Written: 20 August, 1918.
 First Published Published (without address, date and signature) September 25, 1918 in Pelrogradshaya Pravda No. 209; Published In full January 27, 1935 in Krasnaya Zvezda No. 22; Published according to the Petrogradshaya Pravda text checked with the Krasnaya Zvezda
      text

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, page 98
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    

Moscow September 22, 1918

      The capture of Simbirsk, my home town, is a wonderful tonic, the
      best treatment for my wounds. I feel a new lease of life and
      energy. Congratulations to the Red Army men on their victory,
      and, on behalf of all working people, thanks for all their
      sacrifices.

      Lenin

Endnotes

[1] The Red Army
      occupied Simbirsk on September 12, 1918. After the capture of
      the town the men of the First Army sent the following telegram
      to Lenin: “Dear Vladimir Ilyich, the capture of your
      native town is our reply for one of your wounds, the capture of
      Samara will be for the other]” In reply Lenin sent the
      telegram published in this volume. 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Letter to Red Army Men Who Took
Part In the Capture Of Kazan









Letter To Red Army Men Who Took Part In The Capture Of Kazan



Vladimir Lenin
Letter To Red Army Men Who Took Part In The Capture Of Kazan[1]


Written: 29 September, 1918.
 First Published Znamya Revolutsii (Kazan) No. 177, September 29, 1918; Published according to the Znamya Revotutsii

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, page 99
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



Comrades,

You already know what tremendous significance Kazan's capture has acquired for the whole Russian revolution. It marked a turning-point in the soldiers’ mood, their changeover to firm, resolute and victorious actions. The immense sacrifices you bore in battle are saving the Soviet Republic. The Republic’s strength in the fight against the imperialists depends on the army’s fortification. So does the victory of socialism in Russia and all over the world. With all my heart I greet the heroic Soviet troops, the army of the vanguard of the exploited fighting for the overthrow of the exploiters. Very best wishes for the future.


Comradely and communist greetings,
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

Endnotes
[1] Lenin’s letter was read to the garrison troops of the town of Sviyazhsk.



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Letter to a Joint Session Of the
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet And Representatives Of
Factory Committees And Trade Unions, October 3, 1918









Letter To A Joint Session Of The Moscow Soviet And Representatives Of Factory Committees And Trade Unions



Vladimir Lenin
Letter To A Joint Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee,
 The Moscow Soviet And Representatives Of Factory Committees And Trade Unions
October 3, 1918[1]


Written: 3 October, 1918.
 First Published 4 October, 1918 Pravda No. 213; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 100-103
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002

Germany is in the throes of a political crisis. The panicky bewilderment both of the government and of all the exploiting classes in general has become abundantly clear to the whole people. The hopelessness of the military situation and the lack of support for the ruling classes among the working people have been exposed at one go. This crisis means either that the revolution has begun or at any rate that the people have clearly realised it is inevitable and imminent.
The government has morally resigned and is in a state of hysterical indecision, wavering between a military dictatorship and a coalition cabinet. But a military dictatorship has, virtually speaking, been under test ever since the outbreak of the war, and now it has ceased to he feasible because the army has become unreliable. And the admission of Scheidemann and Co. to the cabinet would only hasten the revolutionary outburst and make it more widespread, more conscious, more firm and determined after the thorough exposure of the pitiful impotence of these lackeys of the bourgeoisie, of these corrupt individuals, who are just like our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, like the Hendersons and Sidney Webbs in Britain, the Albert Thomas and Renaudels in France, and so on.
The crisis in Germany has only begun. It will inevitably end in the transfer of political power to the German proletariat. The Russian proletariat is following events with the keenest attention and enthusiasm. Now even the blindest workers in the various countries will see that the Bolsheviks were right in basing their whole tactics on the support of the world workers’ revolution, and in not fearing to bear all sorts of heavy sacrifices. Today even the most ignorant will see how unspeakably vile the betrayal of socialism by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries was when they formed an alliance with the predatory British and French bourgeoisie, ostensibly to secure the annulment of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. And the Soviet government will certainly not help the German imperialists by attempting to violate the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, to tear it up at a moment when the anti-imperialist forces in Germany are beginning to seethe and boil, and when the spokesmen for the German bourgeoisie are beginning to excuse themselves to their people for having concluded such a peace treaty, and to search for a way of “changing” their policy.
But the workers of Russia are not merely following events with attention and enthusiasm. They are demanding that everything be done to help the German workers, who have the gravest trials ahead of them, a most difficult transition from slavery to freedom, a most stubborn struggle against their own and British imperialism. The defeat of German imperialism will for a while have the effect of increasing the insolence, brutality, reaction, and annexatory attempts of British and French imperialism.
The Bolshevik working class of Russia has always been internationalist in action, unlike those scoundrels, the heroes and leaders of the Second International, who either resorted to outright betrayal by forming an alliance with their bourgeoisie, or tried, by phrase-mongering and excuses (as Kautsky, Otto Bauer and Co. did), to avoid revolution, and opposed all bold and great revolutionary action, all sacrifice of narrow national interests for the sake of furthering the workers’ revolution.
The Russian workers will understand that very soon they will have to make the greatest sacrifices in the cause of internationalism. The time is approaching when circumstances may require us to come to the aid of the German people, who are struggling for their liberation from their own imperialism, against British and French imperialism.
Let us begin to prepare at once. Let us show that the Russian worker is capable of working much harder, of fighting and dying much more self-sacrificingly, when the world workers’ revolution is at stake, as well as the Russian revolution.
First of all, let us multiply our efforts in storing up grain stocks. Let us resolve that every large elevator will put aside some grain to help the German workers should they be hard pressed in their struggle for emancipation from the imperialist monsters and brutes. Let every Party organisation, every trade union, every factory and workshop, etc., form special connections with several rural areas of their own selection with the object of strengthening the alliance with the peasants, helping and enlightening them, vanquishing the kulaks, and gathering up all surpluses of grain to the last ounce.
Let us, similarly, multiply our efforts in creating a proletarian Red Army. The turning-point has arrived- we all know it, we all see and feel it. The workers and labouring peasants have had a respite from the horrors of imperialist slaughter, they have realised and learnt from experience that war must be waged against the oppressors in defence of the gains of their revolution, the revolution of the working people, of their government, the Soviet government. An army is being created, a Red Army of workers and poor peasants, who are prepared to make any sacrifice in defending socialism. The army is growing in strength and is being tempered in battle with the Czechs and whiteguards. A firm foundation has been laid, and we must now hurry to erect the edifice itself.
We had decided to have an army of one million men by the spring; now we need an army of three million. We can have it. And we shall have it.
In these past few days world history has given tremendous momentum to the world workers’ revolution. The most kaleidoscopic changes are possible, there may be attempts to form an alliance between German and Anglo-French imperialism against the Soviet government.
And we too must speed up our preparations. We must multiply our efforts.
Let this be the slogan for the anniversary of the Great October Workers’ Revolution!
Let it be a pledge to the coming victories of the world workers’ revolution!
N. Lenin

Endnotes
[1]  The letter was read at a joint session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and representatives of factory committees and trade unions held on October 3 on Lenin’s proposal in connection with the political crisis in Germany. The resolution adopted at the session incorporated the main ideas contained in Lenin’s letter. 



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## The Proletarian Revolution And the
Renegade Kautsky









The Proletarian Revolution And The Renegade Kautsky


 Vladimir Lenin
The Proletarian Revolution And The Renegade Kautsky 
Written: 10 October, 1918. First Published 11 October, 1918 Pravda No. 219,; Published according to the manuscript Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 104-112 Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters Online Version: V.I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002 
This is the title of a pamphlet I have begun to write in criticism of Kautsky’s pamphlet, The Dictatorship of the Proletariat, which has just appeared in Vienna. But as this work is taking longer than I had anticipated, I have decided to ask Pravda to find space for a short article on the subject.
Over four years of a most exhausting and reactionary war have done their work. One can feel the impending proletarian revolution in Europe—in Austria, Italy, Germany, France and even in Britain (very significant, for example, is the article “Confessions of a Capitalist” in the July number of the arch-opportunist Socialist Review, edited by the semi-liberal Ramsay MacDonald).
And at a time like this, Mr. Kautsky, leader of the Second International, comes out with a book on the dictatorship of the proletariat-in other words, on the proletarian revolution—that is a hundred times more disgraceful, outrageous and renegade than Bernstein’s notorious Premises of Socialism. Nearly twenty years have elapsed since the appearance of that renegade book, and now Kautaky repeats this renegacy in an even grosser form!
Only a very small part of the book deals with the Russian Bolshevik revolution as such. Kautsky repeats every one of the Mensheviks’ pearls of wisdom in a way that would make the Russian worker split his sides laughing. Just imagine, for example, what goes by the name of “Marxism": the argument—peppered with quotations from the semi-liberal works by the semi-liberal Maslov—that the rich peasants are trying to appropriate the land (novel!), that they find high grain prices profitable, and so on. Then our “Marxist” makes the following contemptuous, and utterly liberal, statement: “The poor peasant is recognised here [that is, by the Bolsheviks in the Soviet Republic] to be a permanent and wholesale product of the socialist agrarian reform under the ’dictatorship of the proletariat’.” (P. 48 of Kautsky’s pamphlet.)
Fine. Here is a socialist, a Marxist, who tries to prove to us the bourgeois nature of the revolution, and who at the same time scoffs at the organisation of the poor peasants, quite in the spirit of Maslov, Potresov and the Cadets.
“The expropriation of the rich peasants only introduces a new element of unrest and civil war into the production process, which urgently needs peace and security for its recovery.” (P. 49.)
Incredible, but there we are. These are the very words, not of Savinkov or Milyukov, but of Kantsky!
Kautsky does not surprise us since we in Russia have seen so many cases of “Marxism” being used as a screen by defenders of the kulaks. For the benefit of the European reader, I should perhaps dwell in greater detail on this despicable kowtowing to the bourgeoisie and the liberal fear of civil war. But for the Russian worker and peasant it is enough to point one’s finger at Kautsky’s renegacy—and pass on.
* * *
Nearly nine-tenths of Kautsky’s book is devoted to a general theoretical question of the utmost importance, the question of the relation between the dictatorship of the proletariat and “democracy”. And it is here that Kautsky’s complete break with Marxism is particularly evident.
Kautsky assures his reader-in a perfectly serious and extremely “learned” tone-that what Marx meant by “revolutionary dictatorship of the proletariat” was not a “form of governing” that precludes democracy, but. a state, namely, “a state of rule”. And the rule of the proletariat, as the majority of the population, is possible with the strictest observance of democracy, and, for instance, the Paris Commune, which was in fact a dictatorship of the proletariat, was elected by universal suffrage. “The fact that Marx thought that in England and America the transition [to communism] might take place peacefully, i.e., in a democratic way, proves” that when he spoke of the dictatorship of the proletariat Marx did not have in mind a “form of governing” (or a form of government, Regierungsform) (pp. 20-21).
Incredible, but there we are! That is exactly the way Kautsky argues and he angrily accuses the Bolsheviks of violating “democracy” in their Constitution and throughout their policy; and he takes every opportunity to energetically preach “the democratic instead of the dictatorial method”.
This is a complete desertion to the opportunists (those like David, Kolb and other pillars of German social-chauvinism, or the English Fabians and Independents, or the French and Italian reformists), who have declared more frankly and honestly that they do not accept Marx’s doctrine of the dictatorship of the proletariat on the ground that it runs counter to democracy.
It is a complete reversion to the views of the pre-Marxist German socialists, who used to claim they wanted a “free people’s state”, to the views of the petty-bourgeois democrats, who did not understand that every state is a machine for the suppression of one class by another.
It is a complete renunciation of the proletarian revolution, which is replaced by the liberal theory of “winning a majority” and “utilising democracy"! Kautsky the renegade has completely forgotten, distorted and thrown overboard everything Marx and Engels taught for forty years, from 1852 to 1891, demonstrating the need for the proletariat to “smash” the bourgeois state machine.
To analyse Kautsky’s theoretical mistakes in detail would mean repeating what I have said in The State and Revolution.  There is no need for that. I shall only say briefly:
Kautsky has renounced Marxism by forgetting that every state is a machine for the suppression of one class by another, and that the most democratic bourgeois republic is a machine for the oppression of the proletariat by the bourgeoisie.
The dictatorship of the proletariat, the proletarian state, which is a machine for the suppression of the bourgeoisie by the proletariat, is not a “form of governing”, but a state of a different type. Suppression is necessary because the bourgeoisie will always furiously resist being expropriated.
(The argument that Marx in the seventies allowed for the possibility of a peaceful transition to socialism in England and America[1] is completely fallacious, or, to put it bluntly, dishonest in that it is juggling with quotations and references. Firstly, Marx regarded it as an exception even then. Secondly, in those days monopoly capitalism, i.e., imperialism, did not exist. Thirdly, in England and America there was no militarist clique then—as there is now—serving as the chief apparatus of the bourgeois state machine.)
You cannot have liberty, equality and so on where there is suppression. That is why Engels said: “So long as the proletariat still needs the state, it does not need it in the interests of freedom but in order to hold down its adversaries, and as soon as it becomes possible to speak of freedom the state as such ceases to exist.[2]”
Bourgeois democracy, which is invaluable in educating the proletariat and training it for the struggle, is always narrow, hypocritical, spurious and false; it always remains democracy for the rich and a swindle for the poor.
Proletarian democracy suppresses the exploiters, the bourgeoisie—and is therefore not hypocritical, does not promise them freedom and democracy—and gives the working people genuine democracy. Only Soviet Russia has given the proletariat and the whole vast labouring majority of Bussia a freedom and democracy unprecedented, impossible and inconceivable in any bourgeois democratic republic, by, for example, taking the palaces and mansions away from the bourgeoisie (without which freedom of assembly is sheer hypocrisy), by taking the print-shops and stocks of paper away from the capitalists (without which freedom of the press for the nation’s labouring majority is a lie), and by replacing bourgeois parliamentarism by the democratic organisation of the Soviets, which are a thousand times nearer to the people and more democratic than the most democratic bourgeois parlaiment. And oi on.
Kautsky has thrown overboard ... the “class
      struggle” as applied to democracy! Kauisky has become a
      downright renegade and a lackey of the bourgeoisie.
*   *   *
I must mention, in passing, a few gems of his renegacy. 

    

      Kautsky has to admit that the Soviet form of organisation is of
      world-wide, and not only of Russian significance, that it is one
      of the “most important phenomena of our times”, and
      that it promises to acquire “decisive significance”
      in the future great “battles between capital and
      labour”. But, imitating the wisdom of the Mensheviks, who
      have happily sided with the bourgeoisie against the proletariat,
      Kautsky “deduces” that the Soviets are all right as
      “battle organisations”, but not as “state
      organisations”.
Marvellous! Form up in Soviets, you proletarians and poor peasants! But, for God’s sake, don’t you dare win! Don’t even think of winning! The moment you will and vanquish the bourgeoisie, that will be the end of you; for you must not be “state” organisations in a proletarian state. In fact, as soon as you have won you must break up!
What a marvellous Marxist this man Kautsky is! What an inimitable “theoretician” of renegacy!
Gem No. 2. Civil war is the “mortal enemy” of “social revolution”, for, as we have already heard, the latter “needs peace [for I lie rich?] and security” (for the capitalists?).
Workers of Europe, don’t think of revolution until you have found a bourgeoisie who will not hire Savinkov and Dan, Dutov and Krasnov, Czechs and kulaks to wage civil war on you!
Marx wrote in 1870 that the chief hope lay in the practice in arms that the war had given the French workers.[3] What Kautsky the “Marxist” expects of four years of war is not the use of arms by the workers against the bourgeoisie (Heaven forbid, that wouldn’t really be “democratic"!), but ... the conclusion of a nice little peace by the nice little capitalists!
Gem No. 3. Civil war has another unpleasant side to it: whereas “democracy” provides for the “protection of the minority” (as-we might note in parenthesis-those in France who stood up for Dreyfus, and people like Liebknecht, Maclean or Debs in more recent times, have learned so well from their own experience), civil war (mark that!) “threatens the vanquished with complete annihilation”.
Well, isn’t this man Kautsky a real revolutionary? He is heart and soul for revolution ... provided there is no serious struggle threatening annihilation! He has completely “overcome” the old errors of old Engels, who so enthusiastically lauded the educational value of violent revolutions.[4] Like the “serious” historian he is, he has completely renounced the delusions of those who said that civil war steels the exploited and teaches them to build a new society without exploiters.
Gem No. 4. Viewed historically, was the dictatorship of the workers and petty bourgeoisie in the 1789 Revolution great and beneficial? Certainly not. For along came Napoleon. “The dictatorship of the lower sections of the population paves the way for the dictatorship of the sword” (p. 26). Like all liberals, to whose camp lie has deserted, our “serious” historian is firmly convinced that in countries which have not known the “dictatorship of the lower sections"-Germany, for example-there has never been a dictatorship of the sword. Germany has never been distinguished from France by a grosser and viler dictatorship of the sword-that is all slander thought up by Marx and Engels, who brazenly lied when they said that there have so far been a greater love of freedom and a greater pride of the oppressed among the “people” in France than in England or Germany, and that it was precisely her revolutions that France has to thank for this.
But enough! One would have to write a whole pamphlet to enumerate all the gems of renegacy of that despicable renegade Kautsky.
* * *
I must say a word or two about Mr. Kautsky’s “internationalisni”. He inadvertently cast light upon it himself by his most sympathetic way of portraying the internationalism of the Mensheviks, who, dear Mr. Kautsky assures us, were also Zimmerwaldists and, if you please, are “brothers” of the Bolsheviks!
Here is his lovely little picture of the “Zimmerwaldism” of the Mensheviks:
"The Menshevilcs wanted universal peace. They wanted all those in the war to accept the slogan: no annexations or indemnities. Until this would have been achieved, the Russian army, in their opinion, should have maintained itself in a stale of fighting readiness But! the wretched Bolsheviks “disorganised” the army and concluded the wretched Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty .... ..And Kautsky says as clear as clear can he that the Constituent Assembly should have been preserved, and the Bolsheviks should not have taken power.
So internationalism means supporting one’s “own” imperialist government, as the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries supported Kerensky, it means concealing its secret treaties, hoodwinking the people with fancy phrases, such as that we “demand” the savage beasts be tame, we “demand” the imperialist governments “accept the slogan of no annexations or indemnities”.
That, in Kautsky’s opinion, is internationalism.
In our opinion it is sheer renegacy.
Internationalism means breaking with one’s own social chauvinists (i.e., defence advocates) and with one’s own imperialist government; it means waging a revolutionary struggle against that government and overthrowing it, and being ready to make the greatest national sacrifices (even down to a Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty), if it should benefit the development of the world workers’ revolution.
We all know very well that Kautsky and his friends (Strobel, Bernstein, and the rest) were greatly “put out” by the Brest-Litovsk Peace: they would have liked us to have made a “gesture” ... that would at once have turned over power in Russia to the bourgeoisie! These dim-witted but all too nice and kind German petty bourgeois were not interested in the proletarian Soviet Republic—the first country in the world to overthrow its imperialism by revolutionary means—maintaining itself until the revolution took place in Europe, fanning the flames of the conflagration in other countries (the petty bourgeoisie dread a conflagration in Europe, they dread civil war, which would disturb “peace and security"). No, what interested them was to maintain in all countries the petty-bourgeois nationalism which calls itself “internationalism” because of its “moderation and propriety”. If only the Russian Republic had remained bourgeois and ... had waited ... then everybody on earth would have een a good, moderate, non-predatory, petty-bourgeois nationalist—and that, in fact, would have been internationalism!
That is the line of thought of the Kautskyites in Germany, the Longuetists in France, the Independents (I.L.P.) in England, Turati and his “comrades” in renegacy in Italy, and the rest of the crowd.
By now only an utter idiot can fail to see that we were not only right in overthrowing our bourgeoisie (and their lackeys, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries), but also in concluding the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty after our open appeal for universal peace, backed by the publication and annulment of the secret treaties, had been rejected by the bourgeoisie of the Entente. In the first place, if we had not concluded the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, we would at once have surrendered power to the Russian bourgeoisie and thus have done untold damage to the world socialist revolution. In the second place, at the cost of national sacrifices, we preserved such an international revolutionary influence that today we have Bulgaria directly imitating us, Austria and Germany in a state of ferment, both imperialist systems weakened, while we have grown stronger and begun to create a real proletarian army.
From the tactics of Kautsky the renegade it follows that the German workers should now defend their homeland together with the bourgeoisie and dread a German revolution most of all, for the British might impose a new edition of the Brest-Litovsk Peace on it. There’s renegacy for you. There’s petty-bourgeois nationalism.
We, however, say that while the loss of the Ukraine was a grave national sacrifice, it helped to steel and strengthen the workers and poor peasants of the Ukraine as revolutionary fighters for the world workers’ revolution. The Ukraine’s suffering was the world revolution’s gain, for the German troops were corrupted, German imperialism was weakened, and the German, Ukrainian and Russian revolutionary workers were drawn closer together.
It would of course he “nicer” if we could overthrow both Wilhelm and Wilson simply by war. But that is utter nonsense. We cannot overthrow them by a war from without. But we can speed up their internal disintegration. We have achieved that on an immense scale by the Soviet, proletarian revolution.
The German workers would do it even more successfully if they began a revolution disregarding national sacrifices (that alone is internationalism), if they said (and backed their word by actions) that they prize the interests of the world workers’ revolution higher than the integrity, security and peace of any national state, and of their own in particular.
* * *
Europe’s greatest misfortune and danger is that it has no revolutionary party. It has parties of traitors like the Scheidemanns, Henaudels, Hendersons, Webbs and Co., and of servile souls like Kautsky. But it has no revolutionary party.
Of course, a mighty, popular revolutionary movement may rectify this deficiency, but it is nevertheless a serious misfortune and a grave danger.
That is why we must do our utmost to expose renegades like Kautsky, thereby supporting the revolutionary groups of genuine internationalist workers, who are to be found in all countries. The proletariat will very soon turn away from the traitors and renegades and follow these groups, drawing and training leaders from their midst. No wonder the bourgeoisie of all countries are howling about “world Bolshevism”.
World Bolshevism will conquer the world bourgeoisie.
N. Lenin 
Endnotes
[1] Marx referred to this possibility in his letter to Kugelmann of April 12, 1871 (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, pp. 318-19), and in his speech on the Hague Congress delivered at a meeting in Amsterdam on September 8, 1872 (Marx/Engels, Werke, Pd. 18, Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1962, p. 160). See also Engels's preface to the English edition of Volume I of Capital (Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, Moscow, 1959, p. 6). p. 107
[2] Man and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, p. 357.
[3] Ibid., p. 307.
[4] Engels, Anti-Duhrlng, Moscow, 1959, pp. 253-54. p. 109 
Collected Works Volume 28 Collected Works Table of Contents Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Report At a Joint Session Of the
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And
Trade Unions, October 22, 1918









Resolution Adopted At A Joint Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, The Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And Trade Unions



Vladimir Lenin
Report at a Joint Session off the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee,
The Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees and Trade 
      Unions[1]
October 22, 1918


Written: 22 October, 1918.
 First Published  Newspaper reports published October 23, 1918 in Pravda No. 229 and Izvestia No. 231; Published in full in 1919 in the book All-Russia Central Executive Committee, Fifth Convocation. Verbatim Report, Moscow; Published according to the book checked with the verbatim report and the newspaper texts
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 113-126
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    

(Stormy, prolonged applause and shouts of
    “hurrah”.) Comrades, I think our present
    situation, for all its contradictions might be expressed by
    saying, firstly, that never before have we been so near the world
    workers’ revolution, and, secondly, that never have we been
    in such a perilous position. It is these two propositions,
    especially the second, that I want to go into today. I think the
    people at large scarcely realise the full danger bearing down on
    us, and as we can only act with popular support, the chief task of
    the representatives of the Soviet government is to bring home to
    the people the full truth of the present situation, however
    difficult this may sometimes be. As far as our being near the
    world socialist revolution is concerned, I shall be brief since it
    has been spoken about time and again. Indeed, one of the chief
    reproaches levelled at the Soviet government both by the
    bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie who have lost faith in
    socialism, as well as by many so-called socialists who are used to
    times of peace and never did believe in socialism, is that we are
    taking a rash step in carrying through the socialist revolution in
    Russia, for the revolution in the West is not yet ripe.
Comrades, this is the fifth year of the war and the universal
    collapse of imperialism is as plain as can be; everyone can now
    see revolution must come in every country in the war. And we, who
    were not given more than a few days or weeks at the beginning,
    have done more in this year of revolution than any proletarian
    party in the world has ever done. Our revolution has become a
    world-wide phenomenon. Even the entire bourgeoisie say that
    Bolshevism is a world-wide phenomenon. This admission goes to show
    that our revolution has spread from the East to the West and is
    falling on more and more receptive soil. You know that revolution
    has flared up in Bulgaria. The Bulgarian soldiers have begun to
    form Soviets. And now news has come that Soviets are being set up
    in Serbia too. Even though the Anglo-French Entente is promising
    the peoples thousands of blessings if they rebel and break with
    Germany, even though the capitalists of America, Britain and
    France, the richest and most powerful in the world, are so lavish
    with their promises, it is becoming obvious that the bourgeoisie
    of the various small countries into which Austria is now
    disintegrating cannot hold out under any circumstances, that their
    rule and power in these countries will be short-lived and
    transitory, for the workers’ revolution is knocking on the
    door everywhere.
The bourgeoisie of individual countries know that the only way
    they can hold on to power in their states is with the help of
    foreign bayonets. And we see that revolution has begun not only in
    Austria, but even in Germany, both of whose positions seemed so
    stable only a little while ago. News has come that the German
    press is already talking about the Kaiser’s abdication and
    that the press of the Independent
    Social-Democratic Party has already received permission from
    the Chancellor to talk about a German republic. That certainly is
    something. We know demoralisation is increasing among the troops
    and that there are direct appeals for an army mutiny. We know that
    revolutionary military committees have been set up in Eastern
    Germany and that they are issuing revolutionary publications which
    are stirring up the soldiers. There is therefore every
    justification to say that revolution is growing in leaps and
    bounds. And we are not the only ones to say so; it is being said
    by all Germans in the war party and among the bourgeoisie who feel
    that the ministers are tottering, that the people do not trust
    them, and that they and their government will not hold on much
    longer. That is what everybody who knows anything about the state
    of affairs is saying, which just goes to show how inevitable a
    popular revolution, and perhaps a proletarian revolution, has
    become in Germany.
We know very well what an immense workers’ movement has
    sprung up in other countries as well. We saw how Gompers went to
    Italy and, with Entente money and the help of all the Italian
    bourgeoisie and social-patriots, toured every town in Italy
    calling upon the Italian workers to carry on the imperialist
    war. We saw how the Italian socialist papers wrote articles about
    this in which all that was left was Gompers’s name, after
    the censor had deleted everything else; or articles which jeered:
    “Gompers is banqueting and tonguewagging.” And the
    bourgeois papers admitted Gompers was hissed everywhere. The
    bourgeois papers wrote: “The Italian workers are behaving as
    if they would allow only Lenin and Trotsky to tour Italy.”
    During the war the Italian
    Socialist Party has made tremendous strides forward, that is,
    to the left. We know there have been too many patriots among the
    workers in France; they were told that Paris and French territory
    were in grave danger. But there, too, the workers’ attitude
    is changing. There were cries of “Hurrah for the Socialist
    Republic!” at the last congress,[2] when a letter was
    read about what the Allies, the British and French imperialists,
    were doing. And yesterday news was received that a meeting had
    been held in Paris attended by two thousand metalworkers, which
    hailed the Soviet Republic in Russia. We see that of the three
    socialist parties in Great Britain,[3]  only one, the
    Independent Socialist Party, is not openly supporting the
    Bolsheviks, whereas the British Socialist Party and the Socialist
    Labour Party of Scotland have definitely prociaimd their support
    for the Bolsheviks. Bolshevism is also beginning to spread in
    Britain. And the Spanish parties are hailing the Russian
    Bolsheviks at their congresses[4] although they had
    formerly sided with British and French imperialism and had had
    only one or two men on the outbreak of the war with even a remote
    conception of what internationalists were. Bolshevism has become
    the worldwide theory and tactics of the international proletariat!
    (Applause.) It has accomplished a thoroughgoing socialist
    revolution for all the world to see. To be for or against the
    Bolsheviks is actually the dividing line among socialists. As a
    result of what Bolshevism has done, a programme for the creation
    of a workers’ state is the vital question of the
    day. Workers who had no idea of what was going on in Russia,
    because they only read the bourgeois papers which were full of
    lies and slander, began to realise, on seeing the workers’
    government winning one victory after another over its
    counter-revolutionaries, that our tactics and the revolutionary
    form of action of our workers’ government was the only way
    out of this war. Last Wednesday there was a demonstration in
    Berlin, and the workers expressed their disgust with the Kaiser by
    trying to march past his palace; then they proceeded to the
    Russian Embassy to express their solidarity with the actions of
    the Russian Government.
That is what Europe has come to in this fifth year of war! That
    is why we say we have never been so near the world revolution, it
    has never been so obvious that the Russian workers have
    established their might. It is clear that millions and scores of
    millions of workers of the world will follow our example. That is
    why, I repeat, we have never been so near the world revolution,
    and never have we been in such a perilous position, because this
    is the first time Bolshevism has been regarded as a world
    force. It had seemed to be only a result of the fatigue of the
    Russian soldiers, an outburst of discontent on the part of the
    war-weary Russian soldiers; it had seemed that as soon as this
    discontent had passed and peace had been established, even a peace
    of the most coercive character, all steps towards building a new
    state and towards socialist reforms would have been
    crushed. Everyone had been certain of that, but it turned out that
    as soon as we emerged from the imperialist war, which ended in
    very harsh peace terms, to take the first steps in building our
    state, as soon as we were able to give the peasants a real chance
    of living without landowners, of establishing relations against
    the landowners, and of convincing themselves in practice that they
    were building their own lives on the expropriated land, really for
    the labouring people and not for the kulaks or the new
    capitalists; as soon as the workers saw they had a chance to build
    their lives without capitalists and learn that difficult but great
    business without which they will never escape from exploitation-it
    became obvious to all, and was shown in practice, that no force,
    no counter-revolution could overthrow the Soviet government.
It took months before we in Russia arrived at this
    conviction. It is said that in the countryside it was only in the
    summer of 1918, only towards autumn, that the peasants came to
    realise the meaning and significance of our revolution. In the
    town this was realised some time ago, but it took many a long
    month for it to reach every district, every remote rural area and
    village, for the peasant to see from his own experience, not from
    books or speeches, that the land has to go to those who till it,
    and not to the kulak, and that the kulak has to be fought, has to
    be defeated by organisation, that the revolts which swept over the
    country this summer were supported by the landowners, kulaks and
    whiteguards; to learn from his own bitter experience, at his own
    cost, what the rule of the Constituent Assembly meant. And now,the
    countryside is emerging steeled and tempered, and the mass of poor
    peasants, who do not exploit the labour of others, have only now
    learnt from their own experience, not from books, from which the
    working people will never derive firm convictions, that Soviet
    government means thegovernment of the exploited working people,
    and that now every village can proceed to lay the foundations of a
    new, socialist Russia.
It took many long months for us to be able to say with
    conviction, basing ourselves on the reports of people with
    practical experience, that after 1918 in the rest of Russia, too,
    in every village, however remote, the people know what Soviet
    government means and uphold it. For the peasants have seen what a
    menace the capitalists and landowners are. They have also seen the
    difficulties of the socialist transformation, yet were not
    deterred; they said: “We shall put our millions of hands to
    this work; we have learnt a lot in a year, and we shall learn even
    more.” This is what scores of millions in Russia are now
    saying with full conviction, on the basis of their own
    experience.
This is just getting through to the West-European bourgeoisie
    as well. Up to now they had not taken the Bolsheviks seriously;
    now they begin to realise that the only stable form of state has
    been set up here, a state which works hand in hand with the
    working people and can rouse them to real heroic
    self-sacrifice. And when this workers’ state began to infect
    Europe, it turned out that this was by no means something peculiar
    to Russia alone, and that four years of war had caused
    demoralisation of the armies all over the world. Before, they used
    to say that owing to her backwardness and inefficiency, only
    Russia had reached such a stage when her army had fallen to pieces
    in the fourth year of war, and that this could never happen in
    civilised, parliamentary countries.
Now, however, everybody can see that after four years of world
    war, when millions have been slaughtered and crippled for the
    profit of the capitalists, and when there are tens of thousands of
    deserters, this extraordinary thing is happening in Austria as
    well as Russia, and even in Germany, which boasts of her good
    order. When that happened, the world bourgeoisie realised they had
    to contend with a more serious enemy, and they began to rally
    together; and the nearer we approached the world workers’
    revolution, the more the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie rallied
    together.
In some countries people are still ignoring revolution, just as
    in October the coalition ministers ignored the Bolsheviks and said
    Russia would never fall under Bolshevik rule. In France, for
    example, they say the Bolsheviks are a gang of traitors who are
    selling their people to the Germans. The French bourgeoisie are
    more to be excused for saying that than the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, for it is only to be expected that the
    bourgeoisie will spend millions on fabricating lies. But when the
    French bourgeoisie saw Bolshevism developing in France and even
    non-revolutionary parties backing the Bolsheviks with
    revolutionary slogans, they saw they were confronted with a more
    formidable enemythe collapse of imperialism and the superiority of
    the workers in the revolutionary struggle.
Everyone knows that the danger to the workers’ revolution
    is particularly great just now owing to the imperialist war,
    because the workers’ revolution develops unevenly in
    different countries, since the crnditions of political life
    differ. In one country the proletariat is too weak and in another
    it is stronger. In one country the top section of workers is weak,
    and in other countries the bourgeoisie are able to split the ranks
    of the workers for a time as was the case in Britain and
    France. That is why the workers’ revolution develops
    unevenly, and that is why the’ bourgeoisie recognised that
    their most powerful enemy is the’revolutionary
    proletariat. They are rallying together to ward off the collapse
    of world imperialism.
Now our situation has changed and events are moving
    tremendously fast. At first there were two groups of imperialist
    marauders who tried to annihilate each other, but now they
    see-especially by the example of German imperialism, which had
    only recently considered itself the match of Britain and
    France-that their chief enemy is the revolutionary
    proletariat. Now, when Germany is being torn apart by the
    revolutionary movement at home, the British and French
    imperialists consider themselves masters of the world. They are
    convinced their chief enemy is the Bolsheviks and the world
    revolution. The more the revolution develops, the more the
    bourgeoisie rally together. That is why some of us, and many
    especially among the people at large, who are now convinced they
    can defeat our counter-revolutionaries—the Cossacks,
    officers and Czechs—and think that settles everything, do
    not realise this is not enough for us now, that there is a new
    enemy, a far more formidable one: British and French
    imperialism. So far this enemy has not had very much success in
    Russia, as, for example, in the case of the Archangel landing. A
    French writer who published a newspaper called periodicals La
    Victoire  said that victory over the Germans was not
    enough for France, that she also needed victory over Bolshevism,
    and that the campaign against Russia was not an attack on Germany,
    but a campaign against the Bolshevik revolutionary proletariat and
    against the contagion that is spreading all over the world.
That is why a new danger has appeared, a danger which has not
    yet fully developed and is not yet fully apparent, a danger which
    the British and French imperialists are plotting surreptitiously
    and which we must clearly realise so as to open the people’s
    eyes to it through their leaders. For although it is true the
    British and French have not achieved any great success in Siberia
    or in Archangel—in fact they have suffered a number of
    setbacks—they are now directing their efforts for an attack
    on Russia from the South, either through the Dardanelles and the
    Black Sea, or else overland, through Bulgaria and Rumania. As they
    keep their moves a military secret, we cannot tell how far
    advanced the preparations for this campaign are, and which of the
    two plans, or perhaps even a third, has been selected; there lies
    the danger, for we cannot know for certain. But we do know
    absolutely for certain that these preparations are being made, for
    the newspapers of these countries are not always very cautious,
    and now and again some journalist openly announces the chief aims,
    and discards all the false talk about a league of nations.
Among the German ruling circles, we now clearly perceive two
    tendencies, two plans of salvation-if salvation is still
    possible. Some say: Let us play for time and keep going until
    spring, and perhaps we may yet be able to put up military
    resistance along the fortified line. Others see their chief hope
    of salvation in Britain and France; they concentrate on reaching
    an agreement with Britain and France against the Bolsheviks; their
    attention is centred on this. And while it is true that Wilson now
    replies to peace overtures with a blunt and contemptuous refusal,
    this is scarcely enough to induce the party of the German
    capitalists who are seeking agreement with Britain to renounce
    their plans. They know that agreements are sometimes reached
    tacitly, and that they may be rewarded if they are of service to
    the British and French capitalists against the Bolsheviks. In
    capitalist society they do pay for services rendered. They think:
    “Perhaps if we help the British and French capitalists grab
    something, they will leave a portion of the spoils for us.”
    One good turn deserves another—such are the ethics of the
    capitalist world. And I think that in laying claim to a certain
    share of British and French capital, these people know what they
    are up to and are counting on billions, no less. Some of these
    gentlemen are past masters at this sort of calculations.
A tacit bargain has most definitely been struck between the
    German bourgeoisie and that of the Entente powers. The gist of it
    is that the British and French say to the Germans: “We shall
    get to the Ukraine, but don’t withdraw your troops until our
    occupational forces arrive, otherwise the workers will take power
    and the Soviet government will triumph there too.” That is
    the way they reason, for they realise that the bourgeoisie of all
    the occupied countriesFinland, the Ukraine, Poland—know they
    cannot hold out for a single day if ’the German army of
    occupation withdraws. And that is why the bourgeoisie of these
    countries-which yesterday sold themselves to the Germans, went cap
    in hand to the German imperialists and concluded an alliance with
    them against their own workers, just as the Ukrainian Mensheviks
    did and the Socialist-Revolutionaries did in Tiflisare now ready
    to sell their country to anybody. Yesterday they sold it to the
    Germans, and today they are selling it to the British and
    French. That is the sort of bargaining going on behind the
    scenes. Seeing that the British and French bourgeoisie are
    winning, they are all going over to them and preparing to make a
    deal with the British and French imperialists against us and at
    our expense.
When they tell their future Anglo-French multimillionaire
    master they are siding with him, they say: “Your Excellency
    will defeat the Bolsheviks, you must help us, because the Germans
    will not save us.” This conspiracy by the bourgeoisie of all
    countries against the revolutionary workers and the Bolsheviks is
    increasingly taking shape and becoming openly blatant. And it is
    our direct duty to indicate this danger to the workers and
    peasants of all countries in the war.
Take the Ukraine as an example. Imagine her position and what
    the workers and intelligent Communists must do in the present
    situation. On the one hand they see the indignation against the
    German imperialists, against the dreadful plunder of the Ukraine,
    and on the other they see that some of the German troops, the
    greater part perhaps, have been withdrawn. They may think of
    giving vent to their pent-up hatred and resentment by attacking
    the German imperialists at once, regardless of everything. But
    others say: “We are internationalists, we must look at
    things from the point of view both of Russia and of Germany; even
    from Germany’s point of view we know that the government
    there cannot hold out; we are firmly convinced that if the victory
    of the workers and peasants in the Ukraine is accompanied by the
    consolidation and success of the government of Russia, then
    socialist proletarian Ukraine will not only win but will be
    invincible!” Such intelligent Ukrainian Communists say: We
    must be very cautious. Tomorrow we may have to exert every effort
    and stake everything in the struggle against imperialism and the
    German troops. That may be so for tomorrow, but not for today; and
    today we know that the troops of the German imperialists are being
    demoralised, we know that beside the Ukrainian troops, the
    East-Prussian and German troops are publishing revolutionary
    literature.[5] At the same time, our chief task is to
    carry on propaganda for a revolt in the Ukraine. That is correct
    from the standpoint of the world revolution because Germany is the
    main link in this chain, since the German revolution is already
    ripe; and the success of the world revolution most of all depends
    on it.
We shall take care that our interference will not harm their
    revolution. One must understand the changes and growth of every
    revolution. The revolution proceeds in its own way in every
    country-we ought to know after seeing and experiencing it-and
    these ways are so diverse that it may be delayed for a year or
    two. World revolution is not so smooth as to proceed in the same
    way everywhere, in all countries. If it were, we should have been
    victorious long ago. Every country has to go through definite
    political stages. Everywhere we find the compromisers making the
    same efforts, the same attempts “to save the people from the
    bourgeoisie"in conjunction with the bourgeoisie. Tsereteli and
    Chernov did it here, and the Scheidemannites are doing it in
    Germany; in France they are doing it in their own way. And now
    that the revolution is making its way into Germany, the country
    where the workers’ movement is strongest, and where it is
    distinguished for its organisation and endurance, where the
    workers have been patient longest of all-but perhaps have
    accumulated more revolutionary hatred and are better able to
    settle scores with their enemies-interference in these events by
    people who do not know how fast the revolution is growing may
    hamper those intelligent Communists who say: “My prime
    purpose is to make this a deliberate process.” Now that the
    German soldier has seen that he is being driven to the slaughter
    on the pretext that he is going to defend his country, while in
    fact going to defend the German imperialists, the time is coming
    when the revolution will break out in Germany with such force and
    organisation as to solve a hundred international problems. That is
    why intelligent Ukrainian Communists say “We must make every
    sacrifice for the victory of the world revolution, but we should
    realise that the future depends on us and we must march in step
    with the German revolution.”
Those are the difficulties I wanted to point out, using the
    reasoning of the Ukrainian Communists as an example. These
    difficulties also affect Soviet Russia’s position. We can
    now say that the workers of the world have awoken and are making
    immense strides; but this makes our position all the more
    difficult, for our “ally” of yesterday is attacking us
    as his chief enemy. He is now out to fight international
    Bolshevism, not hostile armies. Now that Krasnov’s troops
    are mustering on the Southern Front (and we know they have
    received ammunition from the Germans), now that we have exposed
    imperialism in the eyes of the world, the people who blamed us for
    the Brest-Litovsk Peaceand sent Krasnov to get ammunition from the
    Germans with which to bombard the Russian workers and peasants,
    are currently getting ammunition from the British and French
    imperialists, auctioning off Russia to the highest millionaire
    bidder. That is why our general conviction that a change has set
    in is now not enough. We have our old enemies, and behind them new
    forces are now rallying to their aid. We know and see all
    that. Six months ago, in February or March, we had no army. The
    army could not fight. The army which had been through four years
    of imperialist war, without knowing what it was fighting for, but
    vaguely feeling that it was fighting in the interests of others,
    that army took to its heels, and no force on earth could stop
    it.
No revolution is worth anything unless it can defend itself;
    but a revolution does not learn to defend itself at once. The
    revolution has awakened millions to a new life. In February and
    March these millions did not know why they were being sent to
    continue the slaughter to which the tsars and the Kerenskys had
    driven them, and whose aim was exposed by the Bolshevik Government
    only in December. All they knew was that it was not their war, and
    nearly six months were required before a turn in the tide. This
    turn has now come; it is changing the force of the revolution. In
    February and March, the people, exhausted and tormented by four
    years of war, abandoned everything and said there must be peace
    and the war terminated. They were in no state to ask what the war
    was about. If these people have now created a new discipline in
    the Red Army, not the discipline of the rod and of the landowner
    but the discipline of the Soviets of Workers’ and
    Peasants’ Deputies; if they are now ready to make the
    greatest sacrifices; if a new unity has sprung up among them, it
    is because for the first time a new discipline, a socialist
    discipline, has been born in the minds and experience of tens of
    millions, a Red Army has been born. It was born only when these
    tens of millions of people saw from their own experience that they
    had overthrown the landowners and capitalists, that a new life was
    being built, that they had begun to build it themselves, and that
    they would get it built if they were not prevented by foreign
    invasion.
When the peasants saw who their chief enemy was and began the
    struggle against the village kulaks, when the workers overthrew
    the manufacturers and began to organise the factories in
    accordance with a proletarian principle of national economy, they
    saw all the difficulty this work of reorganisation entailed, but
    they proved equal to the task. It took months to get things
    going. These months have passed, and the turn has come. Gone is
    the time when we were impotent. We have begun to advance with
    giant strides. Gone is the time when we had no army and no
    discipline; a new discipline has been created, and new people are
    joining the army and laying down their lives by the thousand.
That means that the new discipline, the comradely alliance, has
    re-educated us in the struggle at the front and in the struggle in
    the countryside against the kulak. This turning-point has been a
    difficult one, but now we feel that things are beginning to move,
    and that we are passing from unorganised, decree-made socialism to
    true socialism. The chief task facing us is to fight imperialism,
    and this fight we must win. We make no secret of all the
    difficulty and danger this fight entails. We know that the tide of
    feeling has changed in the Red Army; it has begun to win
    victories, it is promoting from its ranks thousands of officers
    who have been through training courses in the new proletarian
    military colleges and thousands of other officers who have been
    through no other training than the hard training of war. Thus,
    without the least exaggeration, and fully recognising the danger,
    we can now say that we have an army; and this army has created
    discipline and has achieved fighting efficiency. Our Southern
    Front is not just a front-it is a front against British and French
    imperialism, against the most powerful foe in the world. But we
    are not afraid, for we know the foe will he unable to cope with
    its own enemy at home.
Three months ago, people used to laugh when we said there might
    be a revolution in Germany. They said that only half-crazy
    Bolsheviks could believe in a German revolution. Not only the
    entire bourgeoisie, but the Mensheviks and Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries as well, called the Bolsheviks traitors
    to patriotism and said that revolution in Germany was
    impossible. But we knew that our help was needed there, and that
    to render that help we had to sacrifice everything and consent
    even to the most onerous terms of peace. That was how these people
    were talking and trying to prove their point to us only a few
    months ago, but in these few months Germany, from a mighty empire,
    has become a rotten hulk. The force which has corroded it is
    operating in America and England as well; today it is weak, but
    with every step the British and French try to take in Russia, with
    every step they try to take to occupy the Ukraine, as the Germans
    did, this force will loom larger and larger and become even more
    formidable than the Spanish ’flu.
That, comrades, is why I repeat that the chief task of every
    class-conscious worker now is to reveal the whole truth, not to
    conceal anything from the people, who may not fully realise the
    acuteness of the situation. The workers are mature enough to be
    told the truth. We have to defeat world imperialism as well as the
    whiteguards. We have to defeat, and we shall defeat, not only that
    enemy, but an enemy even more formidable. And for this we need the
    Red Army more than anything else. Every organisation in Soviet
    Russia must always give its prime attention to the army. Today,
    when everything is clear, the war and the strengthening of the
    army must take first place. We are absolutely confident we shall
    cope with the counter-revolution. We know we have the forces, but
    we also know that British and French imperialism is stronger than
    we are, and we want the working people to realise this quite
    clearly. We say that the army must be ten times stronger, and
    more; we must go on strengthening discipline, and every
    class-conscious, enlightened, organised and genuine leader must
    show ten times more attention and concern for this. Then this
    growth of the world revolution will not be confined to the
    defeated countries. Revolution is now beginning in the victor
    countries as well. Our forces must grow daily, and this constant
    growth is, as it was, our chief and complete guarantee that world
    socialism will triumph!
(Comrade Lenin’s speech is repeatedly interrupted by
    loud applause and ends in ovation. All rise and greet the leader
    of the world revolution.)

Endnotes
[1]
    The session was held in the Hall of Columns of Trade Union House,
    Moscow. It discussed the international situation, the question of
    convening the Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets
    and the dispatch to the front of 300 participants in the
    session. Lenin spoke about the international situation for the
    first time since his recovery, P. G. Smidovich and Y. M. Sverdlov
    conveyed a message of greetings to those leaving for the
    front. The session adopted a 

      resolution drafted
by Lenin and endorsed with slight amendments by the Sixth
    Congress of Soviets on the basis of Lenin’s report on the
    international situation. The session unanimously decided to
    convene the Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets and
    approved the agenda for it. 
[2]
    At the Congress of the French Socialist Party, held in Paris from
    October 6-11, 1918, Longuet, one of the party leaders, read a
    letter from Captain Sadoul, a member of the French military
    mission in Russia, to Remain Rolland, in which he condemned the
    actions of the Entente in Russia. According to the Geneva
    correspondent of Pravda, “the letter produced an
    enormous impression. There were cries from the left: ’Long
    live the Soviet Republic!" (Pravda No. 221, October 13.)
    
[3]
    This refers to the British
    Socialist Party,  Socialist Labour Party  and Independent
    Labour Party.
[4]
    Reference is to the resolution unanimously adopted by the Eighth
    Congress of the Spanish workers, held in October 1918, to send
    greetings to the Soviet Republic. 
[5]
    This evidently means the Military Revolutionary Council which was
    established in the German army on the Eastern Front and which
    published the newspaper Krasny Soldat (Red Soldier).


Collected Works Volume 28 
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive








==========

## Resolution Adopted At a Joint
Session Of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet, Factory
Committees And Trade Unions, October 22, 1918









Resolution Adopted At A Joint Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, The Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And Trade Unions



Vladimir Lenin
Resolution Adopted At A Joint Session Of
The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, The Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees And Trade Unions
October 22, 1918


Presented: 22 October, 1918.
 First Published Izvestia No. 231 October 23, 1918; Published according to the manuscript

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 127-129
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002


 
      The proletarian and peasant revolutionary movement against the
      imperialist war has recently had tremendous successes in all
      countries, especially in the Balkans, Austria and Germany. These
      successes, however, have particularly embittered the
      international bourgeoisie, now headed by the Anglo-American and
      French bourgeoisie, and have forced them to make hasty efforts
      to organise themselves as a counter-revolutionary force for
      crushing the revolution and, above all for crushing Soviet power
      in Russia, which is the chief hotbed of revolution at present. 

    
 
      The German bourgeoisie and the German Government, defeated in
      the war and threatened by a mighty revolutionary movement from
      within, are threshing about in their search for salvation. One
      trend in the ruling circles of Germany still hopes by delays to
      gain time before the winter and to prepare for the
      country’s military defence on a new line of
      fortifications. Another trend is feverishly seeking agreement
      with the Anglo-French bourgeoisie against the revolutionary
      proletariat and the Bolsheviks. Since this trend is running up
      against the flat refusal of the victors, the Anglo-French
      imperialists, to strike a bargain, it is trying to frighten them
      with the Bolshevik danger and bribe them by offering its
      services against the Bolsheviks, against the proletarian
      revolution. 

    
 
      The bourgeoisie of the countries subordinated to Germany or
      occupied by her are still more eagerly seeking agreement with
      the Entente, especially in those cases—as, for example, in
      Finland, the Ukraine, etc.—where they are aware that it is
      completely impossible for them to maintain power over the
      exploited working people without the aid of foreign bayonets. 

    
 
      Owing to these circumstances, Soviet power finds itself in the
      following peculiar situation: on the one hand, we have never
      been so close to an international proletarian revolution as we
      are now; on the other hand, we have never been in such a
      perilous position as we are now. There are no longer two
      approximately equal groups of imperialist plunderers, devouring
      and weakening each other. There remains a single group of
      victors, the Anglo-French imperialists, which intends to divide
      the whole world among the capitalists. It intends to overthrow
      Soviet power in Russia at all costs and replace it by bourgeois
      power. It is preparing now to attack Russia from the South,
      through the Dardanelles and the Black Sea, for example, or
      through Bulgaria and Rumania. Moreover, at least a part of the
      Anglo-French imperialists evidently hope that the German
      Government, by a direct or tacit agreement with them, will
      withdraw its troops from the Ukraine only as the latter becomes
      occupied by Anglo-French troops, so as not to allow the
      otherwise inevitable victory of the Ukrainian workers and
      peasants and their establishment of a Ukrainian workers’
      and peasants’ government. 


 
      Behind the back of the Krasnov and whiteguard
      counter-revolutionaries, preparations are being made for an
      attack against us by a much more dangerous force, the force of
      the international counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, with the
      Anglo-American and French bourgeoisie in first place. This is a
      fact that is not realised everywhere and the awareness of which
      has not penetrated deep down among the broad mass of the workers
      and peasants. We must therefore tirelessly imbue this awareness
      in the people. The most assiduous attention must be devoted to
      strengthening the Southern Front and establishing and arming an
      incomparably mightier Red Army than we have now. Every
      workers’ organisation, every union of poor peasants, every
      Soviet institution must again and again give priority to the
      question of strengthening the army, and repeatedly re-examine
      whether we have done enough, and what new measures we could and
      should undertake. 

    
 
      A marked change has taken place in the mood of our workers and
      peasants. The people have overcome their extreme
      war-weariness. An army is being created and has been created. A
      new, communist discipline, a class-conscious discipline of the
      working people, has developed. And this fact gives us every
      reason to confidently expect that we can and will defend our
      socialist homeland and secure the victory of the international
      proletarian revolution. 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Rally In Honour Of the
Austro-Hungarian Revolution, November 3,1918









Speech At A Rally In Honour Of The Austro-Hungarian Revolution



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Rally
 In Honour Of
 The Austro-Hungarian Revolution
November 3, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 3 November, 1918.
 First Published:  5 November, 1918 Pravda No. 240,; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, page 130
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



(Storm of applause.) Events have shown that the people's sufferings have not been in vain.
We are not only fighting Russian capitalism. We are fighting the capitalism of all countries, world capitalismwe are fighting for the freedom of all workers.
Hard as it was for us to cope with famine and our enemies, we now see that we have millions of allies.
They are the workers of Austria, Hungary and Germany. While we are gathered here, Friedrich Adler is very likely on his way to Vienna after his release from prison. The first day of the Austrian workers' revolution is probably being celebrated on the squares of Vienna.
The time is near when the first day of the world revolution will be celebrated everywhere.
Our labour and sufferings have not been in vain! The world revolution will triumph!
Long live the world proletarian revolution! (Storm of applause.)


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Ceremonial Meeting Of
The All-Russia Central And Moscow Trade Union Councils, November 6,
  1918.









Speech At A Ceremonial Meeting Of The All-Russia Central And Moscow Trade Union Councils



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Ceremonial Meeting Of The
All-Russia Central And Moscow Trade Union Councils
November 6, 1918[1]
Newspaper report


Delivered: 6 November, 1918.
 First Published: Izvestia No. 244, November 9, 1918; Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 131-133
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    

(Those present rise and greet Comrade Lenin
    with stormy, prolonged applause.) People today are gathering
    at hundreds of meetings to celebrate the anniversary of the
    October Revolution. To those who have been in the workers’
    movement for some time, who were connected with the workers in the
    old days, and who had close contacts with the factories, it is
    clear that this past year has been one of genuine proletarian
    dictatorship. This concept used to be mysterious book Latin, a
    mouthful of incomprehensible words. Intellectuals sought an
    explanation of the concept in learned works, which only gave them
    a hazy notion of what the proletarian dictatorship was all
    about. The chief thing that stands to our credit during this past
    year is that we have translated these words from abstruse Latin
    into plain Russian. During this past year the working class has
    not been engaged in idle philosophising, but in the practical work
    of creating and exercising a proletarian dictatorship, despite the
    excited mental state of the intellectuals.
Capitalism still rules the roost in the West. But now the day
    of great upheavals is dawning there too. Today the West-European
    workers, too, are approaching the difficult period of transition
    from capitalism to socialism. They, like ourselves, will have to
    smash the entire old apparatus and build a new one.
We have not been able to utilise the whole store of experience,
    knowledge and technical training the bourgeois intellectuals
    had. The bourgeoisie sneered at the Bolsheviks and said the Soviet
    government would scarcely hold out for a fortnight; so they not
    only shirked co-operation, but wherever they could and with every
    means in their power put up resistance to the new movement, the
    new construction which was destroying the old order.
The resistance of the bourgeoisie has by no means ceased. It is
    growing more vindictive every day; the nearer the end of the old
    capitalist world approaches, the faster it grows.
Due to Bolshevism’s growing strength and the world-wide
    dimensions it is assuming, the international situation today could
    well cause an alliance of imperialists of all shades to attack the
    Soviet Republic; then bourgeois resistance would be international
    rather than national.

    

      Germany, as you know, has expelled our Ambassador from Berlin on
      the pretext that our mission in Germany was conducting
      revolutionary propaganda. As if the German Government did not
      know before that our Embassy was a carrier of the revolutionary
      contagion. If Germany said nothing about it before, it was
      because she was still strong and not afraid of us. But now,
      after her military collapse, she has begun to dread us. The
      German generals and capitalists are turning to the Allies and
      saying: “You may have beaten us, but don’t carry
      your experiments on us too far, for we are both menaced by world
      Bolshevism; and we might be useful in the fight against
      it.”
It is quite possible that the Allied imperialists may unite with the German imperialists for a joint campaign against Russia, provided, of course, the German imperialists still survive. That is why the danger that has surrounded us all through the past year is now looming larger than ever. But now we are not alone. We now have friends in the people who have already rebelled and those who are about to rebel and who are making it plain enough to their governments that they refuse to go on fighting for rapacious aims. Although a new stretch of very dangerous periods lies ahead, we shall continue our socialist construction. Past experience will help us avoid mistakes and lend us fresh strength in our further work.
The part played by the trade unions in the building of a new apparatus has been tremendous. The working class has shown that it is capable of organising industry without intellectuals or capitalists. Much has been done, but much still remains to be done. Comrades, carry on boldly along the path you have been following, and get more and more people to join in the work! Give all workers who are connected with the people and sincerely want the new system to take firm root, even though they may be illiterate, inexperienced and untrained-give them all, whether Party members or not, a chance to work and learn in the new proletarian state, to govern and create wealth.
The workers of the world will rise up, overthrow capitalism everywhere and consummate our work, which will lead to the complete victory of socialism! (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The Congress was held at the Bolshoi Theatre between November 6 and 9, 1918. Its opening coincided with the celebrations of the anniversary of the October Revolution. There were 1,296 delegates (963 with voting rights and 333 with voice but no vote), of whom 1.260 were Communists. The agenda included the following items: anniversary of the October Revolution, the international situation, military situation, building of Soviet power at the centre, Poor Peasants’ Committees and local Soviets. Lenin was elected honorary chairman of the Congress. After hearing Lenin's report on the anniversary of the October Revolution at the first sitting on November 6, the delegates sent greetings to the workers, peasants and soldiers of all countries and their leaders who were fighting for peace and socialism, and to the Red Army. On Sverdlov’s proposal the Congress adopted an appeal to the governments at war with Soviet Russia to start peace negotiations. In view of the strengthening of Soviet power and the victories of the Red Army the Congress adopted a decision on amnesty.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia
Congress Of Soviets Of Workers’, Peasants’, Cossacks’ And Red
Army Deputies, November 6-9, 1918.









Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets Of Workers', Peasants', Cossacks', And Red Army Deputies



Vladimir Lenin
Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress Of Soviets Of
      Workers’, Peasants’, Cossacks’and Red Army

    Deputies[1]
November 6-9, 1918


Presented: 6-9November, 1918
 First Published  Newspaper reports published in Izvestia No. 244, November 9, 1918, and in Pravda No. 243, November 10, 1918 First published in full in 1919 in the book Extraordinary Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. Verbatim Report Moscow; Published according to the book checked with the verbatim report and the pamphlet N. Lenin, World Imperialism and Soviet Russia, Moscow, 1919 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 135-164
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
    


Speech On The Anniversary Of The Revolution, November 6

Speech On The International Situation, November 8
Endnotes 

1
Speech On The Anniversary Of The Revolution
November 6, 19__ 
 (Comrade Lenin’s appearance in the hall
    is greeted with prolonged ovation.) Comrades, we are
    celebrating the anniversary of our revolution at a time when
    events of the utmost importance are taking place in the
    international working-class movement. It has become obvious even
    to the most sceptical and doubting elements of the working class
    and working people in general that the world war will end neither
    by agreements nor by coercion on the part of the old government
    and the old ruling bourgeois class, that this war is leading the
    whole world as well as Russia to a world proletarian revolution
    and to the workers’ triumph over capital. Capital drenched
    the earth in blood, and, after the violence and outrages of German
    imperialism, Anglo-French imperialism, supported by Austria and
    Germany, is pursuing the same policy. 
Today, when celebrating the anniversary of the revolution, it
    is fitting that we cast a glance back along the path traversed by
    the revolution. We began our revolution in unusually difficult
    conditions, such as no other workers’ revolution in the
    world will ever have to face. It is therefore particularly
    important that we endeavour to review the path we have covered as
    a whole, to take stock of our achievements during this period, and
    see to what extent we have prepared ourselves during the past year
    for our chief, our real, our decisive and fundamental task. We
    must be one of the detachments, one of the units of the world
    proletarian and socialist army. We have always realised that it
    was not on account of any merit of the Russian proletariat, or
    because it was in advance of the others, that we happened to begin
    the revolution, which grew out of world-wide struggle. On the
    contrary, it was only because of the peculiar weakness and
    backwardness of capitalism, and the peculiar pressure of military
    strategic circumstances, that we happened in the course of events
    to move ahead of the other detachments, while not waiting until
    they had caught us up and rebellEditor We are now making this
    review so as to take stock of our preparations for the battles
    that will face us in the coming revolution. 
And so, comrades, when we ask ourselves what big changes we
    have made over the past year, we call say the following: from
    workers’ control, the working class’s first steps, and
    from disposing of all the country’s resources, we are now on
    the threshold of creating a workers’ administration of
    industry; from the general peasants’ struggle for land, the
    peasants’ struggle against the landowners, a struggle that
    had a national, bourgeois-democratic character, we have now
    reached a stage where the proletarian and semi-proletarian
    elements in the countryside have set themselves apart: those who
    labour and are exploited have set themselves apart from the others
    and have begun to build a new life; the most oppressed country
    folk are fighting the bourgeoisie, including their own rural kulak
    bourgeoisie, to the bitter end. 
Furthermore, from the first steps of Soviet organisation we
    have now reached a stage where, as Comrade Sverdlov justly
    remarked in opening this Congress, there is no place in Russia,
    however remote, where Soviet authority has not asserted itself and
    become an integral part of the Soviet Constitution, which is based
    on long experience gained in the struggle of the working and
    oppressed people. 
We now have a powerful Red Army instead of being utterly
    defenceless after the last four years’ war, which evoked
    hatred and aversion among the mass of the exploited and left them
    terribly weak and exhausted, and which condemned the revolution to
    a most difficult and drastic period when we were defenceless
    against the blows of German and Austrian imperialism. Finally, and
    most important of all, we have come from being isolated
    internationally, from which we suffered both in October and at the
    beginning of the year, to a position where our only, but firm
    allies, the working and oppressed people of the world, have at
    last rebellEditor We have reached a stage where the leaders of the
    West European proletariat, like Liebknecht and Adler, leaders who
    spent many months in prison for their bold and heroic attempts to
    gather opposition to the imperialist war, have been set free under
    the pressure of the rapidly developing workers’ revolutions
    in Vienna and Berlin. Instead of being isolated, we are now in a
    position where we are marching side by side, shoulder to shoulder
    with our international allies. Those are the chief achievements of
    the past year. I want to say a few words about the road we have
    covered, about this transitional stage. 
At first our slogan was workers’ control. We said that
    despite all the promises of the Kerensky government, the
    capitalists were continuing to sabotage production and increase
    dislocation. We can now see that this would have ended in complete
    collapse. So the first fundamental step that every socialist,
    workers’ government has to take is workers’
    control. We did not decree socialism immediately throughout
    industry, because socialism can only take shape and be
    consolidated when the working class has learnt how to run the
    economy and when the authority of the working people has been
    firmly establishEditor Socialism is mere wishful thinking without
    that. That is why we introduced workers’ control,
    appreciating that it was a contradictory and incomplete measure,
    but an essential one so that the workers themselves might tackle
    the momentous tasks of building up industry in a vast country
    without and opposed to exploiters. 
Everyone who took a direct, or even indirect, part in this
    work, everyone who lived through all the oppression and brutality
    of the old capitalist regime, learned a great deal. We know that
    little has been accomplishEditor We know that in this extremely
    backward and impoverished country where innumerable obstacles and
    barriers were put in the workers’ way, it will take them a
    long time to learn to run industry. But we consider it most
    important and valuable that the workers have themselves tackled
    the job, and that we have passed from workers’ control,
    which in all the main branches of industry was bound to be
    chaotic, disorganised, primitive and incomplete, to workers’
    industrial administration on a national scale. 
The trade unions’ position has alterEditor Their main
    function now is to send their representatives to all management
    boards and central bodies, to all the new organisations which have
    taken over a ruined and deliberately sabotaged industry from
    capitalism. They have coped with industry without the assistance
    of those intellectuals who from the very out set deliberately used
    their knowledge and education—the result of mankind’s
    store of knowledge—to frustrate the cause of socialism,
    rather than assist the people in building up a socially-owned
    economy without exploiters. These men wanted to use their
    knowledge to put a spoke in the wheel, to hamper the workers who
    were least trained for tackling the job of administration. 
We can now say that the main hindrance has been removEditor It
    was extremely difficult, but the sabotage of all people
    gravitating towards the bourgeoisie has been checkEditor The
    workers have succeeded in taking this basic step, in laying the
    foundations of socialism, despite tremendous handicaps. We are not
    exaggerating and are not afraid to tell the truth. It is true that
    in terms of our ultimate goal, little has been accomplishEditor
    But a great deal, a very great deal, has been done to strengthen
    the foundations. When speaking of socialism, we cannot say that
    great sections of workers have laid the foundations in a
    politically-conscious way in the sense that they have taken to
    reading books and pamphlets. By political consciousness we mean
    that they have tackled this formidable task with their own hands
    and by their own efforts. And they have committed thousands of
    blunders from each of which they have themselves sufferEditor But
    every blunder trained and steeled them in organising industrial
    administration, which has now been established and put upon a firm
    foundation. They saw their work through. From now on the work will
    be different, for now all workers, not just the leaders and
    advanced workers, but great sections of workers, know that they
    themselves, with their own hands, are building socialism and have
    already laid its foundations, and no force in the country can
    prevent them from seeing the job through. 
  We may have had great difficulties in industry, where we had
    to cover a road which to many seemed long, but which was actually
    short and led from workers’ control to workers’
    administration, yet far greater preparatory work had to be done in
    the more backward countryside. Anyone who has studied rural life
    and come into contact with the peasants would say that it was only
    in the summer and autumn of 1918 that the urban October Revolution
    became a real rural October Revolution. And the Petrograd workers
    and the Petrograd garrison soldiers fully realised when they took
    power that great difficulties would crop up in rural
    organisational work, and our progress there would have to he more
    gradual and that it would be the greatest folly to try to
    introduce socialised farming by decree, fot only an insignificant
    number of enlightened peasants might support us, while the vast
    majority had no such object in view. We therefore confined
    ourselves to what was absolutely essential in the interests of
    promoting the revolution—in no case to endeavour to outrun
    the people’s development, but to wait until a movement
    forward occurred as a result of their own experience and their own
    struggle. In October we confined ourselves to sweeping away at one
    blow the age-old enemy of the peasants, the feudal landowner, the
    big landed proprietor. This was a struggle in which all the
    peasants joinEditor At this stage the peasants were not yet
    divided into proletarians, semi-proletarians, poor peasants and
    bourgeoisie. We socialists knew there would be no socialism
    without such a struggle, but we also realised that knowing it was
    not enough—it had to be brought home to the millions, and
    through their own experience, not through propaganda. And for that
    reason, since the peasants as a whole could only conceive of the
    revolution on the basis of equal land tenure, we openly declared
    in our decree of October 26, 1917, that we would take the Peasant
    Mandate on the Land as our starting-point. [See present edition, Volume 26, pages
    258-60. —Editor;] 
We said frankly that it did not accord with our views, that it
    was not communism, but we were not imposing on the peasants
    something that was merely in accord with our programme and not
    with their views. We said we were marching alongside them, as with
    fellow-workers, fully confident 

      
      that the development of the revolution would lead them to the
      conclusions we ourselves had drawn. The result of this policy is
      the peasant movement. The agrarian reform began with the
      socialisation of the land which we voted for and carried out,
      though openly declaring that it did not accord with our
      views. We knew that the idea of equal land tenure had the
      support of the vast majority, and we had no desire to force
      anything upon them. We were prepared to wait until the peasants
      themselves abandoned the idea and advanced further. So we waited
      and we have been able to prepare our forces. 
The law we then passed was based on general democratic
    principles, on that which unites the rich kulak peasant with the
    poor peasant—hatred for the landowner. It was based on the
    general idea of equality which was undoubtedly a revolutionary
    idea directed against the old monarchist system. From this law we
    had to pass to differentiation of the peasants. The land
    socialisation law was universally accepted; it was unanimously
    adopted both by us and by those who did not subscribe to Bolshevik
    policy. We gave the agricultural communes the biggest say in
    deciding who should own the land. We left the road open for
    agriculture to develop along socialist lines, knowing perfectly
    well that at that time, October 1917, it was not yet ready for
    it. Our preparatory work cleared the way for the gigantic and
    epoch-making step we have now taken, one that has not been taken
    by any other country, not even by the most democratic
    republic. That step was taken this summer by all the peasants,
    even in the most remote villages of Russia. When food difficulties
    arose and famine threatened, when the heritage of the past and the
    aftermath of the accursed four years of war made themselves felt,
    when counter-revolution and the Civil War had deprived us of our
    richest grain region, when all this reached a climax and the
    cities were menaced by famine, the only, the most reliable and
    firm bulwark of our government, the advanced workers of the towns
    and industrial regions, went en masse to the countryside. It is
    slander to say the workers went there to provoke an armed conflict
    between workers and peasants. Events expose that slander. The
    workers went to put down the rural exploiters, the kulaks, who
    were making huge fortunes out of grain profiteering at a time when
    people were starving. They went to help the poor peasants, that
    is, the majority of the rural population. The July crisis, when
    kulak revolts swept the whole of Russia, clearly showed that their
    mission had not been in vain, that they had extended the hand of
    alliance, and that their preparatory work had merged with the
    efforts of the peasants. The working and exploited country people
    settled the July crisis by rising up everywhere and coming out in
    alliance with the urban proletariat. Today Comrade Zinoviev told
    me over the telephone that 18,000 people are attending the
    regional congress of Poor Peasants’ Committees in Petrograd
    and that there is remarkable enthusiasm and high spirits.[2] 
As events unfolding throughout Russia became more evident, the
    village poor realised from their own experience when they went
    into action what the struggle against the kulaks meant, and that
    to keep the cities supplied with food and to re-establish
    commodity exchange, without which the countryside cannot live,
    they must part company with the rural bourgeoisie and the
    kulaks. They have to organise separately. And we have now taken
    the first and most momentous step of the socialist revolution in
    the countryside. We could not have taken that step in October. We
    gauged the moment when we could approach the people. And we have
    now reached a point where the socialist revolution in the rural
    areas has begun, where in every village, even the most remote the
    peasant knows that his rich neighbour, the kulak, if he is engaged
    in grain profiteering, sees everything in the light of his old,
    backwoods mentality. 
And so the countryside, the rural poor, uniting with their
    leaders, the city workers, are only now providing us with a firm
    and stable foundation for real socialist construction. Socialist
    construction will only now begin in the countryside. Only now are
    Soviets and farms being formed which are systematically working
    towards large-scale socialised farming, towards making full use of
    knowledge, science and technology, realising that even simple,
    elementary human culture cannot be based on the old, reactionary,
    ignorant way of life. The work here is even more difficult than in
    industry, and even more mistakes are being made by our local
    committees and Soviets. But they learn from their mistakes. We are
    not afraid of mistakes when they are made by ordinary people who
    take a conscientious attitude to socialist construction, because
    we rely only on the experience and effort of our own people. 
And now the tremendous upheaval that in so short a time has led
    us to socialism in the countryside shows that this fight has been
    crowned with success. The Red Army is the most striking proof of
    that. You know the state we were in during the imperialist world
    war when conditions in Russia made life unbearable for the common
    people. We know that at that time we were in an utterly helpless
    state. We frankly told the working people the whole truth. We
    exposed the secret imperialist treaties, the fruits of a policy
    which serves as a massive instrument of deception, and which in
    America today, the most advanced of the bourgeois imperialist
    democratic republics, is more than ever deceiving the people and
    leading them by the nose. When the imperialist character of the
    war became patent to all, the Russian Soviet Republic was the only
    country that completely shattered the bourgeoisie’s secret
    foreign policy. We exposed the secret treaties and declared,
    through Comrade Trotsky, to all countries of the world: We appeal
    to you to put an end to this war in a democratic way, without
    annexations and indemnities, and frankly and proudly declare the
    truth, a bitter truth but the truth nevertheless, that only a
    revolution against the bourgeois governments can put an end to
    this war. But we stood alone. So we had to pay the price of that
    terribly excruciating peace which was forced upon us by the
    Brest-Litovsk Treaty and which drove many of our sympathizers to
    gloom and despair. That was because we were alone. But we did our
    duty and showed up the aims of the war for everyone to see! The
    onslaught of German imperialism was able to overwhelm us because
    it took some time before our workers and peasants could organise
    properly. We had no army then; all we had was the old,
    disorganised, imperialist army which had been driven to fight in
    the war for aims which the soldiers did not support and with which
    they did not sympathise. So we had to go through a very painful
    period. It was a time when the people needed a respite from the
    terrible imperialist war, and had to realise that a new war was
    beginning. We are entitled to regard the war we shall wage in
    defence of our socialist revolution as our war. That is what
    millions and tens of millions of people had to learn to appreciate
    from their own experience. It took months. It took a long and hard
    battle for this realisation to get through. By this summer,
    however, everyone saw that it had got through at last, and that
    the breakthrough had come. Everyone realised that to have the army
    fight for the Soviet Republic, the army that comes from the
    people, that is sacrificing itself, and that after four years of
    bloody slaughter is again prepared to go to war, our country had
    to replace the weariness and despair of the people going to war by
    a clear realisation that they go to their death for their own
    cause: for the workers’ and peasants’ Soviets and the
    socialist republic. That has been achieved. 
The victories we gained over the Czechs in the summer, and the
    news of big victories now coming in go to show that a
    turning-point has come, and that the hardest task—organising
    the people in a politically-conscious, socialist way after four
    years of terrible war—has been achievEditor That political
    consciousness has penetrated a long way among the people. Tens of
    millions of people have come to realise they are tackling a
    difficult job. And that gives us assurance that we shall not
    despair, even though the forces of world imperialism, stronger
    than us today, are being mustered against us, even though we are
    surrounded by the soldiers of the imperialists, who realise the
    menace from the Soviet government and are eager to strangle it,
    and even though we truthfully say they are stronger than us. 
We say we are growing, the Soviet Republic is growing. The
    cause of the proletarian revolution is growing faster than the
    imperialist forces are closing in upon us. We are full of hope and
    assurance that we are fighting in the interests of the world
    socialist revolution as well as the Russian socialist
    revolution. Our hopes of victory are growing faster because our
    workers are becoming more politically conscious. What was the
    state of Soviet organisation last October? Only the first steps
    were being taken. We could not make it perfect or put it on a
    proper basis. But now we have the Soviet Constitution. The Soviet
    Constitution; ratified in July, is, as we know, not the invention
    of a commission, nor the creation of lawyers, nor is it copied
    from other constitutions. The world has never known such a
    constitution as ours. It embodies the workers’ experience of
    struggle and organisation against the exploiters both at home and
    abroad. We possess a fund of fighting
    experience. (Applause.) And this fund of experience has
    provided a striking corroboration of the fact that the organised
    workers created a Soviet government without civil servants,
    without a standing army and without privileges (privileges in
    practice for the bourgeoisie), and that they created the
    foundations of a new system in the factories. We are getting down
    to work and drawing in new helpers, who are essential if the
    Soviet Constitution is to be carried into effect. We now have
    ready new recruits, young peasant, who must be drawn into the work
    and help us carry the job through. 
The last question I want to touch upon is the international
    situation. We are standing shoulder to shoulder with our
    international comrades, and we have now seen for ourselves the
    resoluteness and enthusiasm they put into their conviction that
    the Russian proletarian revolution will go along with them as the
    world revolution. 
As the revolution’s international significance grew, the
    imperialists of the whole world banded even closer and more
    furiously together against us. In October 1917 they regarded our
    Republic as a curiosity not worth serious attention. In February
    they regarded it as an experiment in socialism not to be taken
    seriously. But the Republic’s army grew and gained in
    strength until the very difficult task of creating a socialist Red
    Army had been accomplishEditor As our cause gained in strength and
    its successes multiplied, the opposition and the hatred of the
    imperialists of all countries grew more rabid. Things have reached
    a state where British and French capitalists, who had proclaimed
    they were Wilhelm’s enemies, are now on the verge of joining
    forces with this same Wilhelm in an effort to strangle the
    Socialist Soviet Republic. For they have come to realise that it
    is no longer a curiosity or an experiment in socialism, but the
    hotbed, the really genuine hotbed, of the world socialist
    revolution. Hence, the number of our enemies has increased along
    with the successes of our revolution. We must realise what is
    lying in store for us, without in any way concealing the gravity
    of the situation. We shall go to meet it not alone but with the
    workers of Vienna and Berlin, who are moving into the same fight,
    and who will perhaps bring greater discipline and
    class-consciousness to our common cause. 
 To give you an idea of how the clouds are gathering over our
    Soviet Republic and what dangers are threatening us, I shall read
    you the full text of a Note sent to us by the German Government
    through its consulate: 
    
 
      “G. V. Chicherin, People’s Commissar for Foreign
      Affairs, Moscow, November 5, 1918.

      On the instructions of the German Imperial Government, the
      Imperial German Consulate has the honour to notify the Russian
      Federative Soviet Republic of the following: The German
      Government has already had occasion to protest twice against the
      impermissible campaign that is being conducted against German
      state institutions through declarations made by official Russian
      authorities in contravention of Article 2 of the Treaty of
      Brest-Litovsk. It can no longer confine itself to protests
      against this campaign, which is not only a violation of the said
      stipulations of the Treaty, but a serious departure from normal
      international practice. 
    

      
      When the Soviet Government established its Diplomatic Legation
      in Berlin after the conclusion of the Peace Treaty, Herr Joffe,
      the appointed Russian representative, received a clear reminder
      of the need to refrain from any agitation or propaganda in
      Germany. To this he replied that he was acquainted with Article
      2 of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty and was aware that in his capacity
      as representative of a foreign Power he must not interfere in
      Germany’s internal affairs. Herr Joffe and the departments
      in his charge accordingly enjoyed in Berlin the attention and
      confidence normally accorded to extraterritorial foreign
      legations. This confidence was, however, betrayEditor It has
      been clear for some time that the Russian Legation has been in
      close contact with certain people working for the overthrow of
      the political order in Germany, and, by employing such people in
      its service, has been interested in a movement aimed at
      overthrowing the existing system in Germany. 

    

      The following incident, which occurred on the 4th instant,
      revealed that the Russian Legation, by importing leaflets
      calling for revolution, is even taking an active part in
      movements aimed at overthrowing the existing order, thereby
      abusing the privilege of employing diplomatic couriers. Because
      one of the boxes in the official baggage of the Russian courier
      who arrived in Berlin yesterday was damaged during
      transportation, it was ascertained that the boxes contained
      revolutionary leaflets printed in German and, judging by their
      contents, designed for dissemination in Germany. 

    

      The German Government has further grounds for complaint because
      of the attitude taken by the Soviet Government towards the
      expiation to be made for the assassination of Count Mirbach, the
      Imperial Ambassador. The Russian  Government solemnly declared
      that it would do everything in its power to bring the criminals
      to court. But the German Government has not observed any signs
      of the prosecution and punishment of the criminals having been
      undertaken, or even of any intention of it being done. The
      murderers escaped from a house surrounded on all sides by Public
      Security men of the Russian Government. The instigators of the
      assassination, who have publicly admitted they were behind the
      whole affair, to this day go unpunished and, according to
      information received, have even been pardonEditor 

      The German Government protests against such violations of the
      Treaty and of public law. It is obliged to demand guarantees
      from the Russian Government that no further agitation and
      propaganda running counter to the Peace Treaty will be
      conductEditor It must furthermore insist on the expiation of the
      assassination of the Ambassador, Count Mirbach, by the
      punishment of the perpetrators and instigators of the
      murder. Until such time as these demands are satisfied, the
      German Government must request the Government of the Soviet
      Republic to withdraw its diplomatic and other representatives
      from Germany. The Russian plenipotentiary in Berlin was today
      informed that a special train for the departure of the
      diplomatic and consular representatives in Berlin and of other
      Russian officials in the city will be ready tomorrow evening,
      and that measures will be taken to secure the unhampered transit
      of all Russian personnel to the Russian frontier. The Soviet
      Government is requested to enable the German representatives in
      Moscow and Petrograd to leave at the same time, with the
      observance of all the demands of courtesy. Other Russian
      representatives in Germany, and likewise German officials in
      other parts of Russia, will be informed they must leave within a
      week, the former for Russia, the latter for Germany. The German
      Government concludes in anticipation that all the rules of
      courtesy will be similarly observed towards the latter German
      officials in relation to their departure and that other German
      subjects or persons under German protection will be allowed the
      opportunity of unhampered departure should they request
      it.” 

    
We all know perfectly well, comrades, that the German
    Government has been fully aware that German socialists enjoyed the
    hospitality of the Russian Embassy and that no supporters of
    German imperialism ever crossed the threshold of the Russian
    Embassy. Its friends were those socialists who opposed the war and
    who sympathised with Karl Liebknecht. They have been guests of the
    Embassy ever since it opened, and we have had dealings with them
    alone. The German Government was perfectly aware of that. It
    followed the movements of every representative of our government
    as zealously as the government of Nicholas II used to follow the
    movements of our comrades. The German Government is now making
    this move not because the situation has in any way changed, but
    because it formerly felt stronger, and was not afraid that one
    “burning’ house on the streets of Berlin would set all
    Germany alight. The German Government has lost its head, and now
    that the whole of Germany is ablaze, it thinks it can put out the
    fire by turning its police hose on a single house. (Stormy
    applause.) 
That is simply ridiculous. If the German Government is going to
    break off diplomatic relations, all we call say is that we knew it
    would, and that it is doing all it can to get an alliance with the
    British and French imperialists. We know Wilson’s government
    has received telegram after telegram requesting that German troops
    be left in Poland, the Ukraine, Estonia and Latvia. Although they
    are enemies of German imperialism, the German troops are doing
    their job: they are putting down the Bolsheviks. [See  Resolution Adopted at
    a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the
    Moscow Soviet, Factory Committees and Trade Unions]
    They can clear out when pro-Entente “armies of
    liberation” appear on the scene to strangle the
    Bolsheviks. 
We are perfectly aware of what is going on and none of it is
    unexpect. We merely repeat that now that Germany is on fire and
    Austria is all ablaze, now that they have had to liberate
    Liebknecht and allow him to visit the Russian Embassy, where a
    joint meeting of Russian and German socialists with Liebknecht at
    their head was held, such a step on the part of the German
    Government shows not so much that they want to fight as that they
    have completely lost their heads. It shows they are at a loss for
    a decision because Anglo-American imperialism, the most brutal
    enemy of all, is advancing upon them, an enemy that has crushed
    Austria with peace terms a hundred times more onerous than those
    of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. Germany sees that these
    liberators want to strangle, crush and torture her too. But at the
    same time the workingman’s Germany is rebelling. The German
    army proved to be useless and unfit for action not because
    discipline was weak but because the soldiers who refused to fight
    were transferred from the Eastern front to the German Western
    front and carried with them what the bourgeoisie call world
    Bolshevism. 
That is why the German army was unfit for action and why this
    document is the best proof of Germany’s utter confusion. We
    say it will lead to a diplomatic rupture, and perhaps even to war
    if they can find the strength to lead the white guard troops. We
    have therefore sent a telegram to all the Soviets of Deputies,[3]  which concludes by warning them to be
    on their guard, to hold themselves in readiness and muster all
    their forces, for this is just another sign that the chief aim of
    international imperialism is the overthrow of Bolshevism. That
    does not mean defeating Russia alone. It means defeating their own
    workers in every country. But they will not succeed, no matter
    what brutalities and outrages may follow this decision. These
    vultures are preparing to swoop down on Russia from the South,
    through the Dardanelles, or by way of Bulgaria and Rumania. They
    are negotiating for the formation of a White Army in Germany to be
    pitted against Russia. We are fully aware of this danger, and say
    quite plainly that we have not worked a year for nothing; we have
    laid the foundations, we are coming up to decisive battles,
    battles which will indeed be decisive. But we are not alone: the
    proletariat of Western Europe has gone into action and has not
    left anything standing in Austria-Hungary. The government of the
    country is just about as helpless, as wildly confused, has lost
    its head as completely as Nicholas Romanov’s government at
    the end of February 1917. Our slogan must be: Put every effort
    into the fight once more, and remember that we are coming up to
    the last, decisive fight, not for the Russian revolution alone,
    but for the world socialist revolution. 
We know that the imperialist vultures are still stronger than
    us. They can still inflict wholesale damage, brutalities and
    atrocities upon our country. But they cannot defeat the world
    revolution. They are full of savage hatred, so we tell ourselves
    that come what may, every Russian worker and peasant will do his
    duty and will face death if the interests of defence of the
    revolution demand it. No matter what miseries the imperialists may
    still inflict upon us, it will not save them. Imperialism will
    perish and the world socialist revolution will triumph in face of
    all odds! (Stormy applause passing into prolonged
    ovation.) 

      
      
      Newspaper reports published November 9, 1918 in Pravda
      No. 242 and Izvestia No. 244


      First published in full in 1919 in the book Extraordinary
      Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. Verbatim Report,
      Moscow 

 
      Published according to the book checked with the verbatim report
      and the Pravda text.
    
2
Speech On The International Situation
November 8
 
      (Prolonged applause.) Comrades, from the very beginning
      of the October Revolution, foreign policy and international
      relations have been the main questions facing us. Not merely
      because from now on all the states in the world are being firmly
      linked by imperialism into a single system, or rather, into one
      dirty, bloody mass, but because the complete victory of the
      socialist revolution in one country alone is inconceivable and
      demands the most active co-operation of at least several
      advanced countries, which do not include Russia. Hence one of
      the main problems of the revolution is now the extent to which
      we succeed in broadening the revolution in other countries too,
      and the extent to which we succeed meanwhile in warding off
      imperialism. 
I should like to remind you briefly of the main stages of our
    international policy over the past year. As I have already had
    occasion to point out in my speech on the anniversary of the
    revolution, the main feature characterising our position a year
    ago was that we were on our own. No matter how sound our
    conviction that a revolutionary force was being and had been
    created throughout Europe and that the war would not end without
    revolution, there were no signs at the time that a revolution had
    begun or was beginning. In these circumstances we could do nothing
    but direct our foreign policy efforts to enlightening the working
    people of Western Europe. This was not because we claimed to be
    more enlightened than they, but because so long as the bourgeoisie
    of a country have not been overthrown, military censorship and
    that fantastically bloodthirsty atmosphere which accompanies every
    war, particularly a reactionary one, predominate in that
    country. You well appreciate that in the most democratic,
    republican countries, war means military censorship and
    unprecedented methods employed by the bourgeoisie and the
    bourgeois military staffs to deceive the people. We set out to
    share our achievements in this respect with other nations. We did
    everything possible for this when we annulled and published the
    disgraceful secret treaties which the ex-tsar had concluded with
    the British and French capitalists to the benefit of the Russian
    capitalists. You know that these were downright predatory
    treaties. You know that the government of Kerensky and the
    Mensheviks kept these treaties secret and upheld them. By way of
    exception, we come across statements in that section of the
    British and French press which is to any degree honest that,
    thanks only to the Russian revolution, the French and the British
    learned much that was material to them as regards their diplomatic
    history. 
We have certainly done very little from the point of view of
    the social revolution as a whole, but what we have done has been
    one of the greatest steps in its preparation. 
If we now make a general survey of the results gained by the
    exposure of German imperialism, we shall see that it is now
    obvious to the working people of all countries that they were made
    to wage a bloody and predatory war. And at the end of this year of
    war the behaviour of Britain and America is beginning to be
    exposed in the same way, since the people are opening their eyes
    and begin to see through the evil designs. That is all we have
    done, but we have done our bit. The exposure of these treaties was
    a blow to imperialism. The terms of the peace treaty which we were
    compelled to conclude proved to be a powerful weapon of propaganda
    and agitation; we did more with them than any other government or
    nation has done. But while it is true that the attempt we made to
    awaken the people did not produce immediate results, we never even
    assumed that the revolution would begin immediately, or that all
    would be lost. During the past fifteen years we have brought about
    two revolutions, and we have clearly seen how much time must
    elapse before they grip the people. Recent events in Austria and
    Germany confirm this. We said that we had no intention of allying
    ourselves with robbers and becoming robbers ourselves; no, we
    expected to arouse the proletariat of the enemy countries. We were
    jeered at and told we were preparing to arouse the German
    proletariat which would strangle us while we were preparing to
    launch a propaganda attack. But facts have shown we were right to
    assume that the working people in all countries are equally
    hostile to imperialism. They only need to be given a certain
    period for preparation; the Russian people, too, despite memories
    of the 1905 Revolution, took some time before they again came up
    for revolution. 
Before the Brest-Litovsk Peace we did everything in our power
    to hit at imperialism. If the history of the growth of the
    proletarian revolution did not completely wipe this out, and if
    the Brest-Litovsk Peace forced us to retreat before imperialism,
    this was because we were insufficiently prepared in January
    1918. Fate condemned us to isolation, and we went through an
    agonising period after the Brest-Litovsk Peace. 
Comrades, the four years which we spent in world war ended in
    peace, but on onerous terms. In the final analysis, however, even
    these onerous peace terms proved that we were right and that our
    hopes were not built on sand. With every passing month we grew
    strong while West-European imperialism grew weak. Now, as a
    result, we see that Germany, who six months ago completely ignored
    our Embassy and thought there could be no Red institution there,
    recently, at any rate, has been weakening. The latest telegram
    informs us of the German imperialists’ appeal to the people
    to keep calm, saying that peace is near at hand. We know what is
    meant when monarchs appeal for calm and promise to do the
    impossible in the near future. If Germany gets peace soon, it will
    be a Brest-Litovsk Peace, which instead of peace will bring the
    working people more misery than ever. 
The results of our international policy shaped in such a way
    that six months after the Brest-Litovsk Peace we were a devastated
    country to the bourgeoisie, but, to the proletariat, we were
    rapidly developing and now head the proletarian army which has
    begun to shake Austria and Germany. This success vindicated and
    fully justified all our sacrifices in any worker’s eyes. If
    we were to be suddenly wiped out, if our activities were to be cut
    short—this is impossible since miracles do not
    happen—yet if this were to happen we would be justified in
    saying, without concealing our mistakes, that we had made full use
    of the period, offered us by fate, for the world socialist
    revolution! We have done everything possible for the working
    people of Russia, and we have done more than anyone else for the
    world proletarian revolution. (Applause.) 
In recent months, and in-recent weeks, the international
    situation has begun to change sharply; now German imperialism is
    almost completely defeatEditor All designs on the Ukraine which
    the German imperialists fostered among their working people proved
    to be empty promises. It turned out that American imperialism was
    ready, and a blow was struck at Germany. A totally different
    situation has arisen. We have been under no illusions. After the
    October Revolution we were considerably weaker than imperialism
    and even now we are weaker than international imperialism. We must
    repeat this now so as not to deceive ourselves: following the
    October Revolution we were weaker and could not fight. Now we are
    weaker too and must do everything we can to avoid a clash with
    imperialism. 
That we were able to survive a year after the October
    Revolution was due to the split of international imperialism into
    two predatory groups: Anglo-French-American on the one hand, and
    German on the other, which were locked in mortal combat, and which
    had no time for us. Neither group could muster large forces
    against us, which they would have done had they been in a position
    to do so. They were blinded by the bloodthirsty atmosphere of
    war. The material sacrifices required to carry on the war demanded
    the utmost concentration of their efforts. They had no time for
    us, not because by some miracle we were stronger than the
    imperialists—no, that would be nonsense—but only
    because international imperialism had split into two predatory
    groups which were at each other’s throats. Only thanks to
    this the Soviet Republic was able to openly declare war on the
    imperialists of all countries, depriving them of their capital in
    the shape of foreign loans, slapping them in the face and openly
    emptying their plunder-laden pockets.
An end has come to the period of declarations which we then
    made over the correspondence started by the German imperialists,
    even though world imperialism could not tear into us as it should
    have done in line with its hostility and thirst for capitalist
    profits, which had been fantastically expanded by the war. Until
    the moment of the Anglo-American imperialists’ victory over
    the other group they were fully occupied fighting among
    themselves, and so had no chance to launch a decisive campaign
    against the Soviet Republic. There is no longer a second
    group. Only one group of victors remains. This has completely
    altered our international position, and we must take this change
    into account. The facts show how this change bears on the
    development of the international situation. The workers’
    revolution is now winning in the defeated countries; everyone can
    clearly see what tremendous advances it has made. When we took
    power in October we were nothing more in Europe than a single
    spark. True, the sparks began to fly, and they flew from us. This
    is our greatest achievement, but even so, these were isolated
    sparks. Now most countries within the sphere of German-Austrian
    imperialism are aflame (Bulgaria, Austria and Hungary). We know
    that from Bulgaria the revolution has spread to Serbia. We know
    how these worker-peasant revolutions passed through Austria and
    reached Germany. Several countries are enveloped in the flames of
    workers’ revolution. In this respect our efforts and
    sacrifices have been justifiEditor They were not reckless
    adventures, as our enemies slanderously claimed, but an essential
    step towards world revolution, which had to be taken by the
    country that had been placed in the lead, despite its
    underdevelopment and backwardness. 
This is one result, and the most important from the point of
    view of the final outcome of the imperialist war. The other result
    is the one to which I referred earlier, that Anglo-American
    imperialism is now exposing itself in the same way as
    Austro-German did in its time. We can see that if, at the time of
    the Brest-Litovsk negotiations, Germany had been somewhat
    level-headed, able to keep herself in check and to refrain from
    making gambles, she would have been able to maintain her
    domination and undoubtedly could have secured an advantageous
    position in the West. She did not do this because when a machine
    like a war involving millions and tens of millions, a war which
    inflamed chauvinist passions to the utmost, a war bound up with
    capitalist interests totalling hundreds of billions of
    rubles—when such a machine has gathered full speed there are
    no brakes that can stop it. This machine went farther than the
    German imperialists themselves desired, and they were crushed by
    it. They were stuck; they ended up like a man who had gorged
    himself to death. And now, before our very eyes, British and
    American imperialism is in this extremely ugly, but, from the
    viewpoint of the revolutionary proletariat, extremely useful
    position. You might have thought they would have had much greater
    political experience than Germany. Here are people used to
    democratic rule, not to the rule of some Junker or other, people
    who went through the hardest period of their history hundreds of
    years ago. You might have thought these people would-have retained
    their presence of mind. If we were to speak as individuals, from
    the point of view of democracy in general, as bourgeois
    philistines, professors, who have understood nothing from the
    struggle between imperialism and the working class, whether or not
    they were capable of level-headedness, if we reasoned from the
    point of view of democracy in general, then we would have to say
    that Britain and America are countries with a centuries-old
    tradition of democracy, that the bourgeoisie there would be able
    to hold their ground. If by some means they were to succeed now in
    holding on, this would at any rate be for a fairly long
    period. But it seems that the same thing is happening to them as
    happened to the militarist-despotic Germany. In this imperialist
    war there is a tremendous difference between Russia and the
    republican countries. The imperialist war is so steeped in blood,
    so predatory and bestial, that it has effaced even these important
    differences, and in this respect it has brought the freest
    democracy of America to the level of semi-militarist, despotic
    Germany. 

  We see that Britain and America, countries which had greater
    opportunities than others for remaining democratic republics, have
    overdone things as savagely and insanely as Germany did in her
    time, and so they are heading, just as quickly, and perhaps even
    faster, towards the end so successfully arrived at by German
    imperialism. It swelled out fantastically over three-quarters of
    Europe, became distended and then burst, leaving behind it an
    awful stench. Now British and American imperialism is racing to
    the same end. You only have to take a cursory glance at the
    armistice and peace terms which the British and Americans, the
    “liberators” of the people from German imperialism,
    are presenting to the defeated nations. Take Bulgaria. You would
    have thought that a country like Bulgaria could hold no terror for
    the Anglo-American imperialist colossus. Nevertheless, the
    revolution in this small, weak, absolutely helpless country caused
    the Anglo-Americans to lose their heads and present armistice
    terms that are tantamount to occupation. In this country where a
    peasants’ republic has been proclaimed, in Sofia, an
    important railway junction, the whole railway is now in the hands
    of Anglo-American troops. They are forced to fight this little
    peasants’ republic. From the military point of view this is
    a walkover. People who take the view of the bourgeoisie, of the
    old ruling class, of old military relations, merely smile
    contemptuously. What does this pigmy Bulgaria signify in
    comparison with the Anglo-American forces? Nothing from the
    military standpoint, but a great deal from the revolutionary
    standpoint. This is not a colony where they are used to
    exterminating the defeated people in their millions. The British
    and Americans consider this is only establishing law and order,
    bringing civilisation and Christianity to African savages. But
    this is not Central Africa. Here the soldiers, no matter how
    strong their army, become demoralised when they come up against a
    revolution. Germany is proof enough of this. In Germany, at any
    rate as regards discipline, the soldiers were model army men. Yet
    when the Germans marched into the Ukraine, factors other than
    discipline came into play. The starving German soldier marched for
    bread, and it would have been unrealistic to demand that he should
    not steal too much bread. Moreover, we know that in this country
    he was most of all infected by the spirit of the Russian
    revolution. The German bourgeoisie were well aware of this and it
    caused Wilhelm to panic. The Hohenzollerns are mistaken if they
    imagine that Germany will shed a single drop of blood for
    them. This is the result of the policy of bellicose German
    imperialism. The same thing is repeating itself in regard to
    Britain. The Anglo-American army is already becoming demoralised;
    this began as soon as it launched the ferocious campaign against
    Bulgaria. And this is only the beginning. Austria followed
    Bulgaria. Permit me to read you some of the clauses of the terms
    dictated by the Anglo-American imperialist victors. These are the
    people who most of all shouted to the working people that they
    were conducting a war of liberation, that their chief aim was to
    crush Prussian militarism which threatened to spread the despotic
    regime over all countries. They shouted loudest that they were
    conducting a war of liberation. This was a deception. You know
    that bourgeois lawyers, these parliamentarians who have spent
    their whole lives learning the art of deception without blushing,
    find it easy to deceive each other—but they don’t get
    away with it when they have to deceive the workers in the same
    way. British and American politicians and parliamentarians are
    past masters at this art. But they will not get away with
    deception. The working people, whom they incited in the name of
    freedom, will come to their senses straight away, and even more so
    when, on a mass scale, not from proclamations (which help, but do
    not really move the revolution), but from their own experience,
    they see they are being deceived, when they become aware of the
    peace terms with Austria. 
These are peace terms now being forced on a comparatively weak,
    disintegrating state by people who shouted that the Bolsheviks
    were traitors because they signed the Brest-Litovsk Peace
    Treaty. When the Germans wanted to send their soldiers to Moscow,
    we said we would rather all die in battle than agree to
    this. (Applause.) We told ourselves great sacrifices
    would have to be made in the occupied areas, but everybody knows
    how Soviet Russia helped and kept them supplied with
    necessities. Now the democratic troops of Britain and France will
    have to serve to “maintain law and order”,  and this
    when there are Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in Bulgaria and
    Serbia, when there are Soviets of Workers’ Deputies in
    Vienna and Budapest. We know what kind of order this means. It
    means that the Anglo-American troops are to be the throttlers and
    executioners of the world revolution. 
Comrades, when the Russian serf troops were sent to suppress
    the Hungarian Revolution in 1848,[4] they were able to get
    away with it because they were serfs; they were able to get away
    with it in relation to Poland.[5] But people who have
    known freedom for a century and who were incited to hate German
    imperialism because it was a beast which had to be destroyed, must
    understand that Anglo-American imperialism is the same sort of
    beast whom it would be only right to destroy as well! 
And now history, with its usual malicious irony, has arrived at
    the point where, after the exposure of German imperialism, it is
    the turn of Anglo-French imperialism to utterly expose itself. We
    declare to the Russian, German and Austrian working people that
    these are not the Russian serf troops of 1848! They will not get
    away with it! They are out to stop people getting from capitalism
    to freedom and to suppress the revolution. We are absolutely
    convinced that this bloated monster will fall into the same abyss
    as did the German imperialist monster. 
I now turn to matters which affect us most of all. I shall
    begin with the peace terms which Germany will have to agree
    to. The comrades from the Commissariat for Foreign Affairs told me
    that The Times, the chief mouthpiece of the fabulously
    rich British bourgeoisie who actually shape the entire policy, has
    already published the terms to be imposed on Germany. She is
    expected to hand over Heligoland and the Wilhelmshaven Canal,
    Essen, where practically all military equipment is manufactured,
    disband her merchant fleet, immediately hand over Alsace-Lorraine
    and pay indemnities totalling 60 thousand-million, a great part of
    which must be paid in kind because money has depreciated
    everywhere and British merchants too have begun to calculate in
    another currency. We can see that the peace terms they are
    preparing for Germany will be completely devastating, far harsher
    than the Brest-Litovsk terms. They are strong enough materially
    and physically to do so if it were not for the existence of that
    awful Bolshevism. By imposing these peace terms they are preparing
    their own doom. For this is happening in civilised countries in
    the twentieth century, not in Central Africa. The once disciplined
    German soldier who put down the illiterate Ukrainian people has
    now buried his discipline. So it is all the more certain that the
    British and American imperialists will bury themselves when they
    make the gamble, which will bring about their political downfall,
    of making their troops throttlers and gendarmes of all
    Europe. They have been trying to destroy Russia for some time, and
    have been thinking of attacking her for some time. You only have
    to recall the Murmansk occupation, the millions they squandered on
    the Czechs, the treaty they concluded with Japan. And now Britain
    has a treaty with the Turks which gives her Baku so that she may
    strangle us by depriving us of raw materials. 
British troops are ready to attack Russia from the South,
    through the Dardanelles or through Bulgaria and Rumania. They are
    closing in around the Soviet Republic, they are trying to cut off
    our economic contacts with the whole world. For this reason they
    compelled Holland to break off diplomatic relations with us.[6] When Germany expelled our Ambassador
    she acted, if not in direct agreement with Anglo-French policy,
    then hoping to do them a service so that they should be
    magnanimous to her. The implication was that we are also
    fulfilling the duties of executioner against the Bolsheviks, your
    enemies. 
The main point about the international situation is (as I
    mentioned the other day) that we have never been so near to world
    proletarian revolution as we are now. We have proved we were not
    mistaken in banking on world proletarian revolution. Our great
    national and economic sacrifices were not made in vain. We
    achieved successes. Yet if we have never previously been so close
    to world revolution, then it is also true to say that we have
    never been in such a dangerous situation as we are now. The
    imperialists were busy among themselves, but now one group has
    been wiped out by the Anglo-French-American group, which considers
    its main task to be the extermination of world Bolshevism and the
    strangulation of its main centre, the Russian Soviet Republic. To
    do this, they intend to surround themselves with a Great Wall of
    China so as to keep out the plague, the plague of
    Bolshevism. These people are trying to rid themselves of
    Bolshevism by going into quarantine, but this cannot be done. Even
    if these Anglo-French imperialist gentlemen, who possess the best
    techniques in the world, succeed in building this Great Wall
    around the Republic, the germ of Bolshevism will still penetrate
    the wall and infect the workers of the world. (Applause.)
    
The West-European press, the press of Anglo-French imperialism,
    tries its hardest to keep silent about the state of
    imperialism. No lie or slander is vile enough to use against the
    Soviet government. It is true to say now that all the Anglo-French
    and American papers, with financial backing running into billions,
    are in capitalist hands and that they act in one syndicate to
    suppress the truth about Soviet Russia, to spread lies and slander
    about us. Yet despite the fact that for years there has been a
    military censor ship which has prevented a word of truth about the
    Soviet Republic from appearing in the newspapers of the democratic
    countries, not a single large workers’ meeting held anywhere
    goes by without the workers siding with the Bolsheviks, because it
    is impossible to hide the truth. The enemy accuses us of
    implementing the dictatorship of the proletariat. They are right
    and we do not hide it. The fact that the Soviet Government is not
    afraid and openly admits this attracts more millions of workers to
    its side, because the dictatorship is directed against the
    exploiters, and the working people see and are convinced that the
    struggle we are waging against the exploiters is a serious one and
    will be brought to a serious conclusion. Although the European
    papers surround us with a conspiracy of silence, they have so far
    announced that they regard it their duty to attack Russia because
    Russia surrendered to Germany, because Russia is in fact a German
    agent, because government leaders in Russia, they claim, are
    German agents. New forged documents, for which a good price is
    paid, appear every month proving that Lenin and Trotsky are
    downright traitors and German agents. Despite all this they cannot
    hide the truth, and from time to time there are open signs that
    the imperialist gentlemen feel uneasy. L’Echo de Paris
    [7] admits: “We are going into
    Russia to break the power of the Bolsheviks.” Their official
    line is that they are only fighting German domination, not
    conducting a war with Russia and not interfering in military
    matters. Our French internationalists who publish the III-me
    Internationale [8] in Moscow cited this quotation, and
    although we have been cut off from Paris and France by an
    extremely elaborate Great Wall of China, we tell the French
    imperialist gentlemen that they cannot defend themselves from
    their own bourgeoisie. Indeed, hundreds of thousands of French
    workers know this small quotation, and others too, and see that
    all the declarations of their rulers, of their bourgeoisie, are
    nothing but lies. Their own bourgeoisie let the cat out of the
    bag; they acknowledge that they want to break the power of the
    Bolsheviks. After four years of bloody war they have to tell their
    people: go and fight again against Russia to break the power of
    the Bolsheviks whom we hate because they owe us 17 thousand
    million and won’t pay up,[9] because they are rude
    to capitalists, landowners and tsars. Civilised nations who come
    down to admitting such things, patently betray the failure of
    their policy. No matter how strong they may be militarily we
    calmly review their strength and say: but you have in your rear an
    even more terrible enemy—the common people, whom you have
    deceived up to now; so much so that your tongue has dried up from
    the lies and slander you have spread about Soviet Russia. Similar
    information may be gleaned from The Manchester Guardian
    [10] of October 23. This British bourgeois
    newspaper writes: “If the Allied armies still remain in
    Russia and still operate in Russia, their purpose can only be to
    effect a revolution in . . . Russia. The Allied governments must,
    therefore, either . . . put an end to their operations in Russia
    or announce that they are at war with Bolshevism.” 
I repeat that the significance of this small quotation, which
    sounds to us like a revolutionary call, like a powerful
    revolutionary appeal, is that it is written by a bourgeois
    newspaper, which is itself an enemy of the socialists, but feels
    that the truth can no longer be hidden. If bourgeois papers write
    in this vein you can imagine what the British workers must be
    thinking and saying. You know the sort of language used by the
    liberals in tsarist times, prior to the 1905 and 1917
    revolutions. You know this language heralded an impending
    explosion amidst the revolutionary proletariat. From the language
    of these British bourgeois liberals, therefore, you can draw
    conclusions about what is going on in the moods, minds and hearts
    of the British, French and American workers. We must, therefore,
    face the bitter truth about our international position. The world
    revolution is not far off, but it cannot develop according to a
    special time-table. Having survived two revolutions we well
    appreciate this. We know, however, that although the imperialists
    cannot contain the world revolution, certain countries are likely
    to be defeated, and even heavier losses are possible. They know
    that Russia is in the birth-pangs of a proletarian revolution, but
    they are mistaken if they think that by crushing one centre of the
    revolution they will crush the revolution in other countries. 
We, for our part, must admit that the situation is more
    dangerous than ever before, that once again we shall have to
    summon up every effort. Over the past year we have laid a firm
    foundation, created a socialist Red Army with a new discipline,
    and we are absolutely certain that we can and must continue the
    work we are doing. At all meetings, in every Soviet institution,
    at trade union meetings and at meetings of Poor Peasants’
    Committees we must say: Comrades, we have survived a year and have
    achieved some success, but all this is still insufficient when we
    consider the powerful enemy bearing down on us. This enemy,
    Anglo-French imperialism, is world-wide, powerful and has defeated
    the whole world. We are going to fight it not because we think
    ourselves economically and technically on a par with the advanced
    countries of Europe. No, but we do know this enemy is going to
    topple into the abyss into which Austro-German imperialism once
    toppled; we know that the enemy, which has now ensnared Turkey,
    seized Bulgaria and is bent on occupying the whole of
    Austria-Hungary with the object of establishing a tsarist,
    gendarme regime, is heading for its doom. We know this as a
    historical fact, and that is why, while in no way attempting the
    impossible, we say we can beat off Anglo-French imperialism! 
Every step in strengthening our Red Army will be echoed by a
    dozen steps in the disintegration of and revolutions in this
    apparently all-powerful enemy. There is therefore no cause
    whatsoever for despair or pessimism. We know the danger is
    great. It may be that fate has even heavier sacrifices in store
    for us. Even if they can crush one country, they can never crush
    the world proletarian revolution, they will only add more fuel to
    the flames that will consume them all. (Prolonged applause
    passing into ovation.)


Endnotes
[1]
    The Congress was held at the Bolshoi Threatre between November 6
    and 9, 1918. Its opening coincided with the celebrations of the
    anniversary of the October Revolution. There were 1,296 delegates
    (963 with voting rights and 333 with voice but no vote), of whom
    1,260 were Communists. The agenda included the following items:
    anniversary of the October Revolution, the international
    situation, military situation building of Soviet power at the
    centre, Poor Peasants’ Committees and local Soviets. Lenin
    was elected honorary chairman of the Congress. After hearing
    Lenin’s report on the anniversary of the October Revolution
    at the first sitting on November 6, the delegates sent greetings
    to workers, peasants and soldiers of all countries and their
    leaders who were fighting for peace and socialism, and to the Red
    Army. On Sverdlov’s proposal the Congress adopted an appeal
    to the governments at war with Soviet Russia to start peace
    negotiations. In view of the strengthening of Soviet power and the
    victories of the Red Army the Congress adopted a decision on
    amnesty.
At the second session of the Congress on
    November 8 Lenin made a report on the international situation. The
    Congress unanimously endorsed a resolution that had been drawn up
    by Lenin and adopted at the joint session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the
    Moscow Soviet, factory committees and trade unions on October
    22,1918. On the same day, after hearing the report of
    People’s Commissar of Justice D. I. Kursky, the Congress
    passed a resolution on revolutionary legality, drawn up on the
    basis of Lenin’s theses. At its last session on November 9
    the Congress discussed the military situation and Soviet
    development, and adopted appropriate resolutions. The Congress
    decided to merge the Poor Peasants Committees, which had already
    fulfilled their functions with volost and village Soviets. The
    delegates warmly welcomed the news of the revolution in Germany
    and expressed their solidarity with the German workers, soldiers
    and sailors.
A new All-Russia Central Executive Committee
    was elected, consisting of 207 full members and 39 alternate
    members. The Congress summed up the results achieved by Soviet
    power in the first year of its existence and drew up a programme
    of work for the Soviet Government in the near future. 
 
    
[2] 
 
      This refers to the Congress of the Poor Peasants’
      Committees of the Northern Region, which was held in Petrograd
      between November 3 and 6, 1918. Over 15,000 representatives of
      the Poor Peasants’ Committees in eight gubernias of the
      Northern Region and other gubernias took part in Congress
      work. Party and Soviet organisations of Petrograd and the
      Northern Region had carried out extensive preparatory work for
      the Congress under the guidance of the Organising Bureau headed
      by S. P. Voskov, People’s Commissar for Food of the
      Northern Region. The Congress discussed the current situation,
      Poor Peasants’ Committees and local Soviets, supply and
      distribution of products, the question of the Red Army, rural
      education and posts and telegraphs. The Congress adopted a
      decision to form model regiments from poor peasants, which was
      later approved by the Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on
      the proposal of the Regional Congress. Its other resolutions
      concerned the merger of Poor Peasants’ Committees with
      local Soviets, the Soviet government’s food policy,
      educational and other questions. 
The Congress was of vast political importance,
    as it strengthened the alliance of the working class and the
    working peasants.
[3] 
 
      Reference is to the telegram sent “to all military
      commissars, military instructors, army commanders and all
      Soviets” on November 5, 1918, over the signatures of
      Lenin, Sverdlov and People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs
      Chicherin in connection with the rupture by Germany of
      diplomatic relations with Soviet Russia. It was published in
      Pravda and Izvestia on November 6. 
[4] 
 
      In 1848-49 the Russian tsar Nicholas I sent troops to help the
      Austrian emperor suppress the revolution in Hungary.
[5] 
 
      In 1863-64 Russian troops suppressed the liberation insurrection
      in Poland.
[6]
    This refers to the sudden refusal of the Dutch Government to
    permit the entry of a plenipotentiary envoy of the R.S.F.S.R., who
    was already on his way to the country. Before his departure from
    Russia the plenipotentiary had received from the Dutch Consul in
    Moscow a visa notifying him of his recognition by the Dutch
    Government as a plenipotentiary envoy of the R.S.F.S.R. at the
    Hague.
[7]
L’Echo de Paris—a reactionary bourgeois
      paper published in Paris from 1884 to 1938. 
[8]
Ill-me Internationale—organ of the French
      Communists in Soviet Russia, published in Moscow. Its first
      issue appeared on October 20 1918. Among its contributors were
      Jacques Sadoul, Inessa Armand (Y. Blonina) and
      others. Publication was discontinued in March 1919. 
[9]
 
      The total sum of debts incurred by Russia through loans received
      by the tsarist and Provisional governments (including foreign
      investments in Russian industry) exceeded 16,000 million rubles
      in gold. All foreign loans contracted by the tsarist government
      and the Provisional Government were repudiated by the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee’s decree of January 21
      (February 3), 1918. 
[10]
Manchester Guardian—a liberal newspaper, one of
      the most popular and influential bourgeois newspapers. It was
      founded in 1821 and appeared once a week (in 1857 it became a
      daily). In the first years after the October Revolution it gave
      a more or less objective coverage of events in Soviet
      Russia. 
The quotation further on is from the article
    “The Allies and Russia”. 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive








==========

## Speech at the Unveiling Of a
Memorial to Marx and Engels, November 7, 1918









Speech at Memorial to Marx and Engels November 7, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At The
Unveiling Of A Memorial To Marx And Engels
November 7, 1918

Delivered: 7 November, 1918
First Published Brief report published November 9, 1918 in
    Pravda No. 242; First published in full April 3, 1924 in Pravda No. 76
    Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
    Volume 28, 1974, pages 165-166
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002

We are unveiling a memorial to Marx and Engels, the leaders of the world
    workers’ revolution.
Humanity has for ages suffered and languished under the oppression of a tiny handful of
    exploiters who maltreated millions of labourers. But whereas the exploiters of an earlier
    period, the landowners, robbed and maltreated the peasant serfs, who were disunited,
    scattered and ignorant, the exploiters of the new period, the capitalists, came face to face
    with the vanguard of the downtrodden people, the urban, factory, industrial workers. They
    were united by the factory, they were enlightened by urban life, they were steeled by the
    common strike struggle and by revolutionary action.
It is to the great historic merit of Marx and Engels that they proved by scientific
    analysis the inevitability of capitalism’s collapse and its transition to communism,
    under which there will be no more exploitation of man by man.
It is to the great historic merit of Marx and Engels that they indicated to the workers of
    the world their role, their task, their mission, namely, to be the first to rise in the
    revolutionary struggle against capital and to rally around themselves in this struggle all
    working and exploited people.
We are living at a wonderful time, when this prophecy of the great socialists is beginning
    to be realised. We all see the dawn of the world socialist revolution of the proletariat
    breaking in several countries. The unspeakable horrors of the imperialist butchery of nations
    are everywhere evoking a heroic upsurge of the oppressed and multiplying their strength in
    the struggle for emancipation.
Let this memorial to Marx and Engels again and again remind the millions of workers and
    peasants that we are not alone in our struggle. Side by side with us the workers of more
    advanced countries are rising. Hard battles still lie ahead of them and us. In
    common struggle capitalist oppression will be broken, and socialism finally won!


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Speech at the Unveiling Of a
Memorial Plaque to Those Who Fell In the October Revolution, November 7,
  1918









Speech At The Unveiling Of A Memorial Plaque To Those Who Fell In The October Revolution, November 7, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At The Unveiling
Of A Memorial Plaque To Those
 Who Fell In The October Revolution
November 7, 1918


Delivered: 7 November, 1918
First Published: Brief report published November 8, 1918 in Vecherniye Izvestia Moshavshovo Soveta No. 93; First pushlished in full April 3, 1924 in Pravda No. 76; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 167-168
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



Comrades, we are here to unveil a memorial to those who fell in the October Revolution, 1917. The best sons of the working people laid down their lives in starting a revolution to liberate nations from imperialism, to put an end to wars among nations, to overthrow capital and to win socialism.
For several decades now the history of Russia has had a long list of revolutionary martyrs. Thousands upon thousands died fighting tsarism. Their death roused new fighters and drew more and more people into the struggle.
Those comrades who fell last October brought the magnificent happiness of victory. The greatest honour of which the revolutionary leaders of mankind dreamed was won by them: over the bodies of those comrades who gallantly fell in battle passed thousands and millions of new arid just as fearless fighters who won victory by their mass heroism.
Today, all over the world, the workers are seething with auger. The workers’ socialist revolution is beginning in several countries. The capitalists of the whole world in terror and hatred hurriedly rally together for the revolution’s suppression. And the Socialist Soviet Republic of  Russia is a particular thorn in their side. The combined imperialists of the world are prepared to attack us, to involve us in more battles, and to impose more sacrifices on us.
Comrades, let us honour the memory of the October fighters by swearing before their memorial that we shall follow in their footsteps and emulate their courage and heroism. Let their motto he our motto, the motto of the rebelling workers of the world  “Victory or Death!”
And with this motto the fighters for the proletarian world socialist revolution will be invincible


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech at a Rally And Concert For
the All-Russia Extraordinary Commission Staff, November 7, 1918









Speech At A Rally And Concert For The All-Russia Extraordinary Commission Staff



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Rally And Concert
 For The All-Russia Extraordinary Commission Staff
November 7, 1918


Delivered: 7 November, 1918
First Published: Brief report publisheded November 10, 1918 in Izvestia No. 214
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 169-170 
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala & David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002



      (Storm of applause.) Comrades, in celebrating the anniversary of
      our revolution, I would like to say a few words about the
      onerous duties of the Extraordinary Commissions.
It is not at all surprising to hear Cheka’s activities
      frequently attacked by friends as well as enemies. We have taken
      on a hard job. When we took over the government of the country, we
      naturally made many mistakes, and it is only natural that the
      mistakes of the Extraordinary Commissions strike the eye most. The
      narrow-minded intellectual fastens on these mistakes without
      trying to get to the root of the matter. What does surprise me in
      all these outcries about Cheka’s mistakes is the manifest
      inability to put the question on a broad fooling. People harp on
      individual mistakes Cheka makes, and raise a hue and cry about
      them. 

    

      We, however, say that we learn from our mistakes. In this
      department, as in all others, we say-we shall learn by
      self-criticism. It is not a matter, of course, of Cheka’s
      personnel but the nature of its functions, which demand
      determined, swift and, above all, faithful action. When I consider
      its activities and see how they are attacked, I say this is all
      narrow-minded and futile talk. It reminds me of Kautsky’s
      homily on the dictatorship, which is tantamount to supporting the
      bourgeoisie. We surely know from experience that the expropriation
      of the bourgeoisie entails a drastic struggle—a
      dictatorship.
Marx said that the revolutionary dictatorship of rthe
      proletariat lies between capitalism and communism. The more the
      proletariat presses the bourgeoisie, the more furiously they
      will resist. We know what vengeance was wreaked on the workers
      in France in 1848. And when people charge us with harshness we
      wonder how they can forget the rudiments of Marxism. We have not
      forgotten the mutiny of the officer cadets in October, and we
      must not forget that a number of revolts are now being
      engineered. We have, on the one hand, to learn to work
      constructively, and, on the other, to smash the
      bourgeoisie’s resistance. The Finnish whiteguards, for all
      their much-vaunted democracy, had no scruples about shooting
      down workers. The realisation of the need for dictatorship has
      taken deep root in the people’s minds, arduous and
      difficult though it is. That alien elements should try to worm
      their way into Cheka is quite natural. With the help of
      self-criticism we shall dig them out. The important thing for us
      is that! Cheka is directly exercising the dictatorship of the
      proletariat, and in that respect its services are
      invaluable. There is no way of emancipating the people except by
      forcibly suppressing the exploiters. That is what Cheka is
      doing, and therein lies its service to the proletariat.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive




==========

## Speech at a Meeting of Delegates
From the Poor Peasants’ Committees Of Central Gubernias, November 8,
  1918









Speech At A Meeting Of Delegates From The Poor Peasants' Committees Of Central Gubernias, November 8, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech At A Meeting Of
Delegates From The Poor Peasants’ Committees Of Central Gubernias[1]
November 8, 1918

Delivered: 8 November, 1918
First Published" 10 November, 1918Byednota No. 185; Published according to the Byednota
    text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
    Volume 28, 1974, pages 95-97
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002

Comrades, the organisation of the poor peasants is the key problem in our
    internal construction work, and even in our whole revolution.
The aim of the October Revolution was to wrench the factories from the hands of the
    capitalists so as to make the means of production the property of the whole people, and to
    reconstruct agriculture on socialist lines by handing over the land to the peasants.
The first part of this aim was much easier to accomplish than the second. In the cities,
    the revolution was dealing with large-scale industry employing tens and hundreds of thousands
    of workers. The factories belonged to a small number of capitalists, who gave the workers
    little trouble. The workers had already gained experience in their long struggle against the
    capitalists, which had taught them to act concertedly, resolutely, and in an organised way.
    Moreover, they did not have to split up the factories; the thing that mattered was to make
    all production serve the interests of the working class and the peasants and see that the
    products of labour should not fall into capitalist hands.
But agriculture is quite a different proposition. A number of transitional measures are
    required if socialism is to win here. To transform a vast number of small peasant farms into
    large farms is something that cannot be done immediately. Agriculture, which has hitherto
    been conducted on a haphazard basis, cannot immediately or in a short space of time be
    socialised and transformed into large-scale state enterprise, whose produce would be equally
    and justly distributed among all working people under a system of universal and equal labour
    service.
While the factory workers in the cities have already succeeded in completely overthrowing
    the capitalists and getting rid of exploitation, in the countryside the real fight against
    exploitation has only just begun.
After the October Revolution we finished off the landowner and took away his land. That,
    however, did not end the rural struggle. Gaining the land, like every other workers’ gain,
    can only be secure when it is based on the independent action of the working people
    themselves, on their own organisation, on their endurance and revolutionary
    determination.
Did the peasants have this organisation?
Unfortunately not. And that is the trouble, the reason why the struggle is so
    difficult.
Peasants who do not employ the labour of others, who do not profit at the expense of
    others, will, of course, always be in favour of the land being divided among all equally, of
    everybody working, of land tenure not serving as a basis of exploitation; they are against
    the concentration of land in the hands of a few. But it is different with the kulaks and the
    parasites who grew rich on the war, who took advantage of the famine to sell grain at
    fabulous prices, who concealed grain in anticipation of higher prices, and who are now doing
    all they can to grow rich on the people’s misfortunes and on the starvation of the village
    poor and urban workers.
They, the kulaks and parasites, are no less formidable enemies than the capitalists and
    landowners. And if the kulaks are not dealt with properly, if we do not cope with the
    parasites, the return of the tsar and the capitalists is inevitable.
The experience of every revolution that has occurred in Europe offers striking
    corroboration of the fact that revolution is inevitably doomed if the peasants do not throw
    off the domination of the kulaks.
Every European revolution ended in failure because the peasants could not cope with their
    enemies. In the cities the workers overthrew their kings (in England and France they executed
    their kings several centuries ago; it was only we who were late with our tsar), yet after a
    certain interval the old order came back. That was because in those days even in the cities
    there was no large-scale industry which could unite millions of workers in the factories and
    weld them into an army powerful enough to withstand the onslaught of the capitalists and the
    kulaks even without peasant support.
The poor peasants were unorganised, fought the kulaks badly, and as a result the
    revolution was defeated in the cities as well.
Now the situation is different. During the last two hundred years large-scale production
    has developed so powerfully and has covered all countries with such a network of huge
    factories employing thousands and tens of thousands of workers that today everywhere in the
    cities there are many organised workers, the proletarians, who constitute a force strong
    enough to achieve final victory over the bourgeoisie, the capitalists.
In former revolutions the poor peasants had nowhere to turn for support in their difficult
    struggle against the kulaks.
The organised proletariat—which is stronger and more experienced than the peasants
    (having gained experience in earlier struggles)—now holds power in Russia and possesses
    all the means of production, the mills, factories, railways, ships, etc.
Now the poor peasants have a reliable and powerful ally in their anti-kulak struggle. They
    know that the town is behind them, that the proletariat will help them, and is in fact
    already helping them with every means in its power. That has been shown by recent events.
You all remember, comrades, in what a dangerous situation the revolution was this July.
    The Czech revolt was spreading, the food shortage in the cities was worsening and the kulaks
    were becoming more insolent and violent than ever in their attacks on the towns, the Soviet
    government and the poor peasants.
We appealed to the poor peasants to organise. We proceeded to form Poor Peasants’
    Committees and organise workers’ food detachments. The Left Socialist-Revolutionaries started
    an uprising. They said the Poor Peasants’ Committees consisted of idlers and the workers were
    robbing the working peasants of grain.
We replied that they were defending the kulaks, who realised that the Soviet government
    could be fought by starvation as well as arms. They talked about "idlers". And we asked, "But
    why does an individual become an ’idler’, why does he deteriorate, why is he impoverished,
    and why does he take to drink? Isn’t it because of the kulaks?" The kulaks, in unison with
    the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, raised an outcry against "idlers", but they themselves
    were raking in grain, concealing it and profiteering because they wanted to grow rich on the
    starvation and suffering of the workers.
The kulaks were squeezing the poor peasants dry. They were profiting from the labour of
    others, at the same time crying, "Idlers!"
The kulaks waited impatiently for the Czechs. They would most willingly have enthroned a
    new tsar so as to continue their exploitation with impunity, to continue to dominate the farm
    labourer and to continue to grow rich.
The only salvation was in the village uniting with the town, the rural proletarians and
    semi-proletarians (those who do not employ the labour of others) joining the town workers in
    a campaign against the kulaks and parasites.
To achieve this unity a great deal had to be done about the food situation. The workers in
    the towns were starving, while the kulak said: "If I hold my grain back a bit longer they may
    pay more." 
The kulaks, of course, are in no hurry; they have plenty of money; they say themselves
    they have tons of Kerensky notes.[2]
But people who during famine can conceal and hoard grain are vicious criminals. They must
    be fought as the worst enemies of the people.
And we have begun this fight in the countryside.
The Mensheviks and S.R.s tried to frighten us by saying that in forming the Poor Peasants’
    Committees we were splitting the peasants. But if we don’t split the peasants? The
    countryside will be left at the kulak’s mercy. And that is exactly what we do not want, so we
    decided to split them. We said: true, we are losing the kulaks—we cannot avoid that
    misfortune (laughter )—but we shall win thousands and millions of poor peasants who
    will side with the workers. (Applause.)
And that is exactly what is taking place. The split among the peasants only served to
    bring out more clearly who are the poor peasants, who are the middle peasants not employing
    the labour of others, and who are the parasites and kulaks.
The workers have been helping the poor peasants in their struggle against the kulaks. In
    the civil war that has flared up in the countryside the workers are on the side of the poor
    peasants, as they were when they passed the S.R.-sponsored law on the socialisation of the
    land.
We Bolsheviks were opposed to this law. Yet we signed it, because we did not want to
    oppose the will of the majority of peasants. The majority will is binding on us always, and
    to oppose the majority will is to betray the revolution.
We did not want to impose on the peasants the idea that the equal division of the land was
    useless, an idea which was alien to them. Far better, we thought, if, by their own experience
    and suffering, the peasants themselves come to realise that equal division is nonsense. Only
    then could we ask them how they would escape the ruin and kulak domination that follow from
    the division of the land.
Division of the land was all very well as a beginning. Its purpose was to show that the
    land was being taken from the landowners and handed over to the peasants. But that is not
    enough. The solution lies only in socialised farming.
You did not realise this at the time, but you are coming round to it by force of
    experience. The way to escape the disadvantages of small-scale farming lies in communes,
    artels or peasant associations. That is the way to improve agriculture, economise forces and
    combat the kulaks, parasites and exploiters.
We were well aware that the peasants live rooted to the soil. The peasants fear
    innovations and tenaciously cling to old habits. We knew the peasants would only believe in
    the benefits of any particular measure when their own common sense led them to understand and
    appreciate the benefits. And that is why we helped to divide the land, although we realised
    this was no solution.
Now the poor peasants themselves are beginning to agree with us. Experience is teaching
    them that while ten ploughs, say, are required when the land is divided into one hundred
    separate holdings, a smaller number suffices under communal farming because the land is not
    divided up so minutely. A commune permits a whole artel or association to make improvements
    in agriculture that are beyond the capacity of individual small owners, and so on.
Of course, it will not be possible to change everywhere to socialised farming immediately.
    The kulaks will put up every resistance—and frequently the peasants themselves stubbornly
    resist the introduction of communal farming principles. But the more the peasants are
    convinced by example and by their own experience of the advantages of communes, the greater
    progress will be.
The Poor Peasants’ Committees have an immensely important part to play. They must cover
    the whole of Russia. For some time their development has been quite rapid. The other day a
    Congress of Poor Peasants’ Committees of the Northern Region was held in Petrograd. Instead
    of the 7,000 representatives expected, 20,000 actually turned up, and the hall booked for the
    purpose could not accommodate them all. The fine weather came to the rescue and the meeting
    was held in the square outside the Winter Palace.
The Congress showed that the rural civil war is being properly understood: the poor
    peasants are uniting and fighting together against the kulaks, the rich and the
    parasites.
Our Party Central Committee has drawn up a plan for reforming the Poor Peasants’
    Committees which will be submitted for the approval of the Sixth Congress of Soviets. We have
    decided that the Poor Peasants’ Committees and the rural Soviets must not exist separately,
    otherwise there will be squabbling and too much useless talk. We shall merge the Poor
    Peasants’ Committees with the Soviets and turn the Poor Peasants’ Committees into
    Soviets.
We know kulaks sometimes worm their way even into the Poor Peasants’ Committees. If this
    continues the poor peasants will have the same sort of attitude towards the Committees as
    they had towards the kulak Soviets of Kerensky and Avksentyev. A change of name will fool
    nobody. It is therefore proposed to hold new elections to the Poor Peasants’ Committees. The
    right to vote will only go to those who do not exploit the labour of others, who do not make
    the starving people a source of plunder, and who do not profiteer on or conceal grain
    surpluses. There must be no place for kulaks and parasites in the proletarian Poor Peasants’
    Committees.
The Soviet government has decided to assign one thousand million rubles to a special fund
    for improving farming. All existing and newly formed communes will receive monetary and
    technical assistance.
We shall send trained experts if they are required. Although most of these experts are
    counter-revolutionary, the Poor Peasants’ Committees should be able to harness them and they
    will work for the people no worse than they used to work for the exploiters. Our specialists
    are now quite sure they cannot overthrow the workers’ government by sabotage or wilful damage
    to work.
We are not afraid of foreign imperialism either. Germany has already burnt her fingers in
    the Ukraine. Instead of the sixty million poods of grain which Germany hoped to carry off
    from the Ukraine, she got only nine million poods, and Russian Bolshevism into the bargain,
    for which she was not so keen. (Storm of applause.) The British should watch out the
    same thing does not happen to them. We might warn them not to choke themselves! (Laughter
    and applause.)
The danger, however, continues to exist as long as our brothers abroad have not everywhere
    rebelled. And we must therefore continue to organise and strengthen our Red Army. The poor
    peasants should be particularly concerned in this matter for they can only carry on farming
    under the protection of our army.
Comrades, the transition to the new form of agriculture may perhaps proceed slowly, but
    the beginnings of communal farming must be carried into practice unswervingly.
There must be no let-up in the fight against the kulaks, and no deals must be made with
    them.
We can work together with the middle peasants, and with them fight the kulaks. We have
    nothing against the middle peasants. They may not be socialists, and may never become
    socialists, but experience will teach them the advantages of socialised farming and the
    majority of them will not resist.
We tell the kulaks: We have nothing against you either, but hand over your surplus grain,
    don’t profiteer and don’t exploit the labour of others. Until you do so we shall hit you with
    everything we’ve got.
We are taking nothing from the working peasants; but we shall completely expropriate all
    those who employ hired labour and who grow rich at the expense of others. (Stormy
    applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The meeting was called by the 
editors of Byednota in Moscow and was attended by 450 delegates. Lenin spoke about the 
tasks of the Poor Peasants’ Committees in the revolution on November 8.
[2]Kerensky notes—money issued in the summer of 1917 by 
the Provisional Government headed by Kerensky. 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Telegram to All Soviets Of
Deputies, to Everyone









Telegram To All Soviets Of Deputies, To Everyone



Vladimir Lenin
Telegram To All
Soviets Of Deputies, To Everyone


Delivered: 10 November, 1918
First Published: 12, November 1918, Pravda No. 244. Published according the the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, page 179 
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: robert Cymbala & David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002


10.11.18

News came from Germany in the night about the victory of the revolution there. First Kiel radio announced that power was in the hands of a Council of Workers and Sailors. Then Berlin made the following announcement:
"Greetings of peace and freedom to all. Berlin and the surrounding districts are in the hands of a Council of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies. Adolf Hoffmann, Deputy to the Seym. Joffe and the Embassy staff are returning at once."
Please take every step to notify German soldiers at all border points. Berlin also reports that German soldiers at the front have arrested the peace delegation from the for-mer German Government and have begun peace negotiations themselves with the French soldiers.
Lenin,

Chairman of the Council of People’s Commissars



Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Speech at First All-Russian
Congress of Women Workers












Speech at First All-Russia Congress of Working Women



VI Lenin on
Speech at the
First All-Russia Congress of Working Women
November 19, 1918


Delivered: 19 November, 1918
First Published: 22 November, 1918,Pravda No. 
      253; Published according the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works,
      Progress Publishers, Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 180-182 

      
Transcribed and HTML Markup: Sally
      Ryan 

      (proofed by 
R. Cymbala; see source file.)

Online Version:
V.I.Lenin Internet Archive, 2002
      
    

 





      (Comrade Lenin is greeted by the delegates with stormy
      applause.) 
      Comrades, in a certain sense this Congress of the women's
      section of the workers' army has a special significance, because
      one of the hardest things in every country has been to stir the
      women into action. There can be no socialist revolution unless
      very many working women take a big part in it.
    



      In all civilised countries, even the most advanced, women are
      actually no more than domestic slaves. Women do not enjoy full
      equality in any capitalist state, not even in the freest of
      republics.
    



      One of the primary tasks of the Soviet Republic is to abolish
      all restrictions on women's rights. The Soviet government has
      completely abolished divorce proceedings, that source of
      bourgeois degradation, repression and humiliation.
    



      It will soon be a year now since complete freedom of divorce was
      legislated. We have passed a decree annulling all distinction
      between legitimate and illegitimate children and removing
      political restrictions. Nowhere else in the world have equality
      and freedom for working women been so fully established.
    



      We know that it is the working-class woman who has to bear the
      full brunt of antiquated codes.
    



      For the first time in history, our law has removed everything
      that denied women rights. But the important thing is not the
      law. In the cities and industrial areas this law on complete
      freedom of marriage is doing all right, but in the countryside
      it all too frequently remains a dead letter. There the religious
      marriage still predominates. This is due to the influence of the
      priests, an evil that is harder to combat than the old
      legislation.
    



      We must be extremely careful in fighting religious prejudices;
      some people cause a lot of harm in this struggle by offending
      religious feelings. We must use propaganda and education. By
      lending too sharp an edge to the struggle we may only arouse
      popular resentment; such methods of struggle tend to perpetuate
      the division of the people along religious lines, whereas our
      strength lies in unity. The deepest source of religious
      prejudice is poverty and ignorance; and that is the evil we have
      to combat.
    




      The status of women up to now has been compared to that of a
      slave; women have been tied to the home, and only socialism can
      save them from this. They will only be completely emancipated
      when we change from small-scale individual farming to collective
      farming and collective working of the land. That is a difficult
      task. But now that Poor Peasants' Committees are being formed,
      the time has come when the socialist revolution is being
      consolidated.
    





      The poorest part of the rural population is only now beginning
      to organise, and socialism is acquiring a firm foundation in
      these organisations of poor peasants.
    

      Before, often the town became revolutionary and then the
      countryside. 
    

      But the present revolution relies on the countryside, and
      therein lie its significance and strength. the experience of all
      liberation movements has shown that the success of a revolution
      depends on how much the women take part in it. The Soviet
      government is doing everything in its power to enable women to
      carry on independent proletarian socialist work.
    

      The Soviet government is in a difficult position because the
      imperialists of all countries hate Soviet Russia and are
      preparing to go to war with her for kindling the fire of
      revolution in a number of countries and for taking determined
      steps towards socialism.
    

      Now that they are out to destroy revolutionary Russia, the
      ground is beginning to burn under their own feet. You know how
      the revolutionary movement is spreading in Germany. In Denmark
      the workers are fighting their government. In Switzerland and
      Holland the revolutionary movement is getting stronger. The
      revolutionary movement in these small countries has no
      importance in itself, but it is particularly significant because
      there was no war in these countries and they had the most
      "constitutional" democratic system. If countries like these are
      stirring into action, it makes us sure the revolutionary
      movement is gaining ground all over the world.
    

      No other republic has so far been able to emancipate woman. The
      Soviet Government is helping her. Our cause is invincible
      because the invincible working class is rising in all
      countries. This movement signifies the spread of the invincible
      socialist revolution.
      (Prolonged applause.
      All sing the "Internationale".)
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Speech at a Rally In
Lenin’s Honour, November 20, 1918.










Speech At A Rally In Lenin's Honour, November 20, 1918



VI Lenin on
Speech At
 A Rally In Lenin’s Honour 
November 20, 1918[1]
Brief Newspaper Report

Written: 20 November, 1918
First Published: 21 November 1918, Pravda No. 252
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
    Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 185-194
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: robert Cymbala & David
    Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002


Pravda No. 253, November 22, 1918; Published according to the Pravda text

(Comrade Lenin is greeted with stormy applause passing into ovation.) Comrades, I should like to say a few words about a letter in today’s Pravda. The letter is written by Pitirim Sorokin, a prominent member of the Constituent Assembly and Right Socialist-Revolutionary Party. Soro-kin informs his constituents that he is relinquishing his seat in the Constituent Assembly and withdrawing com-pletely from politics. Apart from being an extremely inter-esting “human document", the letter has a great deal of political significance.

      As is fairly well known, Pitirim Sorokin was the main force on
      the staff of the Right-wing S. B. Volga
      Naroda which connived with the Cadets. To admit this in
      the press is quite a volte-/ace, a big change, which is taking
      place among people who had been violently hostile to the Soviet
      government up till now. In saying that in many cases the policy
      of certain statesmen is socially harmful, Pilirim Sorokin shows
      that he is publicly and honestly admitting at last that the
      whole policy of the Right-wing S.R.s was socially harmful.
    
Through recent events, many members of this party are beginning to realise that the time has come when the Bolshevik stand is being proved right and all the blunders and errors of its inveterate enemies are being exposed.
Sorokin’s letter goes to show that at the given moment we can count on at least a neutral attitude to the Soviet government from a whole number of groups now antagonistic. The monstrous Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty turned many away from us, many did not believe in revolution, many piously trusted the pure intentions of the Allies; and now all this has been exposed and everyone can see that the notorious Allies, having dictated even more monstrous peace terms to Germany than those at Brest-Litovsk, are just as rapacious as the German imperialists.
As we all know, the Allies are supporters of the monarchy in Russia: in Archangel, for instance, they are actively hacking the monarchists. The British are attacking Russia to take the place of the vanquished German imperialists. All this has opened the eyes of even the most inveterate and uninformed enemies of the revolution.
Many people had been blind supporters of the Constituent Assembly up till now, although we had always said it was just a slogan of the landowners, the monarchists and the entire bourgeoisie with Milyukov at their head, who is selling Russia left, right and centre to the highest bidder.
The “Republic” of America is oppressing the working class. Now everyone knows what a democratic republic actually is. Now it is apparent to everyone that either victorious imperialism or Soviet power can exist-there’s no middle way. (Lenin’s speech is repeatedly interrupted by stormy ovations.)

Endnotes
[1]
 The rally was called by the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P. (B.) and the Presnya District Party Committee at the cinema Ars. The two reports made at the rally were entitled “V. I. Lenin as Leader of the Russian Communist Party” and “V. I. Lenin as Fighter for the Third International". After Lenin’s speech a film was shown, called October Festivities in Moscow.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Valuable Admissions Of Pitirim
Sorokin










The Valuable Admissions Of Pitirim Sorokin



VI Lenin on
The Valuable Admissions Of Pitirim Sorokin

Written: 20 November, 1918
First Published: 21 November 1918, Pravda No. 252
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
    Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 185-194
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: robert Cymbala & David
    Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002

Pravda today carries a remarkably
      interesting letter by Pitirim Sorokin, to which the special
      attention of all Communists should be drawn. In this letter,
      which was originally published in Izvestia of the North
      Dvina Executive Committee[1], Pitirim
      Sorokin announces that he is leaving the Right
      Socialist-Revolutionary Party and relinquishing his seat in the
      Constituent Assembly. His motives are that he finds it difficult
      to provide effective political recipes, not only for others, but
      even for himself, and that therefore he “is withdrawing
      completely from politics”. He writes: “The past year
      of revolution has taught me one truth: politicians may make
      mistakes, politics may be socially useful, but may also be
      socially harmful, whereas scientific and educational work is
      always useful and is always needed by the people. . . .”
      The letter is signed: “Pitirim Sorokin, lecturer at
      St. Petersburg University and the Psycho-Neurological Institute,
      former member of the Constituent Assembly and former member of
      the Socialist-Revolutionary Party”.
This letter is worth mentioning in the first place because it
      is an extremely interesting “human document”. We do
      not often meet such sincerity and frankness as are displayed by
      Sorokin in admitting the mistakenness of his politics. In
      practically the majority of cases politicians who become
      convinced that the line they have been pursuing is erroneous try
      to conceal their change of front, to hush it up, to
      “invent” more or less extraneous motives, and so
      on. A frank and honest admission of one’s political error
      is in itself an important political act. Pitirim Sorokin is
      wrong when he says that scientific work “is always
      useful”.

      For mistakes are made in this sphere too, and there are examples
      also in Russian literature of the obstinate advocacy of, for
      instance, reactionary philosophical views by people who are not
      conscious reactionaries. On the other hand, a frank declaration
      by a prominent person—i.e., a person who has occupied a
      responsible political post known to the people at
      large—that he is withdrawing from politics is also
      politics. An honest confession of a political error may be
      of great political benefit to many people if the error was
      shared by whole parties which at one time enjoyed influence over
      the people.
The political significance of Pitirim Sorokin’s letter is
      very great precisely at the present moment. It is a
      “lesson” which we should all seriously think over
      and learn thoroughly.
It is a truth long known to every Marxist that in every
      capitalist society the only decisive forces are the
      proletariat and the bourgeoisie, while all social elements
      occupying a position between these classes and coming within the
      economic category of the petty bourgeoisie inevitably
      vacillate between these decisive forces. But there is an
      enormous gulf between academic recognition of this truth and the
      ability to draw the conclusions that follow from it in the
      complex conditions of practical reality.
Pitirim Sorokin is representative of the Menshevik
      Socialist-Revolutionary trend, an extremely broad public and
      political trend. That this is a single trend, that the
      difference between the Mensheviks and the
      Socialist-Revolutionaries in their attitude towards the struggle
      between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat is insignificant, is
      especially convincingly and strikingly borne out by the events
      in the Russian revolution since February 1917. The Mensheviks
      and the Socialist-Revolutionaries are varieties of
      petty-bourgeois democrats—that is the economic essence and
      fundamental political characteristic of the trend in
      question. We know from the history of the advanced countries how
      frequently this trend in its early stages assumes a
      “socialist” hue.
What was it that several months ago so forcibly repelled those
      of this trend from the Bolsheviks, from the proletarian
      revolution, and what is it that is now inducing them to shift
      from hostility to neutrality? It is quite obvious that the cause
      of this shift was, firstly, the collapse of German imperialism
      in connection with the revolution in Germany and other
      countries, and the exposure of Anglo-French imperialism, and,
      secondly, the dispelling of bourgeois democratic illusions.
Let us deal with the first cause. Patriotism is one of the most
      deeply ingrained sentiments, inculcated by the existence of
      separate fatherlands for hundreds and thousands of years. One of
      the most pronounced, one might say exceptional, difficulties of
      our proletarian revolution is that it was obliged to pass
      through a phase of extreme departure from patriotism, the phase
      of the Brest-Litovsk Peace. The bitterness, resentment, and
      violent indignation provoked by this peace were easy to
      understand and it goes without saying that we Marxists could
      expect only the class-conscious vanguard of the proletariat to
      appreciate the truth that we were making and were obliged to
      make great national sacrifices for the sake of the supreme
      interests of the world proletarian revolution. There was no
      source from which ideologists who are not Marxists, and the
      broad mass of the working people, who do not belong to the
      proletariat trained in the long school of strikes and
      revolution, could derive either a firm conviction that the
      revolution was maturing, or an unreserved devotion to it. At
      best, our tactics appeared to them a fantastic, fanatical, and
      adventurist sacrifice of the real and most obvious interests of
      hundreds of millions for the sake of an abstract, utopian, and
      dubious hope of something that might occur abroad. And the petty
      bourgeoisie, owing to their economic position, are more
      patriotic than the bourgeoisie or the proletariat.
But it turned out as we had said.
German imperialism, which had seemed to be the only enemy,
      collapsed. The German revolution, which had appeared to be a
      “dream-farce” (to use Plekhanov’s expression),
      became a fact. Anglo-French imperialism, which the fantasy of
      the petty-bourgeois democrats had pictured as a friend of
      democracy and a protector of the oppressed, turned out to be a
      savage beast which imposed on the German Republic and the people
      of Austria terms worse than those of Brest, a savage beast which
      used armies of “free” republicans—French and
      American—as gendarmes, butchers and throttlers of the
      independence and freedom of small and weak nations. Anglo-French
      imperialism was exposed by world history with ruthless
      thoroughness and frankness. The facts of world history
      demonstrated to the Russian patriots, who formerly would hear of
      nothing that was not to the direct advantage (as formerly
      understood) of their country, that the transformation of our
      Russian revolution into a socialist revolution was not a dubious
      venture but a necessity, for there was no other
      alternative: Anglo-French and American imperialism will
      inevitably destroy the independence and freedom of
      Russia if the world socialist revolution, world Bolshevism, does
      not triumph.
Facts are stubborn things, as the English say. And during
      recent months we have witnessed facts that signify a most
      momentous turning-point in world history. These facts are
      compelling the petty-bourgeois democrats of Russia, in spite of
      their hatred of Bolshevism, a hatred inculcated by the history
      of our inner-Party struggle, to turn from hostility to
      Bolshevism first to neutrality and then to support of
      Bolshevism. The objective conditions which repelled these
      democratic patriots from us most strongly have now vanished. The
      objective conditions existing in the world now compel
      them to turn to us. Pitirim Sorokin’s change of front is
      by no means fortuitous, but rather the symptom of an inevitable
      change of front on the part of a whole class, of the
      whole petty-bourgeois democracy. Whoever fails to reckon with
      this fact and to take advantage of it is a bad socialist, not a
      Marxist.
Furthermore, faith in “democracy” in
      general, as a universal panacea, and failure to understand
      that this democracy is bourgeois democracy,
      historically limited in its usefulness and its necessity, have
      for decades and centuries been particularly characteristic of
      the petty bourgeoisie of all countries. The big bourgeois is
      case-hardened; he knows that under capitalism a democratic
      republic, like every other form of state, is nothing but a
      machine for the suppression of the proletariat. The big
      bourgeois knows this from his most intimate
      acquaintance with the real leaders and with the most profound
      (and therefore frequently the most concealed) springs of
      every bourgeois state machine. The petty bourgeois,
      Owning to his economic position and his conditions of life
      generally, is less able to appreciate this truth, and even
      cherishes the illusion that a democratic republic implies
      “pure democracy”, “a free people’s
      state”, the non-class or supra-class rule of the people, a
      pure manifestation of the will of the people, and so on and so
      forth. The tenacity of these prejudices of the petty-bourgeois
      democrat is inevitably due to the fact that he is farther
      removed from the acute class struggle, the stock exchange, and
      “real” politics; and it would be absolutely
      un-Marxist to expect these prejudices to be eradicated very
      rapidly by propaganda alone.
World history, however, is moving with such furious rapidity,
      is smashing everything customary and established with a hammer
      of such immense weight, by crises of such unparalleled
      intensity, that the most tenacious prejudices are giving
      way. The naïve belief in a Constituent Assembly and the
      naïve habit of contrasting “pure democracy”
      with “proletarian dictatorship” took shape naturally
      and inevitably in the mind of the “democrat in
      general”. But the experiences of the Constituent Assembly
      supporters in Archangel, Samara, Siberia and the South could not
      but destroy even the most tenacious of prejudices. The idealised
      democratic republic of Wilson proved in practice to be
      a form of the most rabid imperialism, of the most shameless
      oppression and suppression of weak and small nations. The
      average “democrat” in general, the Menshevik and the
      Socialist-Revolutionary, thought: “How can we even dream
      of some allegedly superior type of state, some Soviet
      government? God grant us even an ordinary democratic
      republic!” And, of course, in “ordinary”,
      comparatively peaceful times he could have kept on cherishing
      this “hope” for many a long decade.
Now, however, the course of world events and the bitter lessons
      derived from the alliance of all the Russian monarchists with
      Anglo-French and American imperialism are proving in
      practice that a democratic republic is a
      bourgeois-democratic republic, which is already out of date from
      the point of view of the problems which imperialism has placed
      before history. They show that there is no other
      alternative: either Soviet government triumphs in every
      advanced country in the world, or the most reactionary
      imperialism triumphs, the most savage imperialism, which is
      throttling the small and weak nations and reinstating reaction
      all over the world—Anglo-American imperialism, which has
      perfectly mastered the art of using the form of a democratic
      republic.
One or the other.
There is no middle course. Until quite recently this view was
      regarded as the blind fanaticism of the Bolsheviks.
But it turned out to be true.
If Pitirim Sorokin has relinquished his seat in the Constituent
      Assembly, it is not without reason; it is a symptom of a change
      of front on the part of a whole class, the petty-bourgeois
      democrats. A split among them is inevitable: one section will
      come over to our side, another section will remain neutral,
      while a third will deliberately join forces with the monarchist
      Constitutional-Democrats, who are selling Russia to
      Anglo-American capital and seeking to crush the revolution with
      the aid of foreign bayonets. One of the most urgent tasks of the
      present day is to take into account and make use of the turn
      among the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary democrats from
      hostility to Bolshevism first to neutrality and then to support
      of Bolshevism.
Every slogan the Party addresses to the people is bound to
      become petrified, become a dead letter, yet remain valid for
      many even when the conditions which rendered it necessary have
      changed. That is an unavoidable evil, and it is impossible to
      ensure the correctness of Party policy unless we learn to combat
      and overcome it. The period of our proletarian revolution in
      which the differences with the Menshevik and
      Socialist-Revolutionary democrats were particularly acute was a
      historically necessary period. It was impossible to avoid waging
      a vigorous struggle against these democrats when they swung to
      the camp of our enemies and set about restoring a bourgeois
      and imperialist democratic republic. Many of the slogans of
      this struggle have now become frozen and petrified and
      prevent us from properly assessing and taking effective
      advantage of the new period, in which a change of front has
      begun among these democrats, a change in our direction, not a
      fortuitous change, but one rooted deep in the conditions of the
      international situation.
It is not enough to encourage this change of front and amicably
      greet those who are making it. A politician who knows what he is
      working for must learn to bring about this change of
      front among the various sections and groups of the broad mass of
      petty-bourgeois democrats if he is convinced that serious and
      deep-going historical reasons for such a turn exist. A
      revolutionary proletarian must know whom to suppress and with
      whom—and when and how—to conclude an agreement. It
      would be ridiculous and foolish to refrain from employing terror
      against and suppressing the landowners and capitalists and their
      henchmen, who are selling Russia to the foreign imperialist
      “Allies”. It would be farcical to attempt to
      “convince” or generally to “psychologically
      influence” them. But it would be equally foolish and
      ridiculous—if not more so—to insist only on tactics
      of suppression and terror in relation to the petty-bourgeois
      democrats when the course of events is compelling them to turn
      in our direction.
The proletariat encounters these democrats everywhere. Our task
      in the rural districts is to destroy the landowner and smash the
      resistance of the exploiter and the kulak profiteer.  For this
      purpose we can safely rely only on the
      semi-proletarians, the “poor peasants”. But the
      middle peasant is not our enemy. He wavered, is wavering, and
      will continue to waver. The task of influencing the waverers
      is not identical with the task of overthrowing the
      exploiter and defeating the active enemy. The task at the
      present moment is to come to an agreement with the middle
      peasant—while not for a moment renouncing the struggle
      against the kulak and at the same time firmly relying solely on
      the poor peasant—for a turn in our direction on the part
      of the middle peasants is now inevitable owing to the causes
      enumerated above.
This applies also to the handicraftsman, the artisan, and the
      worker whose conditions are most petty-bourgeois or whose views
      are most petty-bourgeois, and to many office workers and army
      officers, and, in particular, to the intellectuals generally. It
      is an unquestionable fact that there often are instances in our
      Party of inability to make use of this change of front among
      them and that this inability can and must be overcome.
We already have the firm support of the vast majority of the
      proletarians organised in the trade unions. We must know how to
      win over the least proletarian and most petty bourgeois sections
      of the working people who are turning towards us, to
      include them in the general organisation and to subject them to
      general proletarian discipline. The slogan of the moment here is
      not to fight these sections, but to win them over, to be able to
      influence them, to convince the waverers, to make use of those
      who are neutral, and, by mass proletarian influence, to educate
      those who are lagging behind or who have only very recently
      begun to free themselves from “Constituent Assembly”
      or “patriotic democratic” illusions.
We already have sufficiently firm support among the working
      people. This was quite strikingly borne out by the Sixth
      Congress of Soviets. We are not afraid of the bourgeois
      intellectuals, but we shall not for a moment relax the struggle
      against the deliberate saboteurs and whiteguards among them. But
      the slogan of the moment is to make use of the change of
      attitude towards us which is taking place among them. There
      still remain plenty of the worst bourgeois specialists who have
      wormed themselves into Soviet positions. To throw them out, to
      replace them by specialists who yesterday were our convinced
      enemies and today are only neutral is one of the most important
      tasks of the present moment, the task of every active Soviet
      functionary who comes into contact with the
      “specialists”, of every agitator, propagandist, and
      organiser.
Of course, like every other political action in a complex and
      rapidly changing situation, agreement with the middle peasant,
      with the worker who was a Menshevik yesterday and with the
      office worker or specialist who was a saboteur yesterday, takes
      skill to achieve. The whole point is not to rest content with
      the skill we have acquired by previous experience, but under
      all circumstances to go on, under all circumstances to
      strive for something bigger, under all circumstances to
      proceed from simpler to more difficult tasks. Otherwise, no
      progress whatever is possible and in particular no progress is
      possible in socialist construction.
The other day I was visited by representatives from a congress
      of delegates of credit co-operative societies. They showed me
      the congress resolution[2] protesting
      against the merger of the Credit Co-operative Bank with
      the People’s Bank of the Republic. I told them that I
      stood for agreement with the middle peasants and highly valued
      even the beginnings of a change in attitude from hostility to
      neutrality towards the Bolsheviks on the part of the
      co-operators, but the basis for an agreement could be created
      only by their consent to the complete merger of their special
      bank with the single Bank of the Republic. The congress
      delegates thereupon replaced their resolution by another, which
      they had the congress adopt, and in which everything hostile to
      the merger was deleted; but . . . but what they
      proposed was a plan for a special “credit
      union” of co-operators, which in fact differed in no way
      from a special bank! That was ridiculous. Only a fool, of
      course, will be deceived by such verbiage. But the
      “failure” of one such . . .  “attempt”
      will not affect our policy in the least; we have pursued and
      will pursue a policy of agreement with the co-operators, the
      middle peasants, at the same time suppressing every attempt to
      change the policy of the Soviet government and of
      Soviet socialist construction.
Vacillation on the part of the petty-bourgeois democrats is
      inevitable. It was enough for the Czechs to win a few victories
      for these democrats to fall into a panic, to begin to spread
      panic, to hasten to the side of the “victors”, and
      be ready to greet them in a servile manner. Of course, it must
      not be forgotten for a moment that now, too, any partial success
      of, let us say, the Anglo-American-Krasnov whiteguards would be
      enough for vacillation to begin in the other direction,
      increasing panic and multiplying cases of the dissemination of
      panic, of treachery, and desertion to the imperialists, and so
      on and so forth.
We are aware of that. We shall not forget it. The purely
      proletarian basis we have won for the Soviet government, which
      is supported by the semi-proletarians, will remain firm and
      enduring. Our ranks will not falter, our army will not
      waver—that we already know from experience. But when
      profound world-historic changes bring about an inevitable turn
      in our direction among the mass of non-Party, Menshevik, and
      Socialist-Revolutionary democrats, we must learn and shall learn
      to make use of this change of front, to encourage it, to induce
      it among the various groups and sections of the population, to
      do everything possible to reach agreement with them and thus
      facilitate the work of socialist construction and ease the
      burden of grievous economic dislocation, ignorance, and
      incompetence which are delaying the victory of socialism.
Lenin

Endnotes
[1]
      Further on in the article Lenin quotes Pitirim Sorokin’s
      letter as published in Pravda No. 251, November 20,
      1918, where it was erroneously said that the letter was
      originally published in Izvestia of the North Dvina
      Executive Committee. Actually the newspaper was called
      Kresfyanskiye i Rabochiye Dumy (Peasants’ and
      Workers’ Thoughts ); the letter appeared in issue
      No. 75 dated October 29, 1918.
[2]
      The resolution was adopted by the emergency congress of the
      Moscow People’s Bank shareholders on November 16, 1918,
      and was directed against the proposed nationalisation of the
      bank.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech On Red Officers’ Day,
November 24 1918










Speech On Red Officers' Day, November 24, 1918



VI Lenin on
Speech On
 Red Officers’ Day
November 24, 1918[1]

Written: 24 November, 1918
First Published: Izvestia No. 258, November 26, 1918 Published according to the Izvestia text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
    Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, page 195
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: robert Cymbala & David
    Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002


(Thunderous applause, singing of the “Internationale".)

      Greetings on behalf of the People’s Commissars. Whenever 1
      think about the tasks of our army and Red officers, I recall
      something that happened in,a train on Finnish Railways not so
      long ago.

      I noticed that the passengers were smiling at something an old
      Finnish woman was saying, so I asked someone to translate her
      words. She was comparing the revolutiouary soldiers to the old
      soldiers and saying that the former protected the poor whereas
      the latter used to protect the interests of the bourgeoisie and
      the landowners. “ Formerly the poor man had to pay heavily
      for every stick of wood he took without permission,” the
      old woman said. “ But when you meet a soldier in the woods
      nowadays he’ll even give you a hand with your bundle of
      sticks. You don’t have to fear the man with the gun any
      more,” she said.

      l think it would be hard to imagine any better tribute to the
      Red Army than that.
Most of the old officers were the spoiled and depraved darling
    sons of capitalists, who had nothing in common with the private
    soldier. So in building our new army now, we must draw our
    officers solely from among the people. Only Red officers will have
    any respect among the soldiers and be able to strengthen socialism
    in our army. Such an army will be invincible.

Endnotes
[1] Red Officers’ Day was appointed for the purpose of popularising the cause of training officers for the Red Army. On November 24, 1918, at 2. p. m., military cadets paraded on Red Square, from where they marched to Sovetskaya Square to be greeted by Leninfrom the balcony of the Moscow Soviet building.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech Delivered to a Meeting Of
Delegates From the Moscow Central Workers’ Co-Operative, November 26,
  1918









Speech Delivered To A Meeting Of Delegates From The Moscow Central Workers' Co-Operative, November 26, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
Speech Delivered To A Meeting Of Delegates
From The Moscow Central Workers’ Co-Operative[1]
November 26, 1918


Delivered: 26 November 1918
 First Published December 1918 as a leaflet
    and in the journal Rabochy Mir No. 19; Published according to the leaflet checked
    with the journal
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
    Volume 28, 1974, pages 196-200
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002

(Comrade Lenin’s appearance is greeted with stormy, prolonged
    applause.) Comrades, greetings to you representatives of the workers’ co-operative
    societies that have a tremendous part to play in setting the whole business of supply on the
    proper lines. In the Council of People’s Commissars we have frequently, especially just
    lately, had to discuss questions that concern co-operative societies and the attitude of the
    workers’ and peasants’ government towards them.
In this respect we should remember how important the role of the co-operative movement was
    under capitalism, when it functioned on the principle of fighting the capitalist class
    economically.
It is certainly true that in their approach to the practical work of distribution, the
    co-operatives often turned the interests of the people into the interests of a group of
    individuals, and were often guided by the urge to share trading profits with the capitalists.
    With purely commercial interests as their guide, the co-operators often forgot about the
    socialist system that seemed to them to be too far away, or even unattainable.
The co-operatives were often associations of mainly petty-bourgeois people, middle
    peasants, whose efforts in the co-operative movement were governed by their own
    petty-bourgeois interests. Nevertheless these co-operatives undoubtedly helped to encourage
    popular initiative, thereby rendering a great service. They really did build big economic
    organisations based on popular initiative, and in this, we must admit, they played an
    important role.
In some cases these economic organisations developed into institutions capable of
    replacing or complementing the capitalist apparatus; this is something we should recognise.
    But in the meantime the urban workers had been drawn into the organisation of large-scale
    capitalist industry to such an extent that they had grown strong enough to overthrow the
    landowning and capitalist class, and to be capable of utilising the entire capitalist
    apparatus.
The urban workers well appreciated that owing to the disorder caused by the imperialist
    war the supply system had to be put in order and for that purpose they used, first and
    foremost, the big economic apparatus of the capitalists.
We must keep that in mind. The co-operative movement is a huge cultural legacy that we
    must treasure and make use of.
Hence we approached the problem cautiously in the Council of People’s Commissars
    when we had to deal with it, knowing full well how important it was to make full use of that
    efficient economic apparatus.
Yet we had to bear in mind that the chief co-operative workers were Mensheviks, Right
    S.R.s and members of other compromise and petty-bourgeois parties. We could not forget that
    while the political groups between the two warring classes used the co-operatives partially
    as a screen for counter-revolutionaries, even to support the Czechs out of their funds. We
    had evidence of this all right. This, however, was certain]y not the case everywhere and we
    frequently invited the co-operatives to work with us, if they wished to.
Soviet Russia’s international position has recently be come such that many
    petty-bourgeois groups have come to realise the importance of the workers’ and
    peasants’ government.
When Soviet Russia was faced with the Brest-Litovsk negotiations and we were forced to
    conclude that very harsh peace with the German imperialists, the Mensheviks and Right S.R.s
    were particularly vociferous in attacking us. When Soviet Russia was forced to conclude that
    peace, the Mensheviks and S.R.s raised a hue and cry that the Bolsheviks were ruining
    Russia.
Some of those people thought the Bolsheviks were utopians, dreamers who believed in the
    possibility of world revolution. Others thought the Bolsheviks were agents of German
    imperialism.
Furthermore, many of them in those days assumed that the Bolsheviks had made concessions
    to German imperialism and gloated over this being an agreement with the ruling German
    bourgeoisie.
I won’t mention other expressions unflattering, to say the least, that these groups
    then hurled at the Soviet government.
Recent events all over the world, however, have taught the Mensheviks and Right S.R.s a
    great deal. The Menshevik Central Committee appeal to all working people[2] published
    recently in our press states that although they have ideological differences with the
    Communists they consider it necessary to fight world imperialism today headed by the
    Anglo-American capitalists.
Indeed, events of tremendous importance have occurred. Soviets of Workers” Deputies
    have been formed in Rumania and Austria-Hungary. In Germany the Soviets have opposed the
    Constituent Assembly and soon, perhaps in a few weeks, the Haase-Scheidemann government will
    fall and be replaced by the Liebknecht government. At the same time the British and French
    capitalists are doing all they can to crush the Russian revolution and thereby halt the world
    revolution. Everyone now realises that the aspirations of Allied imperialism go even farther
    than those of German imperialism; the terms imposed on Germany are even worse than those of
    the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, and on top of that they want to crush the revolution and be
    world gendarmes. The Mensheviks have shown by their resolution that they realise which way
    the British winds are blowing. We must not now turn them away, on the contrary, we must meet
    them halfway and give them a chance to work with us.
Last April the Communists showed they were not averse to working with co-operators. It is
    the job of the Communists, relying on the support of the urban proletariat, to be able to use
    all those who can be enlisted for the work, who formerly adopted socialist slogans but did
    not have the courage to continue fighting for them until they achieved victory or were
    defeated. Marx said the proletariat must expropriate the capitalists and make use of petty
    bourgeois groups. And we said everything must be taken from the capitalists but only pressure
    must be brought to bear on the kulaks and they must be kept under the control of the grain
    monopoly. We must come to an agreement with the middle peasants, bring them under our
    control, while at the same time actually promoting the ideals of socialism.
We must say forthrightly that the workers and poor peasants will do all they can to really
    promote the ideals of socialism, and if there are people out of step with these ideals, we
    shall go it alone. We must, however, make use of everyone who can really help us in this most
    difficult struggle.
When discussing these questions last April the Council of People’s Commissars came
    to an agreement with the co-operators.[3] This was the only meeting that was attended by
    members of the non-government co-operative movement as well as the Communist People’s
    Commissars.
We came to an agreement with them. This was the only meeting that adopted a decision by a
    minority, by co-operators, and not by a majority of Communists.
The Council of People’s Commissars did this because it thought it necessary to make
    use of the experience and knowledge of the co-operators and of their apparatus.
You also know that a decree[4]  on the organisation of supply was adopted a few days ago
    and published in Sunday’s Izvestia, and which allots a considerable role to
    the co-operatives and the co-operative movement. This is because socialist economic
    organisation is impossible without a network of co-operative organisations and because there
    have been a lot of mistakes in this sphere up to now. Some co-operatives have been closed or
    nationalised even though the Soviets could not cope with distribution and the organisation of
    Soviet shops.
By the decree everything taken from the co-operatives must be returned to them.
The co-operatives must be denationalised and re-established.
True enough, the decree is cautious towards co-operatives that were closed because
    counter-revolutionaries had wormed their way into them. We categorically stated that in this
    respect the work of the co-operatives had to be kept under control, although they must be
    fully utilised.
All of you well appreciate that one of the proletariat’s chief tasks is the
    immediate and proper organisation of the supply and distribution of food.
Since we do have an apparatus with the necessary experience and which, most important of
    all, is based on popular initiative, we must set it to fulfilling these tasks. It is
    particularly important to utilise the initiative of the people who created these
    organisations. The ordinary people must be drawn into this work, and this is the main task we
    must set the co-operatives, the workers” co-operatives in particular.
The supply and distribution of food is something everyone understands. Even a man with no
    book-learning understands. And in Russia most people are still ignorant and illiterate
    because everything had been done to prevent the working and exploited people from acquiring
    education.
Yet there are very many live wires among the people who can display tremendous ability,
    far greater than might be imagined. It is, therefore, the duty of the workers”
    co-operatives to enlist these people, to nose them out and give them direct work in the
    supply and distribution of food. Socialist society is one single co-operative.
I do not doubt that popular initiative in the workers” co-operatives will indeed
    lead to the conversion of the workers” co-operatives into a single Moscow city
    consumers” commune.

Endnotes
[1] The meeting, held on November 
26-27, 1918, heard and discussed reports of the board and auditing commission of the 
co-operative a report on the distribution of foodstuffs in Moscow, and elected a new board. 
Despite Menshevik and S.R. opposition vote was taken on the list of members submitted by the 
Communist group. At the close of the evening session on the first day of the proceedings Lenin 
spoke about the role of co-operatives in the socialist economy.
[2] Reference is to the Menshevik
    C.C. appeal, published in Pravda on November 26, 1918. It called for a campaign
    against foreign intervention in the Russian revolution. At the same time the Mensheviks
    favoured the interference of the Second International. Thus the Menshevik change of attitude
    to the armed intervention was on paper only and due to the successes of Soviet power and the
    development of the revolutionary movement in Western Europe. They remained in fact implacable
    enemies of the dictatorship of the proletariat and gave support to foreign imperialists and
    Russian whiteguards in their struggle against the Soviet Republic in the Caucasus, the
    Ukraine, Siberia and elsewhere.
    Lenin criticised the stand of the Mensheviks at that time in his draft resolution for the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee, “Closure of the Menshevik Newspaper Undermining the Country’s Defence” (pp. 447-48 of this volume), and in other works.
[3]  Lenin refers to the discussion of the
    draft decree on consumers” co-operatives at the Council of People’s Commissars.
    He wrote the original draft, which was then enlarged upon by the People’s Commissariat
    of Food and published in Izvestia on January 29 1918. The draft aroused frantic
    opposition from bourgeois co-operators, who were insisting on the independence of
    co-operatives from the Soviet state. Realising the need to utilise co-operatives in putting
    trade and distribution on a proper basis, the Council of People’s Commissars made
    several concessions to co-operators. During the talks between representatives of the Supreme
    Economic Council, co-operatives and food bodies in March and early April 1918, a draft decree
    was agreed upon. It was this decree that came up for discussion at the Council of
    People’s Commissars, which approved it with Lenin’s amendments. On April 22 the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee endorsed it and on April 23 it was published in
    Pravda.
    Lenin appraised the decree in his work TheThe Immediate Tasks of the Soviet
    Government (Collected Works, Vol. 27, pp. 235-77).
[4]   The decree On the Organisation of Supply is meant
    here. The Council of People’s Commissars discussed the decree on November 22, 1928, and
    finally endorsed it on November 22. On November 24 it was published in Izvestia.
    Lenin directly participated in formulating the decree and introduced several
    amendments.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Moscow Party Workers’
Meeting, November 27, 1918









Speech at Moscow Party Workers' Meeting, November 27, 1918



Vladimir Lenin
 Moscow Party Workers’ Meeting[1]
November 27, 1918

Delivered: 27 November, 1918
First Published 1929; Published according the verbatim report; 
Part 1 published inPravda Nos. 264, 265, December 5 and 6, 1918; Published 
according to the Pravda text checked with the verbatim report. 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 
Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 201-224
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters
Online Version: V.I.Lenin Internet
    Archive, 2002

1
Report On The Attitude Of The Proletariat 
 To Petty-Bourgeois Democrats

  Comrades, I should like to talk about the tasks facing our Party and the Soviet government in connection with the policy of the proletariat towards the petty-bourgeois democrats. Recent events have undoubtedly brought this question to the fore because the vast changes in the international situation—such as the annulment of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty, the revolution in Germany, the collapse of German imperialism and the disintegration of British and American imperialism—were bound to undermine a number of bourgeois-democratic tenets underlying the theory of the petty-bourgeois democrats. Russia’s military position and the onslaught of the British, French and American imperialists were bound to bring some of the petty-bourgeois democrats more or less over to our side. What I should like to talk about this evening are the changes we must make in our tactics and the new tasks before us.
Let me begin with certain fundamental theoretical propositions. There can be no doubt that the chief social group which gives the petty-bourgeois democrats an economic basis is, in Russia, the middle peasants. Undoubtedly the socialist revolution and the transition from capitalism to socialism are bound to assume special forms in a country where the peasant population is numerically large. I should therefore like first to remind you of the main tenets of Marxism with regard to the proletariat’s attitude to the middle peasants. I shall do so by reading some of Engels’s statements in his article “The Peasant Question in France and Germany”. This article, published in pamphlet form, was written in 1894 or 1895, when the agrarian programme of the socialist party, its attitude towards the peasants, became a practical issue in connection with the discussion of the programme of the German Social-Democratic Party at its Breslau Congress.[2] This is what Engels had to say about the attitude of the proletariat:



“What, then, is our attitude towards the small peasantry?
“To begin with, the French programme is absolutely correct in stating: that we foresee the inevitable doom of the small peasant but that it is not our mission to hasten it by any interference on our part.

“Secondly, it is just as evident that when we are in possession of state power we shall not even think of forcibly expropriating the small peasants (regardless of whether with or without compensation), as we shall have to do in the case of the big landowners. Our task relative to the small peasant consists, in the first place, in effecting a transition of his private enterprise and private possession to co-operative ones, not forcibly but by dint of example and the proffer of social assistance for this purpose.”
Engels says further:
“Neither now nor at any time in the future can we promise the small-holding peasants to preserve their individual property and individual enterprise against the overwhelming power of capitalist production. We can only promise them that we shall not interfere in their property relations by force, against their will.”[3]
And the last statement I would like to quote is the argument about the rich peasants, the big peasants, the kulaks as we call them in Russia, peasants who employ hired labour. Unless these peasants realise the inevitability of the doom of their present mode of production and draw the necessary conclusions, Marxists cannot do anything for them. Our duty is only to facilitate their transition, too, to the new mode of production.[4]
These are the tenets which I wanted to quote to you and which are no doubt known to every Communist. It follows that when the workers come to power, they cannot have the same task in countries where large-scale capitalism predominates and in countries where backward, small, middle and big peasants predominate. Thus, we were interpreting Marxism quite correctly when we said it was our duty to wage war on the landowners, the exploiters.
For the middle peasant we say: no force under any circumstances. For the big peasant we say: our aim is to bring him under the control of the grain monopoly and fight him when he violates the monopoly and conceals grain. I expounded these principles the other day at a meeting of several hundred delegates from Poor Peasants’ Committees who had come to Moscow at the time the Sixth Congress was being held.[See pp. 171-78 of this volume.] In our Party literature, as in our propaganda and agitation, we have always stressed the distinction between our attitude to the big bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie. But although we are all in agreement as to theory, not all of us by a long shot have drawn the correct political conclusions, or drawn them rapidly enough. I deliberately began in a roundabout way, so to speak, to show you what economic concepts about class relations must guide us if our policy towards the petty-bourgeois democrats is to be based on a firm foundation.
There can be no doubt that this small-peasant class (by middle peasant we mean one who does not sell his labour power) in Russia, at any rate, constitutes the chief economic class which is the source of the broad diversity of political trends among the petty-bourgeois democrats. Here in Russia these trends are associated mostly with the Menshevik and S.R. parties. The history of socialism in Russia shows a long struggle between the Bolsheviks and these parties, while West-European socialists have always regarded this struggle as one within socialism, that is, as a split in the Russian socialist movement. Incidentally, this view is often expressed even by sound Social-Democrats.
Only today I was handed a letter from Friedrich Adler, a man who is well known for his revolutionary activity in Austria. His letter, which was written at the end of October and received today, contains only one request: to release the Mensheviks from prison. He could find nothing more sensible to write about at a moment like this. True, he makes the reservation that he is not well informed about our movement, and so on. But still this is typical. This silly mistake by West-European socialists comes from them looking backwards instead of forwards, and not realising that neither the Mensheviks nor the S.R.s, who preach socialism, can be classed as socialists. All through the 1917 revolution the Mensheviks and S.R.s did nothing but vacillate between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat; they could never stick to a correct stand, as though to deliberately illustrate Marx’s words that the petty bourgeoisie are incapable of taking an independent stand in decisive battles.
As soon as they began to form the Soviets, the workers instinctively took up a firm class stand by the very act of establishing them. The Mensheviks and S.R.s, on the other hand, vacillated all the time. And when in the spring and summer of 1917 their own friends labelled them semi-Bolsheviks, this was a true description, not merely a witticism. On every single issue they would say “yes” one day and “no” the next, whether it was the question of the Soviets, the revolutionary movement in the countryside, the direct seizure of land, fraternisation at the front, or whether to support imperialism. They would help on the one hand, and hinder on the other, all the time displaying their spinelessness and helplessness. Yet their propaganda among the people for the Soviets, which they always referred to as revolutionary democracy and contrasted with what they called the propertied elements, was only a cunning political device on their part, and the masses whom they addressed were carried away by this propaganda. Thus the Menshevik preaching was partly of service to us too.
This is a very complex question with a wealth of history behind it. I need only dwell on it briefly. This policy of the Mensheviks and S.R.s before our very eyes is conclusive proof of our assertion that it is wrong to regard them as socialists. If they had at any time been socialists, it was only in their phraseology and reminiscences; in fact they are nothing but Russian petty bourgeois.
I began with the attitude Marxists should adopt towards the middle peasant, or, in other words, towards the petty bourgeois parties. We are now coming to a stage when our slogans of the previous period of the revolution must be changed to take proper account of the present turn of events. You know that in October and November these people wavered.
The Bolshevik Party stood firm then and rightly so. We said we should have to destroy the enemies of the proletariat, and were facing a battle on the fundamental issues of war or peace, of bourgeois representation, and of Soviet government. In all these questions we only had our own forces to rely on, and we were absolutely right when we refused to compromise with the petty-bourgeois democrats.
The subsequent course of events confronted us with the question of peace and the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. You know that the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty repelled the petty bourgeoisie from us.
The petty-bourgeois democrats sharply recoiled from us as a consequence of these two circumstances: our foreign policy, which led to the conclusion of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, on the one hand, and our ruthless struggle against democratic illusions on the part of a section of the petty-bourgeois democrats, our ruthless struggle for the Soviet government, on the other. You know that after the Brest-Litovsk Peace, the Left Socialist-Revolutionaries began to waver, some taking to open warfare, and others splitting up, and still splitting up to this day. But the fact remains. Of course, we cannot doubt for one minute or one little bit that our policy was absolutely right. To start proving that now would be to reiterate the fundamentals, because the German revolution has proved more than anything else that our views were correct.
What we were reproached for most after the Brest-Litovsk Peace, and what we heard most often from the less enlightened workers, was that our hopes of a German revolution were in vain and were not being fulfilled. The German revolution has refuted all these reproaches and has proved we were right in our view that it had to come and that we had to fight German imperialism by propaganda and by undermining it from within as well as by a national war. Events have justified us so fully that no further proof is needed. The very same applies to the Constituent Assembly; vacillations on this score were inevitable, and events have proved the correctness of our views so fully that all the revolutions now starting up in the West are taking place under the slogan of Soviet government and are setting up Soviet government. Soviets are the distinguishing feature of the revolution everywhere. They have spread from Austria and Germany to Holland and Switzerland, countries with the oldest democratic culture, which call themselves Western Europe even in relation to Germany. In these countries the demand for Soviet government is being raised. That means that the historical collapse of bourgeois democracy was an absolute historical necessity, not an invention of the Bolsheviks. In Switzerland and Holland, the political struggle took place hundreds of years ago, and it is not for the sake of the Bolsheviks’ beautiful eyes that the demand for Soviet government is being raised there now. That means we gauged the situation rightly. Events have borne out the correctness of our tactics so well that it is not worth dwelling on the subject any further. Only we must realise that this is a serious matter, one affecting the most deep-seated prejudices of the petty-bourgeois democrats. Look at the overall history of the bourgeois revolution and parliamentary development in all the West-European countries, and you will find that a similar prejudice prevailed among the old Social-Democrats of the forties in all countries. These views persisted longest of all in France. All this is only natural.
When it comes to parliamentarism, the petty bourgeoisie are the most patriotic, more patriotic than the proletariat or the big bourgeoisie. The latter are more international. The petty bourgeoisie are less mobile, are not connected to the same extent with other nations and are not drawn into the orbit of world trade. It was therefore impossible to expect anything else than that the petty bourgeoisie should be most up in arms over the question of parliamentarism. And this proved to be the case in Russia too. An important factor was that our revolution had to fight against patriotism. At the time of the Brest-Litovsk Peace we had to go against patriotism. We said that if you are a socialist you must sacrifice all your patriotic feelings to the international revolution, which is inevitable, and although it is not here yet you must believe in it if you are an internationalist. 



  And, naturally, with this sort of talk, we could only hope to win over the advanced workers. It was only natural that the majority of the petty bourgeoisie should not see eye to eye with us. We could scarcely have expected them to. How could the petty bourgeoisie have been expected to accept our point of view? We had to exercise the dictatorship of the proletariat in its harshest form. It took us several months to live through the period of illusions. But if you examine the history of the West-European countries, you will find they did not get over this illusion even in decades. Take the history of Holland, France, Britain, etc. We had to disperse the petty-bourgeois illusion that the people are an integral whole and that the popular will can be expressed other than in class struggle.
We were absolutely right in rejecting all compromise over this. If we had made any concessions to petty-bourgeois illusions, to illusions about the Constituent Assembly, we would have ruined the whole cause of the proletarian revolution in Russia. We would have sacrificed to narrow national interests the interests of the world revolution, which turned out to be proceeding along the Bolshevik course, because it was purely proletarian instead of national. The result of these conditions was that the Menshevik and S.R. petty-bourgeois people recoiled from us. They crossed the barricades and landed in the camp of our enemies. When the Dutov revolt broke out, we saw clearly enough that the political forces that had been fighting us were in the camp of Dutov, Krasnov and Skoropadsky. The proletariat and poor peasants stood on our side.
You know that during the Czech attack, when it was at the height of its success, kulak revolts broke out all over Russia. It was only the close ties formed between the urban workers and the peasants that consolidated our rule. It was only the proletariat, with the help of the poor peasants, that held off all our enemies. The overwhelming majority of both the Mensheviks and the S.R.s sided with the Czechs, the Dutov and Krasnov gangs. This state of affairs forced us to make a ruthless struggle and use terrorist methods of warfare. No matter how much people may have condemned this terrorism from different points of view—and we were condemned by all the vacillating Social-Democrats—we knew perfectly well it was necessitated by the acute Civil War. It was necessary because all the petty-bourgeois democrats had turned against us. They used all kinds of methods against us—civil war, bribery and sabotage. It was these conditions that necessitated the terror. Therefore we should not repent or renounce it. Only we must clearly appreciate the conditions of our proletarian revolution that gave rise to these acute forms of struggle. These special conditions were that we had to go against patriotism, that we had to replace the Constituent Assembly with the slogan “All Power to the Soviets!”
The change in international politics was inevitably followed by a change in the position of the petty-bourgeois democrats. A change of heart is now occurring in their camp. In the Menshevik appeal we find a call to renounce alliance with the propertied classes, a call to go and fight British and American imperialism addressed by the Mensheviks to their friends, people from among the petty-bourgeois democrats who had concluded an alliance with the Dutov men, the Czechs and the British. It is now clear to everybody that, except for British and American imperialism, there is no force that can put up any sort of stand against the Bolshevik power. Similar vacillations are going on among the S.R.s and the intellectuals, who most of all share the prejudices of the petty-bourgeois democrats and were swayed by patriotic sentiments. The same sort of thing is going on among them too.
Our Party’s job now is to be guided by class relations when choosing tactics, and to be perfectly clear whether this is just chance, spinelessness, groundless vacillation, or, on the contrary, a process with deep social roots. The answer is quite obvious if we examine this question as a whole from the standpoint of theoretically established relations between the proletariat and the middle peasants, and from the standpoint of the history of our revolution. This change of front is not due to chance or something personal. It involves millions and millions of people whose status in Russia is either that of middle peasants or something equivalent. The change of front involves all the petty-bourgeois democrats, who opposed us with a bitterness amounting almost to fury because we had to break down all their patriotic sentiments. But history has veered round to bring patriotism back towards us now. It is evident that the Bolsheviks cannot be overthrown except by foreign bayonets. Up till now the petty bourgeoisie had cherished the illusion that the British, French and Americans stood for real democracy. But now that illusion is being completely dispelled by the peace terms that are being imposed on Austria and Germany. The British are behaving as if they had made a special point of proving the correctness of the Bolshevik views on international imperialism.
Hence voices are being raised in the parties that fought us as in the Plekhanovite camp, for instance, saying: “We were mistaken, we thought that German imperialism was our chief enemy and that the Western countries—France, Britain and America—would bring us a democratic system.” Yet now it appears that the peace terms these Western countries offer are a hundred times more humiliating, rapacious and predatory than our peace terms at Brest-Litovsk. It appears that the British and Americans are acting as the hang men of Russian freedom, as gendarmes, playing the part of the Russian butcher Nicholas I, and are doing it no less effectively than the kings who played the hangmen in throttling the Hungarian revolution. This part is now being played by Wilson’s agents. They are crushing the revolution in Austria, they are playing the gendarme, they are issuing an ultimatum to Switzerland: “You’ll get no bread from us if you don’t join the fight against the Bolshevik Government.” They tell Holland: “Don’t you dare allow Soviet ambassadors into your country, or we’ll blockade you.” Theirs is a simple weapon—the noose of famine. That is what they are using to strangle the peoples.
The history of recent times, of the war and post-war period, has developed with extraordinary speed, and it goes to show that British and French imperialism is just as infamous as German imperialism. Don’t forget that even in America, where we have the freest and most democratic of all republics, that does not prevent its imperialists from behaving just as brutally. Internationalists are not only lynched, they are dragged into the street by the mob, stripped naked, tarred and burned. 


  Events are exposing the imperialists most effectively, and posing the alternative: either a Soviet government, or the complete suppression of the revolution by British and French bayonets. There is no longer any question of an agreement with Kerensky. As you know, they have thrown him away like a squeezed lemon. They joined forces with Dutov and Krasnov. Now the petty bourgeoisie have got over that phase. Patriotism is now pushing them to us— that is how things have turned out, that is how history has compelled them to act. And we must all draw a lesson from this great experience of all world history. The bourgeoisie cannot be defended, the Constituent Assembly cannot be defended, because it in fact played into the hands of the Dutovs and Krasnovs. It seems funny that they should have been for the Constituent Assembly, but that happened because the bourgeoisie were still on top when it was being convened. The Constituent Assembly turned out to be an organ of the bourgeoisie, and the bourgeoisie turned out to be on the side of the imperialists, whose policy was directed against the Bolsheviks. The bourgeoisie were prepared to go to any lengths, to resort to the vilest means to throttle the Soviet government, to sell Russia to anybody, only to destroy the power of the Soviets.
That is the policy that led to civil war and made the petty-bourgeois democrats change round. Of course, there is always bound to be vacillation among them. When the Czechs gained their first victories, the petty-bourgeois intellectuals tried to spread rumours that the Czechs were bound to win. Telegrams from Moscow were issued declaring that the city was surrounded and about to fall. And we know perfectly well that if the British and French gain even the slightest success, the petty-bourgeois intellectuals will be the first to lose their heads, give way to panic and spread all sorts of rumours about enemy gains. But the revolution showed that revolts against imperialism are inevitable. And now our “Allies” have proved to be the chief enemies of Russian freedom and independence.
Russia cannot and will not be independent unless Soviet power is consolidated. That is why this turn about has occurred. So we must now define our tactics. It would be a great mistake to think of mechanically applying slogans of our revolutionary struggle from the time when there could be no reconciliation between us, when the petty bourgeoisie were against us, and when our firm stand demanded resort to terror. Today, this would not be standing firm but sheer stupidity, a failure to understand Marxist tactics. When we were obliged to sign the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, this step seemed, from the narrow patriotic point of view to be a betrayal of Russia; but from the point of view of world revolution it was a correct strategical step, which was of the greatest help to the world revolution. The world revolution has broken out just now, when Soviet power has become an institution of the whole people.
Although the petty-bourgeois democrats are still wavering, their illusions have been dispelled. And we must of course take this state of affairs into account, as we must all the other conditions. Formerly we looked at things differently, because the petty bourgeois sided with the Czechs, and we had ta use force. After all, war is war, and when at war you have to fight. But now that these people are beginning to swing over to us, we must not turn away from them simply because the slogan in our leaflets and newspapers used to be different. When we find them half turning towards us, we must rewrite our leaflets, because the petty-bourgeois democrats’ attitude towards us has changed. We must say: “Come along, we are not afraid of you; if you think the only way we know how to act is by force, you are mistaken; we might reach agreement.” Everyone steeped in the traditions of bourgeois prejudice, all the co-operators, all sections of working people particularly connected with the bourgeoisie, might come over to us.
Take the intellectuals. They lived a bourgeois life, they were accustomed to certain comforts. When they swung towards the Czechs, our slogan was ruthless struggle— terror. Now that there is this change of heart among the petty-bourgeois masses, our slogan must be one of agreement, of establishing good-neighbourly relations. When we come across a declaration from a group of petty-bourgeois democrats to the effect that they want to be neutral towards the Soviet government, we must say: neutrality and good neighbourly relations are old-fashioned rubbish and absolutely useless from the point of view of communism. 


      They are just old-fashioned rubbish and nothing else, but we
      must consider this rubbish from the practical standpoint. That
      has always been our view, and we never had hopes that these
      petty-bourgeois people would become Communists. But practical
      propositions must be considered.
We said of the dictatorship of the proletariat that the
    proletariat must dominate over all other classes. We cannot
    obliterate the distinctions between classes until complete
    communism. Classes will remain until we have got rid of the
    exploiters—the big bourgeoisie and the land owners, whom we
    are ruthlessly expropriating. But we cannot say the same thing of
    the middle and small peasants. While relentlessly suppressing the
    bourgeoisie and the landowners, we must win over the
    petty-bourgeois democrats. And when they say they want to be
    neutral and live on good-neighbourly terms with us, we shall
    reply: “That’s just what we want. We never expected
    you to become Communists.”
We continue to stand for the ruthless expropriation of the landowners and capitalists. Here we are ruthless, and we cannot agree to any conciliation or compromise. But we realise that no decrees can convert small-scale into large-scale production, that we must gradually, keeping in step with events, win conviction for the inevitability of socialism. These people will never become socialists by conviction, honest to goodness socialists. They will become socialists when they see there is no other way. Now they can see that Europe has been so thoroughly shattered and imperialism has reached such a state that no bourgeois democracy can save the situation, that only a Soviet system can do so. That is why this neutrality, this good-neighbourly attitude of the petty-bourgeois democrats is to be welcomed rather than feared. That is why, if we look at the matter as the representatives of a class which is exercising dictatorship, we must say that we never counted on any thing more from the petty-bourgeois democrats. That is quite sufficient as far as we are concerned. You maintain good-neighbourly relations with us, and we shall keep state power. After your declaration in regard to the “Allies” we are quite willing to legalise you, Menshevik gentlemen. Our Party Central Committee will do that. But we shall not forget there are still “activists” in your party, and for them our methods of struggle will remain the same; for they are friends of the Czechs and until the Czechs are driven out of Russia, you are our enemies too. We reserve state power for ourselves, and for ourselves alone. To those who adopt an attitude of neutrality towards us we shall act as a class which holds political power and keeps the sharp edge of its weapon for the landowners and capitalists, and which says to the petty-bourgeois democrats: if it suits you better to side with the Czechs and Krasnov, well, we have shown you we can fight, and we shall carry on fighting. But if you prefer to learn from the Bolshevik example, we shall come some way to meet you, knowing that without a series of agreements, which we shall try out, examine and compare, the country cannot get to socialism.
This is the path we took from the very beginning, for example, by passing the socialisation of the land law and turning it gradually into the means that enabled us to unite the poor peasants around us and turn them against the kulaks. Only as the proletarian movement succeeds in the countryside shall we systematically pass to collective common ownership of land and to socialised farming. This could only be done with the backing of a purely proletarian movement in the countryside, and in this respect a great deal still remains to be done. There can be no doubt that only practical experience, only realities will show us how to act properly.
To reach agreement with the middle peasants is one thing, with the petty-bourgeois elements another, and with the co-operators yet another. There will be some modification of our task in relation to the associations which have preserved petty-bourgeois traditions and habits. It will be even further modified in relation to the petty-bourgeois intellectuals. They vacillate, but we need them, too, for our socialist revolution. We know socialism can only be built from elements of large-scale capitalist culture, and the intellectuals are one of these elements. We had to be ruthless with them, but it was not communism that compelled us to do so, it was events, which repelled from us all “democrats” and everyone enamoured of bourgeois democracy. Now we have the chance to utilise the intellectuals for socialism, intellectuals who are not socialist, who will never be communist, but whom objective events and relations are now inducing to adopt a neutral and good-neighbourly attitude towards us. We shall never rely on the intellectuals, we shall only rely on the vanguard of the proletariat that leads all workers and poor peasants. The Communist Party can rely on no other support. It is one thing, however, to rely on the class which embodies the dictatorship, and another to dominate over other classes.
You may remember what Engels said even of the peasants who employ hired labour: Most likely we shall not have to expropriate all of them.[5] We are expropriating as a general rule, and we have no kulaks in the Soviets. We are crushing them. We suppress them physically when they worm their way into the Soviets and from there try to choke the poor peasants. You see how the domination of one class is exercised here. Only the proletariat may dominate. But this is applied in one way to the small peasant, in another to the middle peasant, in another to the landowner, and in yet another to the petty bourgeois. The whole point is for us to understand this change of attitude brought about by international conditions, to understand that it is inevitable that slogans we were accustomed to during the past six months of the revolution’s history should be modified as far as the petty bourgeois democrats are concerned. We must say that we reserve the power for the same class. In relation to the petty-bourgeois democrats our slogan was one of agreement, but we were forced to resort to terror. If you co-operators and intellectuals really agree to live in good-neighbourly relations with us, then work a bit and do the jobs we give you. If you don’t, you will be lawbreakers and our enemies, and we shall fight you. But if you maintain good-neighbourly relations and perform these tasks, that will be more than enough for us. Our support is secure. We’ve always known you were weak and flabby. But we don’t deny we need you, for you are the only educated group.
Things would not be so bad if we did not have to build socialism with people inherited from capitalism. But that is the whole trouble with socialist construction—we have to build socialism with people who have been thoroughly spoiled by capitalism. That is the whole trouble with the transition—it is associated with a dictatorship which can be exercised only by one class—the proletariat. That is why we say the proletariat will set the pace since it has been schooled and moulded into a fighting force capable of smashing the bourgeoisie. Between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat stand innumerable transitional groups, and our policy to them must now be put on the lines which were envisaged by our theory, and which we are now in a position to follow in practice. We shall have to settle a number of problems and make a number of agreements and technical assignments which we, as the ruling proletarian power, must know how to set. We must know how to set the middle peasant one assignment—to assist in commodity exchange and in exposing the kulak—and the co-operators another—they have the apparatus for distributing products on a mass scale and we must take over that apparatus. And the intellectuals must be set quite a different assignment. They cannot continue their sabotage, and they are now in a very good-neighbourly mood towards us. We must make use of these intellectuals, set them definite tasks and keep an eye on them and check their work; we must treat them as Marx said when speaking of office workers under the Paris Commune: “Every other employer knows how to choose assistants and accountants for his business, and, if they for once make a mistake to redress it promptly. If they prove to be unfit for the job, he replaces them with other, efficient assistants and accountants.”[6]
We are building our state out of the elements left over by capitalism. We cannot build it if we do not utilise such a heritage of capitalist culture as the intellectuals. Now we can afford to treat the petty bourgeoisie as good neighbours who are under the strict control of the state. The class-conscious proletariat’s job now is to appreciate that its domination does not mean carrying out all the tasks itself. Whoever thinks that has not the slightest inkling of socialist construction and has learnt nothing from a year of revolution and dictatorship. People like that had better go to school and learn something. But whoever has learnt something in this period will say to himself: “These intellectuals are the people I am now going to use in construction. For I have a strong enough support among the peasants.” And we must remember that we can only work out the form of construction that will lead to socialism in that struggle, and in a number of agreements and trial agreements between the proletariat and the petty-bourgeois democrats.
Remember that Engels said we must act by force of example.[7] No form will be final until complete communism has been achieved. We never claimed to know the exact road. But we are inevitably moving towards communism. In times like these every week is worth more than decades of tranquility. The six months that have elapsed since the Brest-Litovsk Peace have shown a swing away from us. The West-European revolution—a revolution which is following our example—should strengthen us. We must take account of the changes taking place, we must take account of every element, and must have no illusions, for we know that the waverers will remain waverers until the world socialist revolution is completely triumphant. That may not be so soon, although the course of the German revolution leads us to hope that it may be sooner than many anticipate. The German revolution is developing in the same way as ours, but at a faster pace. In any case, our job now is to wage a desperate struggle against British and American imperialism. Just because it feels that Bolshevism has become a world force, it is trying to throttle us as fast as possible in the hope of dealing first with the Russian Bolsheviks, and then with its own.
We must make use of the waverers whom the atrocities of imperialism are driving towards us. And we shall do so. You know full well that in time of war no aid, even indirect, can be scorned. In war even the position of the wavering classes is of immense significance. The fiercer the war, the more we need to gain influence over the waverers who are coming over to us. So the tactics we have been pursuing for six months must be modified to suit the new tasks with regard to the various groups of petty-bourgeois democrats.
If I have succeeded in directing the attention of Party workers to this problem and in inducing them to seek a correct solution by systematic experiment, I may consider my task accomplished. 
    
2
 Reply To The Discussion Of Report Of The Attitude Of The Proletariat 
  To Petty-Bourgeois Democrats

  Comrades, I have a few remarks to make in reply to the discussion. First of all, I would like to reply to the question of dogma that was raised. Marx and Engels repeatedly said that our teaching is not a dogma, but a guide to action,[8]and I think that is what we should bear in mind most.
The teaching of Marx and Engels is not a dogma to be learnt by heart. It must be taken as a guide to action. We have always stood by that, and I think we have acted consistently, never succumbing to opportunism, modifying our tactics. That is no departure from Marxism, and certainly cannot be called opportunism. I have said before, and I repeat once again, that this teaching is not a dogma, but a guide to action.
Now on to Comrade Steklov’s remark about whom we are to make an agreement with—the top men or the rank and file? My reply is, of course, with the rank and file, and then with the top men; and when it comes to fighting the top men, all will depend on the particular circumstances. I shall come to that, but just now I see no practical possibility of an agreement with the Menshevik and S.R. parties. It is said that agreement means ceding something. What do we intend to cede and how are we going to depart from basic policy? That would be apostasy, but if it is to apply only to practice, there is nothing new in it. Of course, we shall never renounce our principles. That does not come into the argument now. Fifteen years ago there was a controversy over the basic policy and principles and, unfortunately, I had to carry on this controversy mostly abroad, not in Russia. But now it is the question of state power that is at issue, and there simply cannot be any question of ceding anything here. No wonder Wilson declared: “Our enemy now is world Bolshevism.” That is what the bourgeoisie all over the world are saying. The fact that they are preparing to attack us means they realise that the Bolshevik government is not only a Russian but a world phenomenon. He would be a sorry and miserable Bolshevik who offered any kind of agreement to the bourgeoisie. And, anyway, now that the fires of revolution have spread to so many countries, no capitalist bourgeois government will or can consent to it.
When the recent events developed, the Swiss bourgeoisie said outright: “We are not Russians, we shan’t surrender power to you.” Captain Sadoul, who has now sided with Bolshevism, writes that he is surprised at the astonishing docility of the Russian bourgeoisie, and declares that that is not the way the French bourgeoisie will act. There the struggle will be far fiercer, and civil war, if it breaks out, will assume the most ruthless forms. No one would deny it.
In practice, the matter has been fully decided by the year of proletarian dictatorship, and no peasant or worker would think of trying to reach agreement with the bourgeoisie. As to agreement being nothing new, I fully agree. I only wanted all of us to confer on these questions.
The circumstances which most repelled the Mensheviks and S.R.s and the lesser intellectuals from us, namely, the relentless struggle over the Brest-Litovsk Peace when German imperialism was on the advance, are now a thing of the past. But we know perfectly well that any success, however transient, the British and French may have, will produce more hesitation among these intellectuals and petty democrats, and they will begin to spread panic and desert to the other side. We are making an agreement with them to achieve definite results and for definite practical work. These tactics should present no cause either for controversy. or surprise. Yet many, even such an influential member of the Moscow Soviet as Comrade Maximov, have shown they do not understand these tactics. Comrade Maximov said that we do not have to come to terms with Khinchuk, but only come to a sensible understanding with him. When we issued the first decree on the co-operative societies in the spring, and they presented us with an ultimatum, we gave in to them. That is what we call agreement—there is no other name for this policy. And I shall be satisfied if every Soviet official makes it a rule and says to himself and all his comrades that we must come to a sensible understanding with the petty-bourgeois democrats.
In our work, especially in our work in the localities, we are still a long way from a sensible understanding. We all too frequently do not discuss matters sensibly. This is thrown in our faces by people who do not appreciate that this is bound to happen in building a new society. There is no genius who could build a new way of life without having learnt how to build. We are no good at coming to sensible terms with practical men when we have to. To run a shop, you must know how to run it. We need people who know their business. We Bolsheviks have had very little chance to apply our talents to practical affairs of this kind. We are not often short of propagandists, but our most crying shortage is the lack of efficient leaders and organisers. And that is still so despite the year’s experience we have behind us. Come to a sensible understanding with every person who has enough experience in this sphere and who favours neutrality and good-neighbourly relations. If he knows how to run a shop and distribute goods, if he can teach us anything if he is a practical man, he will be a great attribute.
Everybody knows the Bolsheviks have many enemies among their “friends” ever since their triumph. Very often utterly unreliable and dishonest people worm their way into our midst, elements that are politically unstable, who sell us out, deceive us and betray us. We are perfectly aware of it, but it does not alter our purpose. It is historically inevitable. When the Mensheviks reproach us that among Soviet employees there are many hangers-on, people who are dishonest even in the ordinary sense, we say: Where are we to get better people? What can we do to make the best people believe in us at once? No revolution can immediately triumph and convince everyone, can make people believe in it at once. A revolution may begin in one country, and elsewhere people will not believe in it. Our revolution is reckoned an awful nightmare, utter chaos, and in other countries they do not expect anything to come of our organised “chaotic” assemblies, which we call Soviets. And that is quite natural. There were many things we had to fight for. So when they say we must come to a sensible understanding with Khinchuk, because he knows how to run shops, I say: Come to terms with others too, and make use of the petty bourgeoisie, they are good at many things.
If we drive this “come to an understanding” slogan into the heads of the people in the localities, if we realise that a new class is awakening to power, that things are being run by people who have never tackled such a complicated job before, and are naturally making mistakes, we shan’t be sorry. We know that it is impossible to govern without making mistakes. But, besides making mistakes, people are using the power crudely, as nothing but power, as though to say: “I have the power, I have given my orders, and you must obey.” We say, this is not the way to treat quite a number of people—the petty-bourgeois democrats in the trade unions, the peasants and those in the co-operatives—it is becoming unnecessary. It is therefore more sensible to come to an understanding with the petty-bourgeois democrats, especially the intellectuals—that is our task. Of course, we shall come to such an understanding on the basis of our policy, we shall do so as the government.
We ask: Is it true you have abandoned hostility for neutrality and good-neighbourly relations? Is it true you have stopped being hostile? If not, we shall not close our eyes to the fact and we’ll tell you straight: If you want war, you’ll have it . And we’ll act as people do in war. If you really have abandoned your hostility for neutrality, however, if you really do want good-neighbourly relations—I have taken these words from statements by people who do not belong to the communist camp, who only yesterday were much closer to the whiteguards—I say that since there are so many people abandoning their former hostility for neutrality and good-neighbourly relations, we must continue our propaganda.
Comrade Khmelnitsky need have no fear that the Mensheviks are carrying on their own propaganda to run the lives of the workers. We won’t mention the Social-Democrats, who have not understood the socialist republic, nor the petty-bourgeois bureaucrats. What we have to do is wage an ideological struggle, a relentless war, against Menshevism. You cannot make a worse insult to a Menshevik than to call him a petty-bourgeois democrat; and the more calmly you try to prove it to him, the more furious he will get. It is a mistake to think we shall surrender a hundredth or even a thousandth part of the position we have won. We shan’t budge an inch.
The examples quoted by Comrade Schmidt show that even the workers who stood closest to the bourgeoisie (like the printers, for example), the petty-bourgeois clerks, the bourgeois bank officials who used to perform the business operations in the commercial and industrial firms, stand to lose a lot from the transition to socialism. We have closed down a great many bourgeois papers, we have nationalised the banks, we have blocked several channels through which bank employees used to make money by dabbling in profiteering. Even in this camp we see them wavering, we find them siding with us. If Khinchuk is valuable because he knows how to run shops, the bank employee is valuable because he knows the ins and outs of the money business, with which many of us may have a theoretical acquaintance, but in which we are very weak practically. We must come to a sensible understanding with a man who knows the ins and outs of this business and who tells us he has abandoned his former hostility for neutrality and good-neighbourliness. I shall be more than satisfied if Comrade Maximov, as a prominent member of the Presidium of the Moscow Soviet, pursues in the Soviets the tactics he spoke of in relation to the intellectuals and the vacillating petty bourgeoisie.
Next, the question of the co-operative societies. Comrade Steklov said the co-operatives stink. Comrade Maximov said we should not pass decrees like the last one passed by the Council of People’s Commissars. On the practical side opinions differed. It is nothing new to us that we must come to an agreement with the petty bourgeoisie on such a basis if they are not hostile to us. If the old stand is no good, it should be revised when new circumstances demand it. And things have certainly changed all right. The co-operatives are a striking example. The co-operative apparatus is a supply apparatus based on the mass participation of the working people themselves, instead of the private initiative of capitalists. Kautsky was right when he said, long before he became a renegade, that socialist society is one big co-operative.
If we are out to get control going and organise the economy in a practical way, in the interests of hundreds of thousands of people, we must not forget that when socialists discuss this question they point out that directors of trusts, as experienced practical men, may be useful to them. Today experience shows that petty-bourgeois people have renounced hostility for neutrality. And, moreover, we must realise that they do know how to run shops. We do not deny that Khinchuk as an ideologist is chock-full of bourgeois prejudices. They all reek of them, but at the same time, they have practical knowledge. As far as ideas are concerned, all the guns are on our side, and not a single one on theirs. But when they say they are no longer hostile and intend to be neutral, we must remember that now hundreds and thousands of people less capable than Khinchuk are coming to a sensible understanding. We must know how to come to terms with them. In practical matters they know more than we do and are more proficient, and we must learn from them. Let them learn from us how to influence the international proletariat; but when it comes to running shops we shall learn from them. That is something we do not know. Technicians with special knowledge are needed in every field.
As far as the co-operatives are concerned, I don’t understand why you say they stink. When drafting the first decree on the co-operatives we invited for discussion in the Council of People’s Commissars people who not only were not Communists, but were actually far closer to the whiteguards. We conferred with them and asked: Can you accept this point? They replied: We can accept this, but not that. Of course, looking at it offhand, superficially, this was compromising with the bourgeoisie. For, after all, these were representatives of bourgeois co-operatives, and it was at their request that several clauses were deleted from the decree. Thus, we deleted a clause providing that there should be no dues or entrance fees in the proletarian co-operatives. To us that seemed quite acceptable, but they rejected our proposal.
  We say we must come to terms with people who know how to run shops much better than we do; that’s something we are weak at. But we shall not budge an inch from our struggle. When we issued another decree of the same type, Comrade Maximov said such decrees must not be written, because the decree says that the co-operatives that were closed down are to be reopened. This shows that in the Moscow Soviet, as among ourselves, there are certain misapprehensions, and if only for the sake of removing such misapprehensions, conferences and discussions should be arranged like ours here today.
We said that in the interests of our work we intended to utilise not only the trade unions in general, but even the Union of Trade and Industrial Employees, and, you know, the trade and industrial employees have always been a mainstay of the bourgeois system. But since these people have come to us and say they are willing to live on good-neighbourly terms with us, we must welcome them with open arms, and accept the hand they proffer—our own won’t drop off. We do not forget that if the British and French imperialists were to strike tomorrow, they would be the first to turn tail and run away. But as long as this party, these bourgeois people do not run away, we repeat that we must have closer relations with them. That is why we adopted the decree published on Sunday, the one that is not to Comrade Maximov ’s liking—which shows that he clings to the old communist tactics, tactics which are inapplicable to the new conditions. We drew up that decree the other day, and received in reply the resolution of the Central Committee of the Employees,[9] and it would be foolish to say we are issuing decrees at the wrong time, when the change of front has begun and the situation is changing.
The armed capitalists are continuing the war with greater stubbornness than ever, and it is immensely important for our practical construction to take advantage of this change of attitude, even if it is only temporary. All power is in our hands. We need not close down co-operatives, and we can reopen those that have been closed down, for we closed them down when they served the ends of whiteguard propaganda. Every slogan has the faculty of becoming more rigid than is necessary. When the wave of closing down and persecuting the co-operatives swept over Russia, it was the conditions of the time that made it necessary. But now it is no longer necessary. They are a highly important apparatus connected with the middle peasants; they unite the scattered and disunited sections of the peasants. These Khinchuks are doing a useful job, which was started by bourgeois elements. When these peasants and petty-bourgeois democrats say they are abandoning hostility for neutrality, for good-neighbourly relations, we must say to them: That’s just what we want. And now, good neighbours, let us come to a sensible understanding. We shall assist you all we can and help you to exercise your rights, and we shall examine your claims and grant you every privilege, but you must carry out the jobs we assign you. If you don’t, remember that the whole Extraordinary Commission apparatus is in our hands. If you are unable to make proper use of your rights and do not carry out our assignments, we have the whole apparatus of State Control in our hands, and we shall regard you as violators of the will of the state. You must account for the last kopek, and any violation will be punished as a violation of the will of the state and its laws.
This entire system of control remains in our hands, but just now the task of winning over these people, if only for a while, although it may not be a gigantic one from the standpoint of world politics, is for us one of urgent necessity. It will strengthen our position in the war. We have no decently organised rear. It will give us a moral victory, for it will show the West-European imperialists that they can expect to meet pretty serious resistance. And that is not to be scoffed at, for inside every country there is a workers’ opposition to the attack on Russia. That is why I think, as far as one can judge from Comrade Maximov’s statement, that we are groping our way to a definite agreement. Even if differences do crop up, they are not so important, for once we recognise the necessity of coming to a sensible understanding with all the petty-bourgeois democrats, with the intellectuals, the co-operators and the trade unions which still do not recognise us, while at the same time never allowing power to slip from our hands—if we firmly adhere to this policy all winter, we shall gain a great advantage for the whole cause of world revolution. 



Endnotes
[1]
In 1918 the Central Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) regularly called meetings of Party activists to discuss the most important questions of current politics. The meeting in question discussed the proletariat’s attitude to petty-bourgeois democrats who swung over to the Soviet government in the autumn of 1918. Lenin’s report on the question evoked heated debate. In his concluding speech Lenin summed up the results of the debate. 
[2] Engels’s article “The Peasant Question in France and Germany” was published in the magazine Die Neue Zeit in November 1894. 

Engels wrote the article after Vollmar, one of the leaders of the Right wing of the Social-Democratic Party of Germany, had made a speech on the agrarian question at the party Congress in Frankfurt in October 1894, in which he distorted Engels’s views on the attitude towards small peasants. In his letter to the editors of Vorwärts Engels refuted Vollmar’s inventions and added that he was going to write an article in which he would set down and substantiate his views on the agrarian question. 


The Frankfurt Congress appointed a special commission to work out an agrarian programme for the next party congress. The draft programme was discussed at the Breslau Congress in October 1895, after Engels’s death. The revisionist draft did not get the required majority of votes and was rejected. The Congress adopted a decision stressing the need for a further study of the laws governing the development of agriculture.
[3]
Frederick Engels, “The Peasant Question in France and Germany” (Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1962, Vol. II, p. 435).
 
 

[4]

ibid., p. 438.
 
 

[5]
ibid.
  

[6]
Karl Marx, The Civil War in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1962, Vol. I, pp. 520-21).
[7]
Frederick Engels, “The Peasant Question in France and Germany” (Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1962, Vol. II, p. 433).
[8] Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, pp. 469 and 476.
[9]
Lenin refers to the report submitted by the All-Russia Council of the Office Employees’ Trade Unions to the Council of People’s Commissars and published in the magazine Vestnik Sluzhashchego (Office Employee’s Herald) No. 11-12, 1918. The report pointed to the need to enlist members of the office employees’ unions for food work conducted by the People’s Commissariat of Food in pursuance of the decree of the Council of People’s Commissars of November 21, 1918, On the Organisation of Supply :  “The decree On the Organisation of Supply is meant here. The Council of People’s Commissars discussed the decree on November 12, 1918, and finally endorsed it on November 21. On November 24 it was published in Izvestia. Lenin directly participated in formulating the decree and introduced several amendments.”


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Telegram to
Commander-In-Chief









Telegram to Commander-In-Chief (In Serpukhov)



V. I. Lenin

Telegram to Commander-In-Chief (In Serpukhov)
      


Written: November 29, 1918

      
First Published: in 1942.
      Published according to the text written by Stalin with additions
      by Lenin.
      

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 28, pg. 225
Transcription\HTML Markup:
David Walters & 
      R. Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marxists.org) 2002.
       Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the 
      GNU Free Documentation License


 

      29/11
    

      As our troops push on westward and into the Ukraine, provisional
      regional Soviet governments are being formed to back up the
      Soviets in the localities. This has the advantage of depriving
      the Ukrainian, Lithuanian, Latvian and Estonian chauvinists of a
      chance to regard our troop movements as occupation and of
      creating a favourable situation for further advance. Otherwise
      our troops would have been in an impossible situation on
      occupied territory and the local population would not have met
      them as liberators. In view of the situation, please issue an
      order to the commanders of the corresponding units so that they
      render all possible support to the provisional Soviet
      governments in Latvia, Estonia, the Ukraine and Lithuania, but,
      of course, only to the Soviet governments.
    

      Lenin
    
Endnotes
 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## The Proletarian Revolution
  And the Renegade Kautsky








The Proletarian Revolution And The Renegade Kautsky




Vladimir Lenin
The Proletarian Revolution
and the
Renegade Kautsky

Written: October—November, 1918.
First Published 1918 in pamphlet form by Kommunist Publishers,
      Moscow. Published according to the pamphlet checked with the manuscript.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers,
      Moscow, Volume 28, 1974, pages 227-325
Translated (and edited): Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
Archive, 2002
Second proofreading: Steve Iverson, 2014



Table of Contents



       
 
Preface



       

 How Kautsky
    Turned Marx Into a Common Liberal



       

 Bourgeois and
    Proletarian Democracy



       

 Can There Be
    Equality Between the Exploited and the Exploiter?



       

 The Soviets Dare
    Not Become State Organisations



       

 The Constituent
    Assembly and the Soviet Republic



       

 The Soviet
    Constitution



       

 What is
    Internationalism?



       

 Subservience to
the Bourgeoisie in the Guise of "Economic Analysis"



       
 
Appendix I. Theses on the
Constituent 
Assembly[41]



       
 
Appendix II. Vandervelde's New
Book on the State




 

Endnotes
[41]
      For “Theses on the Constituent Assembly” see
      Lenin’s Collected Works, Vol. 26, pp.
      379-83.

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





==========

## Draft Decision on the Use of State
Control











Draft Decision On The Use Of State Control



V. I. Lenin
Draft Decision On The Use Of State
      Control[1]


Delivered: 3 December, 1918
First Published: 1931; Published
      according to the manuscript; Published according to the
      manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
      Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 327
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive May, 2002
    


      On the question of using State Control for keeping check on work
      and improving defence capacity, the majority on the commission
      have voted for lightning control, that is, dispatch of groups or
      commissions with wide powers to check on various
      institutions.
We must have concrete, factual, numerical data on the forces at
    our disposal (Party members first, then non-Party, but absolutely
    honest men) for exercising genuine control. We must know the
    number of specialists in the various branches; the number of those
    experienced in administration and management.
Tasks of control are of two kinds: 

    

      the very simple task of checking on warehouses, goods, etc.; 

    

      the more difficult one of checking on the efficiency of the
      work; combating sabotage, completely exposing it; checking on
      the way the work is being organised; ensuring the greatest
      efficiency of work, and so on.
No. I task is to improve work in the Food and Communications
      Commissariats.
    

Endnotes
[1]
      This draft decision was submitted by Lenin on December 3, 1918,
      at a sitting of the commission set up by the Council of Defence
      (see Note 151) for the purpose of regulating the work of Soviet
      bodies and enhancing the country’s defence capacity. The
      commission’s decision on the question was based on
      Lenin’s draft.
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Speech to the Moscow Gudernia
Congress Of Soviets, Poor Peasants’ Committees And District Committees Of
the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks),











Speech to the Moscow Gubernia Congress of Soviets, Poor Peasants' Committees and District Committees of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks), December 8, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech to the Moscow Gubernia Congress of Soviets, Poor Peasants’ Committees and District Committees of the Russian Communist Party 
(Bolsheviks)
December 8, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered:8 December, 1918
First Published: 11 December, 1918, Izvestia No. 271; Published according to the Izvestia text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
    Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 328
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
    Archive May, 2002


(Storm of applause.) Lenin began his speech by saying that events of the past few weeks in Austria and Germany had gone to show that in our estimation of the international situation we had been right to base our policy on a precise, lucid and proper account of all the consequences of the four year war, which, from being a battle of capitalists for dividing up their spoils, had turned into a battle between them and the workers of the world. The revolution had had a hard time starting in Western Europe, but once it had done so it had been developing more rapidly, surely and orderly than our.
Speaking of the labour movement in other countries which is coming to our aid Comrade Lenin called for an all-out effort and said that every month of our existence, which we were defending at so high a cost, was bringing us nearer to a lasting victory.
On the current task of re-elections to the volost and village Soviets, Comrade Lenin stressed that all the difficulties of independent organisation of the working people from below would be overcome when everyone realised that the government must rely on the workers and the poor and middle peasants, who are not, our enemies, they are just wavering, and with the consolidation of the Soviet government they will side with us.
The cause we have begun, Lenin concluded, will be carried through by the workers of the whole world. (Prolonged applause.)


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Speech to the Third Workers’
Co-Operative Congress, December 9, 1918











Speech To The Third Workers' Co-Operative Congress, December 9, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech To The Third Workers’ Co-Operative

      Congress[1]
December 9, 1918
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 8 December, 1918
First Published: Published in full in 1919 in the pamphlet Speeches by Lenin, Milgutin and Nogin at the Third Workers’ Co-operative Congress; Published according to the pamphlet checked with the verbatim report; Brief report published in Izvestia No. 270, December 10, 1918 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 329-337
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
      Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet
Archive May, 2002
    


      (Stormy ovation.) Comrades, the workers’ co-operatives are
      today faced with extremely important economic and political
      tasks. Both the one and the other are now part and parcel of the
      economic and political struggle. In respect of the immediate
      tasks I want to underline the meaning of “conciliation
      with the co-operatives”. This conciliation, mentioned so
      frequently of late in the papers, radically differs from the
      conciliation with the bourgeoisie, which is nothing short of
      treachery. This conciliation we are talking about now is
      conciliation of a very special kind. There is a world of
      difference between the Soviet Government’s conciliation
      with Germany which produced some results, and the
      conciliation-which would be harmful and even fatal to the
      country of the working class with the bourgeoisie. What that
      pretext of conciliation amounts to is the complete betrayal both
      of the class struggle and the fundamentals of
      socialism. Socialists who are well aware that their chief task
      is to fight the bourgeoisie and capital appreciate this
      distinction.
All of us very well realise that there can only be one
    alternative in our class struggle: recognition either of the rule
    of capital or of the working class. We know that all the attempts
    by the petty-bourgeois parties to form and pursue their policy in
    the country are doomed to failure before they even start.. We have
    clearly seen and experienced several attempts by various
    petty-bourgeois parties and groups to push through their policy,
    and we see that all attempts by intermediate forces are bound to
    end in failure. By virtue of the very definite conditions there
    are only two central forces, standing at opposite ends of the
    pole, that can have a hold on Russia, can decide her fate one way
    or the other. I will go even further and say that the whole world
    is being formed and directed by one or the other of these central
    forces. As far as Russia is concerned I can say quite definitely
    that, because of the specific economic conditions, only one of
    these forces can take control. The rest, the intermediate forces,
    may be numerous but they can never count for much.
Right now, the Soviet authorities must face the question of
    conciliation with the co-operatives. In April we departed from our
    vowed intention and made concessions. Naturally enough, there
    should be no class co-operatives in a country where all classes
    are being eliminated, but, I repeat, the conditions of the time
    demanded a certain delay and we put it off for a few months.
    Nevertheless, we all realise that the Soviet government will
    never abandon the position it now occupies. We had to make those
    concessions since at that time we were alone in the whole
    world. Our concessions were due to the difficulties we had in our
    work. Because of the economic tasks which the proletariat had
    taken on, we had to reconcile ourselves to and preserve certain
    petty-bourgeois habits. The point here is that in one way or
    another we must ensure the guidance and co-ordination of the
    activity of the whole mass of working and exploited people. We
    must all the while bear in mind what the proletariat requires of
    us. A popular government must remember that the various sections
    of the petty bourgeoisie will more and more come over to the
    governing working class when they eventually see there is no
    choice, that all their hopes of a middle way of running the
    country are finally ruined. All the wonderful slogans about
    popular will, the Constituent Assembly and the like, which were a
    screen for all the half-measures, were immediately swept away the
    moment genuine popular will asserted itself. You can see for
    yourselves what happened and how all these slogans, the
    half-measure slogans, were scattered to the winds. At the given
    moment, we can see this happening throughout the whole world in
    revolution as well as in Russia.
I want to show you the difference between the conciliation
    which produced such an appalling disgust throughout the working
    class, and the conciliation which we are now calling for,
    agreement with all the small peasants, all the petty
    bourgeoisie. At the time of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty, when
    we accepted the harsh terms of the treaty, it was said there was
    no hope of a world revolution, nor could there be. We were quite
    alone in the world. We know that at that time many parties were
    repelled from us because of the treaty and joined the
    bourgeoisie. At that time we had to endure all sorts of terrible
    experiences. A few months later we saw there was and could be no
    choice, no middle way.
When the German revolution came, everyone realised that
    revolution was sweeping the whole world, that Britain, France and
    America were also going the same way-along our path! When our
    petty-bourgeois democrats followed their patrons, they did not
    realise where they were being led, they did not realise they were
    being led along the capitalist road. Now we see by the example of
    the German revolution that these representatives and patrons of
    democracy, these Wilsons and Co., are imposing worse treaties on a
    defeated nation than the Brest-Litovsk Treaty which was forced on
    us. It is quite clear to us that international demagogy is now
    bankrupt because of the events in the West and the new
    situation. Now the physiognomy of every nation is as clear as can
    be. Now, the masks have been torn off and all the illusions have
    been dispelled by the battering-ram of history.
It is natural that the Soviet government should have to use all
    its influence and weight with such waverers who are always around
    during a transition, so as to carry out tasks which we are now
    setting, tasks which back our policy begun in April. We then had
    to put off our vowed intentions for a while; then we consciously
    and openly made several concessions.
Someone asked about exactly where we stand on this road. Now
    the whole of Europe clearly sees that our revolution is no longer
    in the experimental stage; the attitude of the civilised nations
    to us has now changed. They now appreciate that in this respect we
    are doing something new and tremendous, that we have had so much
    trouble because for almost all the time we stood utterly alone and
    completely forsaken by the entire international proletariat. In
    this respect we have been guilty of many serious mistakes which we
    do not in any way hide. We should, of course, have endeavoured to
    unite the whole population and not to divide them. We may not have
    done it up to now and we must get down to the job sometime. We
    have already joined up with many organisations. Now, the
    workers’ co-operatives and Soviet bodies should be
    merged. Since this April we have been organising on the basis of
    experience and we have been employing the store of social and
    political forces that we have at our disposal. We have been
    organising the supply and distribution of goods among the whole
    population. We have checked every step we took because this
    organisation has been particularly difficult to carry out in our
    economically backward country. Agreements with the co-operatives
    were first made in April and the decree issued on the complete
    merger and organisation of supply and distribution pursues the
    same aim.
The previous speaker mentioned friction in a reference to
    Petrograd; we know there is friction almost everywhere. We also
    know that this friction is quite inevitable because the time has
    come when two utterly different types of apparatus are meeting and
    merging. We know too, however, that we have to pass through it
    because it is inevitable. In just the same way you must realise
    that the long resistance put up by the workers’
    co-operatives has finally resulted in distrust from the Soviet
    government, a distrust that is perfectly natural.
You say you want independence. It is quite natural that anyone
    who puts forward this demand should induce distrust. If you
    complain of friction and want to avoid it, then you must first
    give up the idea of independence since anyone who insists on that
    is an enemy of the Soviet government at a time when we are all
    striving for a closer union. Once the workers’ co-operatives
    unite in a perfectly clearcut, honest and open way with the Soviet
    government, this friction will begin to disappear. I know only too
    well that when two groups merge the work does not proceed smoothly
    at first. Nevertheless, with a little time, when the one group
    earns the trust of the other, all the friction gradually fades
    away. However, constant inter-departmental friction is likely if
    the two groups stay apart. I don’t understand what
    independence has got to do with it. After all we all agree that
    the whole of society should be one big co-operative as far as
    supply and distribution are concerned. All of us agree that the
    co-operatives are a socialist gain. There lies the immense
    difficulty of socialist gains. There lie the difficulty and aim of
    victory. Capitalism deliberately splits the population. This split
    must disappear once and for all, and the whole of society must
    become a single workers’ co-operative. There can and must be
    no question of any kind of independence for individual groups.
To establish this type of co-operative I was speaking about
    just now is the condition for the victory of socialism. That is
    why we say that no matter what difference of opinion we may have
    over private matters, we shall never come to terms with capitalism
    or take any step away from the principles of our struggle. The
    agreement we are now going to make with sections of social classes
    is an agreement not with the bourgeoisie or capital, but with
    individual groups of workers and democrats. There is nothing to be
    afraid of in this agreement because the whole difference between
    these sections will disappear without. a trace in the fire of
    revolution. Now all we need is a single will to enter with an open
    heart that single world co-operative. What the Soviet government
    and the co-operatives have done up to now must be merged. That is
    the substance of the latest decree passed by the Soviet
    government. That has been the approach by Soviet representatives
    in many places in the absence of our decree. The tremendous good
    accomplished by the co-operatives must be merged with the
    tremendous good accomplished by the Soviet government. All
    sections of the population fighting for their freedom must be
    merged in a single strong organisation. We know we have made a lot
    of mistakes, especially in the first months after the October
    Revolution. But from now onwards, after a passage of time, we
    shall endeavour to attain a complete union and complete agreement
    among the population. To do so, everything must come under the
    Soviet government and all illusions about some sort of
    “independence", whether for individual groups or the
    workers’ co-operatives, must be dispelled as quickly as
    possible. Hopes for “independence” can only be held
    out where there can still be hopes for some sort of return to the
    past.
The Western nations once regarded us and all our revolutionary
    movement as a curiosity. They used to say: “Let the people
    have their fling; we shall wait and see how it all works out
    .... Queer people, those Russians!” Now the “queer
    Russians” have shown the world what their
    “fling” means. (Applause.)
Now that the German revolution has broken out, a foreign consul
    said to Zinoviev: “It’s hard to say at this point who
    has made better use of the Brest-Litovsk Peace, you or
    we.”
He said this because everyone was saying it. Everyone saw that
    this was just the beginning of the great world revolution. And
    this great revolution was started by the backward and
    “queer” Russian people .... History certainly has
    strange ways: that a backward country should have the honour of
    leading a great world movement, which is seen and understood by
    the bourgeoisie of the whole world. This conflagration has swept
    Germany, Belgium, Switzerland and Holland.
This movement is spreading from day to day, the revolutionary
    Soviet Government is daily gaining in strength. That is why the
    bourgeoisie have now taken an entirely different attitude to
    matters. Now that the axe is about to fall on world capitalism,
    there can be no question at all of any independence for individual
    parties. America provides the most glaring example. America is one
    of the most democratic countries, it is a great democratic social
    republic. Where else, if not in that country-which has all the
    electoral rights and all the rights of a free state-could we
    expect a correct solution to all legal questions? Yet we know what
    has happened to a clergyman there, in that democratic republic: he
    was tarred and whipped until his blood flowed in the dust. This
    took place in a free country, in a democratic republic. This was
    allowed to happen by the “humane",
    “philanthropic” Tiger Wilsons and Co. What are these
    Wilsons now doing with Germany, a defeated country? The pictures
    of world relations are displayed before us in full view! We see
    the substance of what the Wilsons offer their friends from these
    pictures, which carry such overwhelming conviction. The Wilsons
    would have instantly proved our point. These gentlemen-the free
    multimillionaires, the “most humane” people in the
    world-would have instantly broken their friends’ habit of
    talking, even of dreaming, of “independence” in any
    form. They would have squarely put before you the alternative:
    either you stand for the capitalist system or you stand for the
    Soviets. They would have said: do this, because we say so, we,
    your friends, the British, the Amnericans-the Wilsons, and the
    French Clemenceau’s friends.
That is why it is quite hopeless to expect any vestige of
    independence to remain. This cannot be, and it is no use dreaming
    of it. There can be no middle course once it is a question of
    protecting property on the one hand, and once the proletariat has
    found its way on the other. The branches of the tree of life must
    either be closely intertwined with capital, or even more closely
    with the Soviet Republic. It is absolutely clear to everyone that
    socialism has entered the period of its realisation. It is quite
    clear to everyone that it is absolutely impossible to maintain or
    retain petty-bourgeois positions through universal suffrage. The
    Wilsons may nurture such illusions, rather, they do not nurture
    such illusions but try to embellish their own aims by fostering
    such illusions, but you won’t find many people nowadays who
    believe these fairy-tales. If such people do exist, they are a
    historical rarity or a museum piece. (Applause.)
The differences you have had from the outset about preserving
    the “independence” of the co-operative movement are
    nothing but vain efforts which must peter out without any hope of
    a positive solution. This struggle is not serious and it clashes
    with the principles of democracy. Although this is not surprising
    because the Wilsons are also “democrats”. They say
    that it remains for them to establish one final union because they
    have so many dollars they can buy up the whole of Russia, and the
    whole of India, and the whole world. Wilson presides over their
    company, their pockets are bulging with dollars and that is why
    they talk about buying up Russia and India and everything
    else. But they forget that basic international issues are settled
    in an entirely different manner, that only some people, in a
    definite environment, may be impressed by their statements. They
    forget that the resolutions daily adopted by the strongest class
    in the world-the kind our own Congress is sure to adopt
    unanimously-greet only the dictatorship of the proletariat all
    over the world. By adopting such a resolution our Congress takes
    the road which does not and cannot lead to the kind of
    “independence” being discussed here today. You are
    aware that Karl Liebknecht has shown some opposition not only to
    the petty-bourgeois peasants, but also to the cooperative
    movement. You know that just for this Scheidemann and company
    consider him a dreamer and fanatic, yet you addressed a message of
    greetings to him, just as you sent greetings to Maclean. By
    voicing solidarity on these matters with the great world leaders
    you have burnt your boats. You must keep a firm stand because at
    the moment you are standing up not only for yourselves, not only
    for your own rights, but also for the rights of Liebknecht and
    Maclean. I have often heard the Russian Mensheviks condemn
    conciliation, and inveigh against those who came to terms with the
    Kaiser’s lackeys. Nor were the Mensheviks alone in erring
    that way. The whole world pointed at us, hurling this stern
    charge: “Conciliators.” Now that the world revolution
    has started, and they have to deal with Haase and Kautsky, we have
    the right to describe our position in the words of the good
    Russian proverb: “Let’s stand back, and see how well
    we are placed.”
We know our shortcomings, and they are easily pointed out. But
      to the onlooker everything appears to be quite different from
      what it actually is. At one time, you know, everyone in the
      other parties condemned our behaviour and our policy, and now
      whole parties are siding with 

      us.[2] The wheel of the
      world revolutionary movement has now turned to such an extent
      that we need not fear any kind of conciliation whatsoever. And I
      am sure that our Congress will find the right way out of the
      situation. There is only one way out: a merger of the
      co-operative movement with the Soviet government. You know that
      Britain, France, America and Spain regarded our actions as
      experiments; they have now changed their tune: they now have to
      look to their own affairs at home. Of course, physically,
      materially and financially they are considerably stronger than
      we are, but in spite of their outward polish we know they are
      rotten inside; they are stronger than we are at present with the
      strength that was Germany’s when the Brest-Litovsk Peace
      Treaty was concluded. But what do we see now? Everyone recoiled
      from us then. Now, every month we spend in strengthening the
      Soviet Republic we spend in defending not only ourselves, but
      also the cause started by Liebknecht and Maclean, and we already
      see that Britain, France, America and Spain have been infected
      with the same disease and are fired with the same flame as
      Germany, the flame of the universal and world-wide struggle of
      the working class against imperialism. (Prolonged applause.)
    

Endnotes
[1]
    The Congress was held in Moscow on December 6-11, 1918. It was
    attended by 208 voting delegates and 98 non-voting delegates. 121
    of the voting delegates were Communists and their sympathisers and
    the other 87 delegates were supporters of
    “independent” co-operatives, i.e., Mensheviks and
    Bight Socialist-Revolutionaries who advocated the independence of
    the co-operatives from the Soviet state. Lenin spoke about the
    tasks of workers’ co-operatives at the evening session on
    December 9. Among other speakers were V. P. Nogie and
    V. P. Milyutin. The Congress censured the anti-Soviet demands for
    “independence” for the co-operatives and decided to
    get the worker!’ co-operatives to organise food supplies
    jointly with state food organs. The Congress elected the
    All-Russia Council of Workers’ Co-operatives of 15 members,
    10 of whom were Communists (V. P. Nogin, V. P. Milyutin,
    I. I. Skvortsov-Stepanov and others.
[2]
    This refers to the Narodnik Communists and Revolutionary
    Communists who had split away from the Left
    Socialist-Revolutionary Party (see Note 128).
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 







==========

## Speech to the First All-Russia
Congress Of Land Departments, Poor Peasants Committees And Communes, December
  8, 1918











Speech to the First All-Russia Congress of Land Departments, Poor Peasants' Committees and Communes, December 11, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech to the First All-Russia Congress of
 Land Departments, Poor Peasants’ Committees and Communes[1]
December 11, 1918

Delivered: 8 December, 1918
First Published: 14 December, 1918, Pravda No. 272; Published according to the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 338-348
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
    Archive May, 2002


(Loud applause passing into ovation.) Comrades, the composition of this Congress, in my opinion, is in itself an indication of the profound change that has taken place and the great progress we, the Soviet Republic, have made in building socialism, in particular in agricultural relations, which are of the utmost importance to our country. This Congress consists of representatives of the land departments, the Poor Peasants’ Committees and the agricultural communes, a combination which shows that within a short space of time, within a single year, our revolution has made great strides in recasting those relations that are the most difficult to recast and which in all previous revolutions constituted the greatest hindrance to the cause of socialism, but which must be most fully recast to ensure the triumph of socialism.
The first stage in the development of our revolution since October was mainly devoted to defeating the common enemy of all the peasants, the landowners.
Comrades, you are all very well aware that even the February Revolution-the revolution of the bourgeoisie, the revolution of the compromisers-promised the peasants victory over the landowners, and that this promise was not fulfilled. Only the October Revolution, only the victory of the urban working class, only the Soviet government could relieve the whole of Russia, from end to end, of the ulcer of the old feudal heritage, the old feudal exploitation, landed estates and the landowners’ oppression of the peasants as a whole, of all peasants without distinction.
This fight against the landowners was one in which all the peasants were bound to participate, and participate they did. The fight united the poor peasants, who do not live by exploiting the labour of others. But it also united the most prosperous and even wealthy peasants, who cannot get along without hired labour.
As long as our revolution was occupied with this task, as long as we had to exert every effort for the independent movement of the peasants, aided by the urban workers’ movement, to sweep away and completely destroy the power of the landowners, the revolution remained a general peasant revolution and could therefore not go beyond bourgeois limits.
It had still not touched the more powerful and more modern enemy of all working people-capital. It therefore ran the risk of ending halfway, like the majority of the revolutions in Western Europe, in which a temporary alliance of the urban workers and all the peasants succeeded in sweeping away the monarchy and the survivals of medievalism, in more or less thoroughly sweeping away the landed estates or the power of the landowners, but never succeeded in undermining the actual foundations of the power of capital.
Our revolution began to tackle this much more important and much more difficult task this summer and autumn. The wave of counter-revolutionary uprisings which arose this summer-when the attack of the West-European imperialists and their Czech hirelings on Russia was joined by all the exploiting and oppressing elements in Russian life injected a new spirit and fresh life in the countryside.
In practice, all these revolts united the European imperialists, their Czech hirelings, and all those in Russia who remained on the side of the landowners and capitalists, united them in a desperate struggle against the Soviet government. These revolts were followed by the revolt of all the village kulaks.
The village was no longer united. The peasants, who had fought as one man against the landowners, now split into two camps-the camp of the more prosperous peasants and the camp of the poor peasants who, side by side with the workers, continued their steadfast advance towards socialism and changed from fighting the landowners to fighting capital, the power of money, and the use of the great land reform for the benefit of the kulaks. This struggle cut the property-owning and exploiting classes off from the revolution completely; it definitely put our revolution on the socialist road which the urban working class had tried so hard and vigorously to put it on in October, but along which it will not be able to direct the revolution successfully unless it finds firm, deliberate and solid support in the countryside.
There lies the significance of the revolution which took place this summer and autumn even in the most remote villages of Russia, a revolution which was not spectacular, not as striking and obvious as the October Revolution of last year, but whose significance is incomparably deeper and greater.
The formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committees in the rural districts was the turning-point; it showed that the urban working class, which in October had united with all the peasants to crush the landowners, the principal enemy of the free, socialist Russia of the working people, had progressed from this to the much more difficult and historically more noble and truly socialist task—that of carrying the enlightening socialist struggle into the rural districts, and reaching the minds of the peasants as well. The great agrarian revolution—proclamation in October of the abolition of private ownership of land, proclamation of the socialisation of the land-would have inevitably remained a paper revolution if the urban workers had not stirred into action the rural proletariat, the poor peasants, the working peasants, who constitute the vast majority. Like the middle peasants, they do not exploit the labour of others and are not interested in exploitation. They are therefore capable of advancing, and have already advanced, beyond the joint struggle against the landowners to the general proletarian struggle against capital, against the rule of the exploiters, who rely on the power of money and property. They have progressed from sweeping Russia clear of landowners to establishing a socialist system.
This, comrades, was an extremely difficult step to take. Those who doubted the socialist character of our revolution prophesied that this is where we were bound to slip up. Today, however, socialist construction in the countryside depends entirely on this step. The formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committees, their wide network throughout Russia, their coming conversion, which in part has already begun, into fully competent rural Soviets that will have to put the fundamental principles of Soviet organisation, the power of the working people, into effect in the rural districts, constitute a real guarantee that we have gone further than the tasks to which ordinary bourgeois-democratic revolutions in West-European countries confined themselves. We have destroyed the monarchy and the medieval power of the landowners, and we are now getting down to the real work of building socialism. This is the most difficult but at the same time the most important and very rewarding work in the countryside. We have got through to the working peasants right in the villages; the wave of capitalist revolts has completely turned them against the capitalist class; the peasants in the Poor Peasants’ Committees and in the Soviets which are now undergoing changes are more and more joining forces with the urban workers. In all this we see the sole, yet true and undoubtedly permanent guarantee that socialist development in Russia has now become more stable, and has now acquired a basis among the vast mass of the agricultural population.
There is no doubt that building socialism is a very difficult job in a peasant country like Russia. There is no doubt that it was comparatively easy to sweep away an enemy like tsarism, the power of the landowners, the landed estates. At the centre the job could be done in a few days; throughout the country it could be done in a few weeks. But, by its very nature, the task we are now tackling can be accomplished only by extremely persistent and sustained effort. Here we shall have to fight our way step by step, inch by inch. We shall have to fight for every achievement to win a new, socialist Russia; we shall have to fight for collective farming.
It goes without saying that a revolution of this kind, the transition from small individual peasant farms to collective farming, will take some time and can certainly not be accomplished at one stroke.
We know very well that in countries where small peasant farming prevails the transition to socialism cannot be effected except by a series of gradual, preliminary stages. In the light of this, the first aim set by the October Revolution was merely to overthrow and destroy the landowners’ power. The February fundamental law on the socialisation of the land, which, as you know, was passed unanimously both by Communists and the non-Communist partners of the Soviet government, was at the same time an expression of the conscious will of the vast majority of the peasants and proof that the working class, the workers’ Communist Party, aware of their task, are persistently and patiently advancing towards the new socialist construction-advancing by a series of gradual measures, by awakening the working peasants, and forging ahead only in step with that awakening, only insofar as the peasants are independently organised.
We fully realise that such tremendous changes in the lives of tens of millions of people as the transition from small individual peasant farming to collective farming, affecting as they do the most deep-going roots of the peasants’ way of life and their mores, can only be accomplished by long effort, and only when necessity compels people to reshape their lives.
After the long and desperate world war, we can clearly discern the beginnings of a socialist revolution all over the world. This has become a necessity for even the more backward countries and—irrespective of any theoretical views or socialist doctrines—is emphatically bringing it home to everybody that it is impossible to live in the old way.
The country has suffered tremendous ruin and disruption, and we see this disruption spreading all over the world, we see many centuries of man’s cultural, scientific and technological achievements swept away in these four years of criminal, destructive and predatory war, and the whole of Europe, not merely Russia alone, returning to a state of barbarism. Now, all common people, particularly the peasants, who have probably suffered most from the war, are coming to realise clearly enough that tremendous efforts are required, that every ounce of energy must be exerted to get rid of the legacy of this accursed war which has left us nothing but ruin and want. It is impossible to live in the old way, in the way we lived before the war, and the waste of human toil and effort associated with individual small scale peasant farming cannot continue. The productivity of labour would be doubled or trebled, there would be a double or triple saving of human labour in agriculture and human activity in general if a transition were made from this scattered small-scale farming to collective farming.
The ruination left by the war simply does not allow us to restore the old small-scale peasant farms. Not only have the mass of the peasants been awakened by the war, not only has the war shown them what technical marvels now exist and how these marvels have been adapted for people’s extermination, but it has also given rise to the idea that these technical marvels must be used primarily to reshape agriculture, the most common form of production in the country, in which the greatest number of people are engaged, but which at the same time is the most backward. Not only has this idea been provoked, but the monstrous horrors of modern warfare have made people realise what forces modern technology has created, how these forces are wasted in awful and senseless war, and that it is the forces of technology themselves that are the only means of salvation from such horrors. It is our obligation and duty to use these forces to give new life to the most backward form of production, agriculture, to reshape it, and to transform it from production conducted in the old, unenlightened way, into production based on science and technical achievements. The war has made people realise this much more than any of us can imagine. But besides this the war has also made it impossible to restore production in the old way.
Those who cherish the hope that after this war the pre-war situation can be restored, that the old system and farming methods can be resumed, are mistaken and are coming to realise their mistake more and more every day. The war has resulted in such terrible ruin that some small farms now possess no draught animals or implements. We cannot allow the waste of people’s labour to continue. The poor peasants, who have borne the greatest sacrifices for the revolution and suffered most from the war, did not tj tl hand from.. the landowners for it to fall into the hands of new kulaks. The latest developments are now confronting these peasants with the question of turning to collective farming as the only means of restoring the agriculture that has been ruined and destroyed by the war. This is the only means of escaping from ignorance and oppression to which capitalism doomed the entire rural population, due to which the capitalists were able for four years to burden mankind with war and from which the working people of all countries are now striving with revolutionary energy and fervour to rid themselves at all costs.
These, comrades, are the conditions that were required on a world scale for this most difficult arid at the same time most important socialist reform, this crucial and fundamental socialist measure, to come to the forefront, and it has come to the forefront in Russia. The formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committees and this joint Congress of land departments, Poor Peasants’ Committees and agricultural communes, taken in conjunction with the struggle which took place in the countryside this summer and autumn, go to show that very many peasants have been awakened, and that the peasants themselves, the majority of the working peasants, are striving toward collective farming. Of course, I repeat, we must tackle this great reform gradually. Here, nothing can be done at one stroke. But I must remind you that the fundamental law on the socialisation of the land, whose adoption was a foregone conclusion on the first day after the Revolution of October 25, at the very first session of the first organ of Soviet power, the Second All-Russia Congress of Soviets, did more than abolish private ownership of land for ever and do away with landed estates. It also stipulated, among other things, that farm property, draught animals and farm implements which passed into the possession of the nation and the working peasants should become public property and cease to be the private property of individual farms. And on the fundamental question of our present aims, of what tasks of land disposal we want carried out, and what we want from the supporters of the Soviet government, the working peasants, in this respect, Article 11 of the law on the socialisation of the land, which was adopted in February 1918, states that the aim is to develop collective farming, the most advantageous form of farming from the point of view of economy of labour and products. This will be at the expense of individual farming and with the aim of passing over to socialist farming.
Comrades, when we passed this law, complete agreement did not exist between the Communists and the other parties. On the contrary, we passed this law when the Soviet Government united the Communists and the Left S.R. Party members, who did not hold communist views. Nevertheless, we arrived at a unanimous decision, to which we adhere to this day, remembering, I repeat, that the transition from individual farming to collective farming cannot be effected at one stroke, and that the struggle which developed in the towns was resolved more easily. In the towns thousands of workers had one capitalist to deal with, and it did not take much trouble to remove him. The struggle which developed in the rural districts, however, was much more complex. At first there was the general drive of the peasants against the landowners; at first the power of the landowners was utterly destroyed so that it could never be restored again. This was followed by a struggle among the peasants themselves, among whom new capitalists arose in the shape of the kulaks, the exploiters and profiteers who used their surplus grain to enrich themselves at the expense of the starving non-agricultural parts of Russia. Here a new struggle began, and you know that this summer it led to a number of revolts. We do not say of the kulak as we do of the capitalist landowner that he must be deprived of all his property. What we do say is that we must break the kulak’s resistance to indispensable measures, such as the grain monopoly, which he is violating to enrich himself by selling his grain surplus at exorbitant prices, while the workers and peasants in the non-agricultural areas are suffering pangs of hunger. Our policy here has been to wage a struggle as merciless as that waged against the landowners and capitalists. But there also remained the question of the attitude of the poor peasants to the middle peasants. Our policy has always been to form an alliance with the middle peasant. He is no enemy of Soviet institutions. He is no enemy of the proletariat or socialism. He will, of course, hesitate and only consent to socialism when he sees by definite and convincing example that it is necessary. The middle peasant, of course, cannot be convinced by theoretical arguments or by agitation. And we do not count on that. But he can be convinced by the example and the solid front of the poor peasants. He can be convinced by an alliance of the poor peasants with the proletariat. And here we are counting on a prolonged and gradual process of persuasion and on a number of transitional measures which will bring about agreement between the proletarian, socialist section of the population, agreement between the Communists who are conducting a resolute fight against capital in all its forms, and the middle peasants.
Appreciating this state of affairs and that our task in the rural areas is incomparably more difficult, we present the question in the way it was presented in the law on the socialisation of the land. You know that the law proclaimed abolition of private ownership of land and equal land tenure, and you know that the enforcement of this law was begun in that spirit, and that it has been put into effect in the majority of rural areas. The law, moreover, contains, with the unanimous consent both of Communists and of people who at that time did not yet share communist views, the thesis I have just read to you, which declares that our common task and our common aim is the transition to socialist farming, to collective land tenure and collective farming. As we proceed with our construction, both the peasants who have already settled on the land and the prisoners of war who are now returning from captivity in thousands and millions, ragged and exhausted, are coming to realise more and more clearly the vast scope of the work that must be done to restore agriculture and free the peasant for ever from his old, neglected, downtrodden and ignorant state. It is becoming clearer to them that the only sure way of escape, one that will bring the mass of peasants nearer to a civilised life and put them on a par with other citizens, is collective farming, which the Soviet government is now systematically striving to put into effect by gradual measures. It is for this purpose, for collective farming, that the communes and state farms are being formed. The importance of this type of farming is indicated in the law on the socialisation of the land. In the clause stating who is entitled to the use of the land, you will find that among the persons and institutions so entitled first place is given to the state, second to public organisations, third to agricultural communes, and fourth to agricultural co-operative societies. I again draw your attention to the fact that these fundamental principles of the law on the socialisation of the land were laid down when the Communist Party was carrying out not only its own will, but when it made deliberate concessions to those who in one way or another expressed the ideas and will of the middle peasants. We made such concessions, and are still making them. We concluded and are concluding agreements of this kind because the transition to the collective form of land ownership, to collective farming, to state farms, to communes, cannot be effected at one stroke. It requires the determined and persistent action of the Soviet government., which has assigned one thousand million rubles for the improvement of agriculture on condition that collective farming is adopted. This law shows that we want to influence the mass of middle peasants mainly by force of example, by inviting them to improve farming, and that we count only on the gradual effect of such measures to bring about this profound and crucial revolution in agricultural production in Russia.
The alliance of the Poor Peasants’ Committees, agricultural communes and land departments at the present Congress shows us, and gives us full assurance, that by this transition to collective farming we have got things going correctly, on a truly socialist scale. This steady and systematic work must ensure an increase in the productivity of labour. For this purpose we must adopt the best farming methods and enlist the farm specialists of Russia so that we may be able to put the best organised farms at our service, which hitherto served as a source of enrichment for individuals, as the source of capitalist revival, as the source of a new bondage and a new enslavement of wage-labourers, but which now, under the socialisation of land law and the complete abolition of private ownership of land, must serve as a source of agricultural knowledge and culture and of higher productivity for the millions of working people. This alliance between the urban workers and the working peasants, the formation of the Poor Peasants’ Committees and their merger with the Soviets are a guarantee that agricultural Russia has taken a path which is being taken by one West-European state after another, later than us, but with greater certainty. It was much harder for them to start the revolution because their enemy was not a rotten autocracy, but a highly cultured and united capitalist class. But, as you know, this revolution has begun. You know that the revolution has not been confined to Russia, and that our chief hope, our chief support, is the proletariat of the more advanced countries of Western Europe, and that this chief support of the world revolution has begun to move. And we are firmly convinced, and the course of the German revolution has shown it in practice, that the transition to socialist farming there, the use of more advanced agricultural techniques and the union of the agricultural population will proceed more rapidly and easily than in our country.
In alliance with the urban workers and the socialist proletariat of the whole world, the working peasants of Russia can now be certain they will overcome all their adversities, beat off all the attacks of the imperialists, and accomplish that without which the emancipation of the working people is impossible-collective farming, the gradual but steady transition from small: individual farms to collective farming. (Loud, prolonged applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The Congress was held in Moscow’s Trade Union House on December 11-20, 1918. There were 550 delegates present. Lenin spoke at the evening session on December 11. The Congress was devoted mainly to working out draft regulations on socialist land settlement and measures for transition to socialist farming (the regulations were adopted by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee in February 1919 and published in Izvestia No. 34, February 14, 1919).


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Rough Draft of Rules for the
Administration of Soviet Institutions 1. 2. 3.











Speech to the First All-Russia Congress of Land Departments, Poor Peasants’ Committees and Communes



V. I. Lenin
Rough Draft Of Rules For The Administration Of Soviet Institutions[1]

Written: 12 December, 1918
First Published: 1928; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 338-348
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
    Archive May, 2002

Collective discussion and decision of all questions of administration in Soviet institutions must be accompanied by the precisely defined responsibility of every person holding any Soviet post for the performance of definite, and clearly and explicitly specified, functions and practical jobs.
Henceforth, this rule, without which it will be impossible to select the most suitable people for each office and job or to exercise effective control, must be unreservedly obeyed.
Accordingly, every Soviet body and every Soviet institution without exception shall immediately:
First, adopt a decision precisely distributing the work and responsibilities among all their members or officials;
Second, define the exact responsibility of all persons entrusted with the performance of any duties whatever, especially such as concern the speedy and proper collection and distribution of material and products.
This rule is binding on all Soviet institutions, and in particular on local, uyezd, urban and other Economic Councils and Economic Departments of Executive Committees. Such Departments and Economic Councils shall immediately assign responsibility to definite persons for the speedy and proper collection of each of the raw materials and products needed by the population.
All leading Soviet bodies-Executive Committees, gubernia and city Soviets, etc.-shall immediately reorganise their work with a view to giving prime place to effective control for actual fulfilment of the decisions of the central authorities and of local institutions. Other kinds of work are to be turned over, as far as possible, to sub-committees consisting of a small number of members of that given body.

2
With a view to eliminating red tape and to the more effective disclosure of abuses, and also to the exposure and removal of dishonest officials ensconced in Soviet institutions, the following rules are hereby established:
Every Soviet institution shall post notices of its reception days and hours outside as well as inside its premises, for all to see without having to obtain passes. The premises assigned for the reception of the public shall be freely accessible without any passes whatever.
Every Soviet institution shall keep a register for recording in brief the name of every visitor, the nature of his business, and to whom it has been entrusted.
Sundays and holidays shall be reception days.
State Control officials shall have the right to be present at all receptions, and it shall be their duty to attend from time to time during reception hours, to examine the visitors’ register, and to draw up a report of their visit and the result of their examination of the register and interrogation of the public.
The Commissariats of Labour, State Control and Justice shall everywhere organise information bureaus, which shall be open to all without passes and free of charge, reception on Sundays being compulsory; the said Commissariats shall widely announce to the public the days and hours the bureaus are open.
It shall be the duty of these information bureaus, not only to give all information requested, orally or in writing, but also to draw up written declarations free of charge for persons who are illiterate or unable to draw up such declarations properly themselves. It shall be obligatory to enlist the services for work on these bureaus of members of all parties represented on the Soviets, as well as of parties which are not represented in the government, and also members of the non-party trade unions and non-party unions of intellectuals.
3

The task of defending the Soviet Republic imperatively calls for the greatest economy of forces and the most productive utilisation of manpower.
With these ends in view it is ordered-in the first place in regard to all Soviet institutions, later to be extended to every enterprise and body-that:
I. Every more or less independent department of every Soviet institution without exception shall within three days submit to the local Executive Committee (and in Moscow to the People’s Commissariat of Justice as well) brief information on the following: (a) name of institution; (b) name of department; (c) nature of its work, in brief; (d) number of sub-departments, sections, or other divisions, with a list of such; (e) number of employees, male and female; (1) volume of work, calculated as far as possible, for example, in number of cases handled, volume of correspondence, or other indices.
Local Executive Committees (in Moscow, the Executive Committee of the Soviet of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies in agreement with the People’s Commissariat of Justice and the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee) shall immediately: () take measures to verify whether the above rule is being promptly and properly observed; (2) draw up within one week after the aforesaid information has been received a plan for co-ordinating, uniting and merging departments which are engaged in similar or kindred affairs.
The commissions which the above-mentioned institutions charge with this task shall include representatives of the Departments for the Interior, Justice, State Control and Labour, as well as of other departments, if need be. The commissions shall submit to the Council of People’s Commissars and the Presidium of the Central Executive Committee brief weekly reports on what has been done to merge kindred departments and to economise labour.
2. In every town in which there are kindred departments or institutions-central, regional, town, gubernia or uyezd, the highest institution shall immediately set up a commission for the purpose of coordinating and amalgamating all these institutions, with a view to the maximum economy of forces; this commission to be guided by the rules and schedule indicated in Clause I.
3. These same commissions (clauses I and 2) are instructed, and on the same grounds, to take urgent measures to substitute female labour for male labour to the utmost and to draw up a list of males who can be transferred to work in the army or for the army, or to other work of an operative and practical and not of an office nature.
4. These same commissions (clauses I and 2) are instructed, in agreement with the local organisations of the Russian Communist Party, to make such alteration in staffs as to leave members of the R.C.P. (of not less than two years’ standing) only in leading and responsible posts; all other posts to be filled by non-Party people, or by members of other parties so as to release as large a number of members of the R.C.P. as possible for other work.

Endnotes
[1] Lenin wrote these rules for discussion at the Council of Defence. e also drew up a list of comrades to whom they should be forwarded-L. B. Krasin, N. N. Krestinsky, G. I. Petrevsky, . I. Kursky, Y. M. Sverdlov, V. A. Avanesov, J. V. Stalin and . I. Lander. In the accompanying note Lenin wrote: “Request you to read this draft which I am proposing for the Council of Defence, show it to comrades and have it discussed by Saturday, December 14. It is desirable to have the amendments in writing by the same date. 12.12.18.”


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Draft Decision of the Central
Committee of the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks).











Draft Decision Of The Central Committee Of The Russian Communist Party 
(Bolsheviks)



V. I. Lenin

Draft Decision Of The Central Committee Of The Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks)

Written: 12 December, 1918
First Published: 1928; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 338-348
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert
    Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet
    Archive May, 2002


All organisations of the R.C.P. shall within one week of publication of the present decision of the Central Committee of the R.C.P. enter on all membership and registration cards the date on which the respective members joined the Bolshevik Party.
In the absence of this information, and if it is impossible to obtain (and to have it verified and signed by not less than three members of the R.C.P. of two years’ standing and over), such membership or registration cards shall be marked: “Date of joining the Party unknown.”
Every member of the R.C.P. holding any Soviet post must immediately make a brief entry into his membership card stating what parties he belonged to, or was associated with, over the past five years, the entry to be certified by the chairman or secretary of his Party organisation.

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Presnya District
Workers’ Conference, December 14, 1918











Speech Presnya District Workers' Conference, December 14, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech at 
Presnya District Workers’ Conference

Delivered: 14 December, 
1918
First Published: Brief report published in Pravda No. 275 December 18, 1918; First published in full in the fourth Russian edition of Lenin’s Collected Works; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 354-366
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. 
Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002


   Comrades, I am going to examine a couple of questions fixed for discussion today. The first concerns the international situation and the second our attitude to the petty-bourgeois democratic parties. 
First a few words about the international situation. As you know, the British, French and American imperialists have declared a grand campaign against the Russian Soviet Republic. These imperialists are carrying on agitation against Russia among their workers, accusing the Bolsheviks of flouting the majority and being propped up by a minority. Since the vast majority of papers in France and Britain belong to the bourgeoisie, these lies against the Soviet Government spread quickly and freely. That is why it is not worth even bothering about such a ridiculous and crude story that the Bolsheviks are backed by the minority of the people in Russia. It is a story that is not even worth refuting because everyone who knows anything about what is going on here realises how ridiculous it is. Yet when you look at the British, French and American papers—and, by the way, we only get the bourgeois papers here—you see the bourgeoisie are still spreading these tales. 
The only people who have no voting rights and no right to take part in or influence the country’s political life are exploiters, those who exploit the labour of others and do not work themselves. There are only a handful of such people among the population. You can just imagine how many people are exploiting hired labour in the towns. Private ownership of the land is no more. The landowners have been deprived of their estates and the homesteaders,  who were still robbing the peasants under Stolypin, have had their land taken away. The number of those exploiting other people’s labour in the countryside is negligible too. But the Soviet government has not told them it will take their vote away. It has said that we recognise anyone’s right to participate in administration if he wants to stop exploiting other people’s labour. If you want to be a worker, God bless you. If you want to be an exploiter, we shall not only disfranchise you, but we shan’t let you feed off someone else’s labour. 
From these fundamentals of our Constitution it is apparent that the Soviet government relies on those who work and offers them the right to run the country. The government is relying on the vast, overwhelming majority of the people. Every Soviet congress, and there have been six so far, shows us that the workers’, peasants’ and-Red Army representatives, representatives of the majority of people who live by their own and not someone else’s labour, constitute an increasingly solid foundation for the Soviet government. The First Congress of Soviets was held in June 1917, when Russia was a bourgeois republic engaged in an imperialist war. It took place in the June of 1917 when Kerensky was driving the troops on to the offensive and millions were killed in battle. At that Congress the number of Communists or Bolsheviks was only 13 per cent, that is one-seventh. At the Second Congress of Soviets which paved the way for the workers’ and peasants’ government, the Bolsheviks had jumped to 51 per cent, a half. And at the Fifth Congress this July the Bolsheviks had 66 per cent. It was then that the Left S.R.s, seeing how quickly Bolshevism was growing, tried their rash action and in so doing split apart completely. Three different parties arose from this split, of which the last one, the Narodnik Communists, came over to the Bolsheviks along with a whole number of prominent individuals like Kolegayev. 
At the Sixth Congress, the Bolsheviks had 97 per cent, that is, practically all representatives of the workers and peasants of the whole of Russia. This is an indication of the present unity of the vast majority of working people around the Soviet government, and how stupid and ridiculous is the bourgeoisie’s fairy-tale about the Bolsheviks only having minority support. The bourgeoisie lie like they do because of the 17 thousand million debt of the tsarist government to the capitalists, the 17 thousand million debt which we repudiated and refused to pay. We don’t intend to pay for the old rulers. We recognise that the debts have been incurred but we say: “Fair enough, you made the debt, you settle up among yourselves.” The allies want to get their own back on us for the debt and restore the power of the landowners and the tsar. We know what they did in Archangel, Samara and Siberia. There, even the Mensheviks and Right S.R.s., who were antagonistic after the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty and thought we were wrong to count on a German revolution, are now convinced of being driven out and of private property and the landowners being restored with the aid of British and Czech troops. 
Even though the British and French papers hide the truth, it seems to be making some headway. The workers sense and realise that the revolution in Russia is theirs, a workingman’s, socialist revolution. Even in France and Britain the labour movement is now carrying such slogans as “Withdraw the forces from Russia!” and “He who makes war against Russia is a criminal!” A socialist rally was recently held in London’s Albert Hall and according to information received, which the British Government tried hard to repress, the rally demanded “Withdraw the forces from Russia!” and all the workers’ leaders condemned the government policy as robbery and violence. We also have news that Maclean, who was a Scottish schoolmaster at one time, called the workers out on strike in the principal industrial districts, condemning the war as a war of plunder. He had been in prison earlier. Then he was put in again. But when the revolutionary movement flared up in Europe, Maclean was let out and he put up as parliamentary candidate in Glasgow, one of the biggest cities in the North of England and Scotland. This shows that the British labour movement and its revolutionary demands are having a bigger impact. The British Government was forced to set Maclean free, its rabid enemy, a man who is proud to call himself a British Bolshevik. 
In France, where the workers are still affected by chauvinism, and where they still think the war is being waged only for the defence of the country, a revolutionary mood is growing. Now, when Britain and France have beaten the Germans, they, as you know, have presented them with terms a hundred times harsher than those of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. Today, revolution in Europe has become a reality. The Allies, who boasted they were bringing Germany freedom from the Kaiser and militarism, have fallen to the role once played by the Russian troops in Nicholas I’s time, when Russia was in the dark, when Nicholas I drove the Russian troops to stifle the Hungarian revolution. That was under serfdom over 60 years ago. Yet today, free Britain and other countries have turned into hangmen and think they are strong enough to stifle the revolution and repress the truth. But this truth will overcome all the obstacles both in France and Britain, and the workers will realise they have been deceived and inveigled into a war for robbing another country, and not for freeing France or Britain. From France we now hear there are people in the Socialist Party, which had previously supported defence of the fatherland, who warmly welcome the Soviet Republic and protest against military intervention in Russia. 
On the other hand, the British and French imperialists are menacing Russia and giving support to the Krasnovs and Dutovs, helping to restore the monarchy and thinking they can deceive a free nation. We know that militarily the imperialists are stronger than us. We knew about it and said so ages ago. We appealed to everyone to aid the Red Army so as to bar the way to and repel the robbers and plunderers. When people say: “If British and French imperialism is stronger, what’s the sense in fighting?” we reply: “Do you remember the Brest-Litovsk Treaty? Didn’t the whole Russian bourgeoisie shout that the Bolsheviks were selling Russia to the Germans? Didn’t they shout then that the Bolsheviks were hoping for a miracle in banking on a German revolution?” The German imperialists were then much stronger than us and had every chance of plundering Russia because we had no army. The old army could not and would not fight because people were so exhausted by the war that they just could not summon up the strength to fight. Everyone who knows what happened then realises that we could not defend ourselves and it looked like Russia was going to fall into the hands of the Kaiser’s henchmen.

Yet, a few months later, the Germans had got themselves into such a mess in this same Russia and met such resistance, had so much trouble with the agitation among the German soldiers that now, as I was told by Zinoviev, Chairman of the Northern Commune in Petrograd, the German consul said as the German representatives were making off: “Now it’s hard to tell who gained more, you or we.” He realised that the German soldiers, who had been so much stronger than us, had been infected by the Bolshevik disease. And Germany today is in the grip of a revolution, there is a battle going on for Soviet power. The Brest-Litovsk Treaty, which had been declared the complete downfall of the Bolsheviks, turned out to be only a stepping stone to our present position. Having fortified ourselves we have now begun to form a Red Army. Yet the German soldiers have been infected by Bolshevism and the apparent victories turned out to be only a step to the complete downfall of German imperialism, an intermediate rung towards extending and developing the world revolution. 
We were alone at the time of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty. All Europe looked on the Russian revolution as an exceptional affair, they regarded our revolution as an “Asiatic revolution”, which began so hastily and toppled the tsar just because Russia was a backward country, and quickly moved on to take away property and to a socialist revolution because of this backwardness. But they forgot the other reason behind the Russian revolution: Russia had no alternative. The war had caused such destruction and starvation every where, made the people and soldiers so weary, they realised they had been tricked for so long, and that the only way out for Russia was revolution. 
The Germans were told they had to defend themselves against the Russian invasion. And now this lie is being nailed with every passing day. The German capitalists and generals continued to lead their troops against Russia even when the country had become socialist. This made it quite clear to even the dimmest German soldier that he had been tricked for the whole four years and sent to war so that the German capitalists could plunder Russia. The same thing that brought the downfall of German imperialism, and the revolution in Germany, is with every passing day and hour bringing the revolution closer in France, Britain and other countries. We were alone. Now we are not. Today, there is a revolution in Berlin, Austria, Hungary; even in Switzerland, Holland and Denmark, free countries that were not touched by the war, the revolutionary movement is growing and the workers are demanding that Soviets be formed. Now it seems there is no alternative. Revolution is maturing all over the world. We were the first and we must defend the revolution until our allies, the workers of all Europe, catch us up. The further their governments get into the mire, the closer these allies will be to us. 
When at the time of the Brest-Litovsk Treaty the Germans thought they were the masters, they were only a step away from their doom. And today, Britain and France, by imposing peace terms on the Germans which are far harsher and more despicable than those Germany foisted on us, are standing on the edge of a precipice. No matter how much they lie, they are now only a few steps away from their doom. They are scared stiff of this doom, their lies are being increasingly exposed as the days go by. We say this: however much these imperialists lie in their newspapers, our cause is sound, much sounder than theirs because it is backed by the class-consciousness of the mass of workers everywhere; this class-consciousness was born of the war, which bled the whole world white for four years. The old governments will not enter God’s world from this war. The old governments now say they are against world Bolshevism. The workers know what is going on in Russia: the landowners and capitalists are being hounded out, and are calling hirelings, alien soldiers to the rescue. The situation is now clear to everyone. Workers everywhere realise what is going on. And despite the whole savagery and bitterness of the imperialists, we courageously go into battle with them in the awareness that every step they take inside Russia will be a step towards their doom, and that they will fare no better than the German soldiers who brought Bolshevism back from the Ukraine instead of bread. 
Power in Russia is now in the hands of the working people; if they lose it, nobody will ever be able to heal the wounds caused by this bloody, terrible war! To leave power in the hands of the old capitalists would mean that the whole 
burden of war would have to be shouldered by the working people, who would have to pay the entire cost. 
Britain? America and Japan are now fighting for a share of the spoils. Everything has been divided. Wilson is President of the world’s most democratic republic. But what is he saying? People there are shot in the streets by jingoist crowds for one word in favour of peace. A clergyman who had never been a revolutionary was dragged out into the street and severely beaten for preaching peace. Where the wildest terror reigns troops are now being used to crush the revolution, to threaten suppression of the German revolution. The revolution in Germany broke out just recently, only a month ago; the burning issue there is a Constituent Assembly or Soviet government. All the bourgeoisie there are for the Constituent Assembly, and all the socialists—those who served the Kaiser as lackeys, who did not dare start a revolutionary war—they, too, want a Constituent Assembly. Germany is split into two camps. The socialists now favour the Constituent Assembly, while Liebknecht, who spent three years in prison, stands, like Rosa Luxemburg, at the head of Die Rote Fahne.   An issue of the newspaper was received in Moscow yesterday. It had a very difficult and eventful journey. In it you will find a number of articles—all the authors, who are revolutionary leaders, describe how the bourgeoisie are cheating the people. Freedom in Germany was in the hands of the capitalists. They published only their own newspapers, and now Die Rote Fahne says that only the workers have the right to use national wealth. Although the revolution in Germany is only a month old, the country is split into two camps. All the traitor socialists are clamouring for a Constituent Assembly, while the genuine, honest socialists are saying: “We all stand for the power of the workers and the soldiers.” They are not saying “and the peasants”, because in Germany many peasants also hire labourers, and so they are saying “for the workers and the soldiers”. They say instead “for the small peasants”. Soviet power there has already become a form of government. 
Soviet government is a world-wide government. It is replacing the old bourgeois state. A republic as well as a monarchy is a form of the bourgeoisie’s robbery of the people if the capitalists are left with their property—the factories, banks and print-shops. The Bolsheviks were right when they said the world revolution was growing. It develops differently in different countries. It takes a long time and is not very easy. Any socialist who thinks the capitalists are going to renounce their rights at once is a bad socialist. No, the world has not seen such kindly capitalists yet. Socialism can only develop through struggle with capitalism. There has not yet been any ruling class which has given way with out a fight. The capitalists know what Bolshevism is. They used to say: “Russian stupidity and Russian backwardness are making some sort of hocus-pocus there, nothing will come of it. They’re chasing ghosts over there in Russia.” But today these very same capitalist gentlemen realise this revolution is a world conflagration and only the workers’ government can triumph. We are now setting up Poor Peasants’ Committees. And in Germany most peasants are either farm labourers or small farmers. The big farmers are in most cases the German brand of landowners. 
Yesterday the Swiss Government expelled our representative from the country, and we know the reason why. We know the French and British imperialists are scared because our representative has every day sent us telegrams and accounts of rallies in London at which the British workers have declared: “Down with British forces in Russia!” He sent us news about France too. The imperialists have reportedly presented the Russian representatives with an ultimatum. The Soviet government’s representatives have been kicked out of Sweden as well and they must return to Russia. But it is still too early for them to rejoice. It is a barren victory. This step won’t get them anywhere. No matter how hard the “Allies” try to hide the truth, deceive their people and get rid of representatives of Soviet Russia, the people will learn the whole truth in the end. 
We are calling on you to give everything you have to repulse the “Allies” and support the Red Army. When we did not have the Red Army, what happened was understandable. But now we see that the Red Army is growing strong and winning battles. Our army is up against the British forces. And our army has officers who only yesterday came up from the working class, who only yesterday had completed their military training. From prisoners, we have a lot of evidence that when they read the Constitution of our Republic in English they say to themselves they have been deceived, that Soviet Russia is not what they thought, that the Soviet government is a workers’ government. And we say: “Yes, comrades, we are not only fighting for Soviet Russia, we are fighting for the government of workers and working people generally, the world over.” As long as we can contain imperialism, the German revolution will strengthen. Revolution will strengthen elsewhere too. That is why, no matter what names they call it in Europe, this world revolution has stood up to its full stature and world imperialism will go under. Our position may be difficult but we have the assurance that we are not alone in fighting for a just cause, we have allies in the workers of every country. 
Comrades, after these remarks on our international position, I want to say a few words about other questions. I want to talk about the petty-bourgeois parties. They considered themselves socialists. But they are not. We know full well that the institutions in capitalist society like banks, savings banks, mutual aid societies are called “mutual help” institutions, but in actual fact they are nothing of the sort, this name is a screen for robbery. These parties, which made out they were for the people, at the time when the Russian working class was fighting off Krasnov (he was arrested by our troops and set free, unfortunately, through the magnanimity of the Petrograders), those Menshevik and Right S.R. gentlemen were siding with the bourgeoisie. These parties of the petty bourgeoisie never know where to go—to the capitalists or to the workers. They are made up of people who live in the hope that one day they will grow rich. They constantly see that around them most small holders live badly—these are all working people. So these petty-bourgeois parties, who are scattered throughout the world, have begun to waver. This isn’t new. It has always been the same, and that is how it is with us too. They all forsook us when the Brest-Litovsk Treaty came along, the hardest time of our revolution, when we had no army and we were forced to conclude a peace treaty, saying to ourselves: we shall not drop our socialist work for one minute. It slipped their mind that Russia was making her supreme sacrifice for the socialist revolution, and they deserted to the Constituent Assembly advocates. These turned up in Samara and Siberia as well. Now they are being driven away from there and shown the only choice is between the landowners’ government and the Bolsheviks’ government. There is no middle course. Either the government of the oppressed or of the oppressors. All the poor peasants can only follow us. And they will only come when they see we do not stand on ceremony with the old regime and are doing everything for the good of the people. That is the only government of Soviets that could have had the people’s support throughout the year despite the terrible conditions and famine. The workers and peasants realise that no matter how badly the war goes, the workers’ and peasants’ government will do everything it can against the capitalist exploiters, so that the whole burden of the war falls on these gentlemen’s shoulders and not on the workers. And there you are, the workers’ and peasants’ government has had the people’s support for more than a year. 
Today, with the beginning of the German revolution, the Mensheviks and S.R.s are starting to change round. The best of them strove for socialism. But they thought the Bolsheviks were chasing ghosts, hoping for a miracle. Now they are convinced that whatever the Bolsheviks expected was not daydreams but real life. They see that the world revolution has begun and is growing throughout the world. And the best people among the Mensheviks and S.R.s are beginning to repent for their mistakes and realise that the Soviet government is not only Russian but a world-wide government of workers, and that no Constituent Assembly will help matters. 
Britain, France and America know that today, now that the world revolution has flared up, they have no external enemies. The enemy comes from inside every country. A new breakthrough has arrived, when the Mensheviks and Right S.R.s are starting to waver and the best of them follow the Bolsheviks and see that though they swear by the Constituent Assembly they cannot help being on the side of the Whites. All over the world the question now is: either Soviet power or the power of the plunderers who have had ten million people murdered in the war, twenty million maimed, and are now continuing to plunder other countries. 
There you have, comrades, the question which causes the petty-bourgeois democrats to waver. We know these parties always have wavered and always will. Most of the people get their convictions straight from their own experience and have no trust in books and words. We tell the middle peasant he is not our enemy and we have no cause to oppress him. And if a local Soviet somewhere or other hits the middle peasant hard and it hurts, that Soviet must be taken away because it does not know how to act properly. The middle, petty-bourgeois democrats will always waver. And if they swing our way, like a pendulum, we must give them support. We tell them that if they are going to spoil our work, we don’t want them. But if they are prepared to help us, we shall accept them. There are different groups among the Mensheviks, there is the group of “activists” which includes all those who have said: “It’s about time we stopped criticising only and helped by action.” We have said we shall fight the Czechs and whoever helps them will be dealt with ruthlessly. But when there are people who have seen their mistake, we must accept them and treat them with leniency. The person who stands in the middle between the worker and the capitalist will always waver. He thought the Soviet government would not last long. But he thought wrong. European imperialism cannot bring down our government. Revolution is now spreading all over the world. And we invite those who wavered and now see and understand their error, to come over to us. We won’t turn them away. We must above all see to it that all these people, no matter what they were before, whether they wavered or not, as long as they are sincere, come over to us. We are now strong enough not to be afraid of anyone. We can stomach them all. But they cannot stomach us. Just remember that these parties are bound to waver. Today the pendulum swings one way, tomorrow the other. We must remain the proletarian party of workers and oppressed. But we are now in charge of the whole of Russia and our only enemy is the person who lives by another’s labour. The others are not our enemies. They are only waverers. But waverers are not yet enemies. 
   
  Now, one more question. Food. As you all know, the food situation, which had improved somewhat in the autumn, is again on the decline. People are starving once more and things will be worse by the spring. Our rail transport is now very much in a mess. On top of everything, it is over-burdened with prisoners of war coming home. Two million men are on their way home from Germany. These two million are utterly worn out. They have starved terribly. They are not people, but shadows, skeletons of people. Our transport suffered more from the fighting at home. There are no steam engines, and no carriages. And the food situation is getting really bad. In view of the seriousness of the situation, the Council of People’s Commissars said to itself: We now have an army and discipline established by Party cells which exist in each regiment. The majority of officers are now from the workers and not sons of the rich. If these officers now appreciate that the working class must find people to run the country, and Red officers too, then the socialist army will really be socialist with officer personnel renovated by the presence of Red officers. We know the breakthrough has now arrived. We have an army. It has a new discipline. The discipline is maintained by the Party cells, workers and commissars who went to the front in their hundreds of thousands explaining to the workers and peasants what the war was all about. That is why the breakthrough started in our army. That is why it has had such a great effect. The British papers are saying they are now running up against a serious foe in Russia. 
We are very well aware of the poor apparatus we have for procuring and distributing food supplies. Certain groups of people have wormed their way in who are swindling and robbing. We know, too, that among the railway workers all those who are shouldering the whole burden of the work are on the side of the Soviet government. But up top they back the old regime, are either causing sabotage or not working with a will. Comrades, you know this war is revolutionary. Every force in the country must be summoned for this war. The whole country must be turned into a revolutionary camp. Everyone must help. By help we do not only mean that everyone should go to the front, but that the class of our state which is leading everyone to freedom, and which is the Soviet government’s support, should run the country because it alone has the right to do so. We appreciate the difficulties resulting from the working class having been kept away both from administration and education for so long. We appreciate the difficulties of the workers in learning everything at once. Nevertheless, in military matters, the most difficult and dangerous of all, it was the working class which effected the breakthrough. The politically-conscious working class must help us to make the same sort of breakthrough with food supplies and the railways. Every railwayman and every food worker should regard himself as a soldier performing his duty. He should remember that he is fighting a war on hunger. He must throw off his former bureaucratic habits. The other day we passed a decree on forming a workers’ food inspection. We told ourselves that we need the workers’ participation to bring about a breakthrough in the railway apparatus, to make a type of Red Army out of it. Call on your people. Rig up courses, teach them, make them commissars. Only they, if they give us their staff, can turn the army of old civil servants into some sort of Red Socialist Army responsible for provisions, an army led by workers and working not under the lash but of their own free will, just like the Red officers are fighting and dying at the front, in the knowledge that they die for a socialist republic.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Telegram to the Samara
Ukrainians











Telegram To The Samara Ukrainians



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To The Samara Ukrainians


Delivered: 16 or 17 of December, 1918
First Published: 1942 Published according to the telegram

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected 
Works,4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 367
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters &Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

Samara, Gubernia Military Commissar for Samara Ukrainians

      Consider it necessary to inform you in reply to telegram sent by
      Samara Ukrainians that in view of influx of Ukrainian volunteers
      and abundance of conscripts in Ukraine itself still without
      arms, Workers’ and Peasants’ Government of Ukraine
      considers it unnecessary to call up Ukrainians in Russia and
      dispatch them to Ukraine. In name of Council of People’s
      Commissars propose you stop sending Ukrainian units to Ukraine.

    
Lenin, Stalin


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## “Democracy” and
Dictatorship











“Democracy” and Dictatorship




      Lenin Internet Archive
    

      “Democracy” and Dictatorship
    


Written: December 23,
      1918

First Published: January 3, 1919 in
      Pravda No. 2

      
Source: Lenin Collected Works, Volume
      28 (p. 368-72)

      
Transcription\Markup: Brian Baggins

      
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive
      (marxists.org) 2000

    

 

      A few numbers of the Berlin  Red Banner  and the Vienna  Call
      (Weckruf) , organ of the Communist Party of German Austria,
      that have reached Moscow, showed that the traitors to socialism
      — those who supported the war of the predatory imperialists
      — the Scheidemanns and Kautskys, Austerlitzes and Renners
      [All who were far right German
      Social-Democrats]  — are getting the rebuff they
      deserve from these genuine representatives of the revolutionary
      workers of Germany and Austria.  We extend warm greetings to
      both papers, which epitomise the vitality and growth of the
      Third International.

    

      Apparently the chief question of the revolution both in Germany
      and Austria now is: Constituent Assembly or Soviet government?
      The spokesmen of the bankrupt Second International, all the way
      from Scheidemann to Kautsky, stand for the first and describe
      their stand as defense of "democracy" (Kautsky has even gone so
      far as to call it "pure democracy") as distinct from
      dictatorship.  In the pamphlet  The Proletarian Revolution
      and Renegade Kautsky , which has just come off the press in
      Moscow and Petrograd, I examine Kautsky's views in detail.  I
      shall try briefly to give the substance of the point at issue,
      which has become the question of the day for all the advanced
      capitalist countries.

    

      The Scheidemanns and Kautsky's speak about "pure democracy" and
      "democracy" in general for the purpose of deceiving the people
      and concealing from them the  bourgeois  character of
       present-day  democracy.  Let the bourgeoisie continue
      to keep the entire apparatus of state power in their hands, let
      a handful of exploiters continue to use the former, bourgeois,
      state machine!  Elections held in such circumstances are lauded
      by the bourgeoisie, for very good reasons, as being "free",
      "equal", "democratic" and "universal".  These words are designed
      to conceal the truth, to conceal the fact that the means of
      production and political power remain in the hands of the
      exploiters, and that therefore real freedom and real equality
      for the exploited, that is, for the vast majority of the
      population, are out of the question.  It is profitable and
      indispensable for the bourgeoisie to conceal from the people the
       bourgeois  character of modern democracy, to picture
      it as democracy in general or "pure democracy", and the
      Scheidemanns and Kautskys, repeating this,  in practice
       abandon the standpoint of the proletariat and side with
      the bourgeoisie.

    

      Marx and Engels in their last joint preface to the Communist
      Manifesto (in
      1872)[A] considered it necessary to specifically
      warn the workers that the proletariat cannot simply lay hold of
      the ready-made (that is, the bourgeois) state machine and wield
      it for their own purpose, but that they must smash it, break it
      up.  The renegade Kautsky, who has written a special pamphlet
      entitled  dictatorship of the proletariat,  concealed
      from the workers this most important Marxist truth, utterly
      distorted Marxism, and, quite obviously, the praise which
      Scheidemann and Co. showered on the pamphlet was fully merited
      as praise by agents of the bourgeoisie for one switching to the
      side of the bourgeoisie.

    

      It is sheer mockery of the working and exploited people to speak
      of pure democracy, of democracy in general, of equality, freedom
      and universal rights when the workers and all working people are
      ill-fed, ill-clad, ruined and worn out, not only as a result of
      capitalist wage slavery, but as a consequence of four years of
      predatory war, while the capitalists and profiteers remain in
      possession of the "property" usurped by them and the
      "ready-made" apparatus of state power.  This is tantamount to
      trampling on the basic truths of Marxism which has taught the
      workers: you must take advantage of bourgeois democracy which,
      compared with feudalism, represents a great historical advance,
      but not for one minute must you forget the bourgeois character
      of this "democracy", it's historical conditional and limited
      character.  Never share the "superstitious belief" in the
      "state" and never forget that the state even in the most
      democratic republic, and not only in a monarchy, is simply a
      machine for the suppression of one class by another.

    

      The bourgeoisie are compelled to be hypocritical and to describe
      as "popular government", democracy in general, or pure
      democracy, the ( bourgeois ) democratic republic which
      is, in practice, the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, the
      dictatorship of the exploiters over the working people.  The
      Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners (and
      now, to our regret, with the help of Friedrich Adler) fall in
      line with this falsehood and hypocrisy.  But Marxists,
      Communists, expose this hypocrisy, and tell the workers and the
      working people in general this frank and straightforward truth:
      the democratic republic, the Constituent Assembly, general
      elections, etc., are, in practice, the dictatorship of the
      bourgeoisie, and for the emancipation of labor from the yoke of
      capital there is no other way but to replace this dictatorship
      with  the dictatorship of the proletariat.  


      The dictatorship of the proletariat alone can emancipate
      humanity from the oppression of capital, from the lies,
      falsehood and hypocrisy of bourgeois democracy — democracy
       for the rich  — and establish democracy  for
      the poor,  that is, make the blessings of democracy 
      really  accessible to the workers and poor peasants,
      whereas now (even in the most democratic —  bourgeois
       — republic) the blessings of democracy are,  in
      fact,  inaccessible to the vast majority of working people.

    

      Take, for example, freedom of assembly and freedom of the press.
      The Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners
      assure the workers that the present elections to the Constituent
      Assembly in Germany and Austria are "democratic".  That is a
      lie.   In practice  the capitalists, the exploiters,
      the landowners and the profiteers own 9/10 of the best meeting
      halls, and 9/10 of the stocks of newsprint, printing presses,
      etc..  The urban workers and the farm hands and day laborers
      are,  in practice,  debarred from democracy by the
      "sacred right of property" (guarded by the Kautskys and Renners,
      and now, to our regret, by Friedrich Adler as well) and by the
      bourgeois state apparatus, that is, bourgeois officials,
      bourgeois judges, and so on.  The present "freedom of assembly
      and the press" in the "democratic" (bourgeois democratic) German
      republic is false and hypocritical, because  in fact 
      it is  freedom for the rich  to buy and bribe the
      press,  freedom for the rich  to befuddle the people
      with venomous lies of the bourgeois press,  freedom for the
      rich  to keep as their "property" the landowners' mansions,
      the best buildings, etc..  The dictatorship of the proletariat
       will take  from the capitalists and hand over to the
      working people the landowners' mansions, the best buildings,
      printing presses and the stocks of newsprint.

    

      But this means replacing "universal", "pure" democracy by the
      "dictatorship of one class", scream the Scheidemanns and
      Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners (together with their
      followers in other countries — the Gomperses, Hendersons,
      Renaudels, Vandervelde and Co.).

    

      Wrong, we reply.  This means replacing what in fact is the
      dictatorship of the bourgeoisie (a dictatorship hypocritically
      cloaked in the forms of the democratic bourgeois republic) by
      the dictatorship of the proletariat.  This means replacing
      democracy for the rich by democracy for the poor.  This means
      replacing freedom of assembly and the press for the minority,
      for the exploiters, by freedom of assembly and the press for the
       majority  of the population, for the working people.
      This means a gigantic, world historic  extension  of
      democracy, its transformation from falsehood into truth, the
      liberation of humanity from the shackles of capital, which 
      distorts  and truncates any, even the most "democratic" and
      republican,  bourgeois  democracy.  This means
      replacing the bourgeois state with the  proletarian 
      state, a replacement that is the sole way the state can
      eventually wither away altogether.

    

      But why not reach this goal without the dictatorship of one
      class?  Why not switch directly to "pure" democracy?  So ask the
      hypocritical friends of the bourgeoisie for the naive
      petty-bourgeois and philistines gulled by them.

    

      And we reply: Because in any capitalist society the powerful
      tell lies to either the bourgeoisie or the proletariat, while
      the small proprietors, inevitably, remain wavering, helpless,
      stupid dreamers of "pure", i.e., nonclass or above class,
      democracy.  Because from a society in which one class opposes
      another there is no way out other than through the dictatorship
      of the oppressed class.  Because the proletariat alone is
      capable of defeating the bourgeoisie, of overthrowing them,
      being the sole class which capitalism has united and "schooled",
      and which is capable of drawing to its side the wavering mass of
      the working population with a petty-bourgeois way of life, of
      drawing them to its side or at least "neutralizing" them.
      Because only mealy-mouthed petty-bourgeois and philistines can
      dream — deceiving thereby both themselves and the workers
      — of overthrowing capitalist oppression without a long and
      difficult process of  suppressing the resistance  of
      the exploiters.  In Germany and Austria this resistance is not
      yet very pronounced because expropriation of the expropriators
      has not yet begun.  But once expropriation begins the resistance
      will be fierce and desperate.  In concealing this from
      themselves and from the workers, the Scheidemanns and Kautskys,
      the Austerlitzes and Renners betray the interests of the
      proletariat, switching at the most decisive moment from the
      class struggle and overthrow of the yoke of the bourgeoisie to
      getting the proletariat to come to terms with the bourgeoisie,
      achieving "social peace" or reconciliation of exploited and
      exploiters.

    

      Revolutions are the locomotives of history, said
      Marx.  Revolutions teach quickly.  The urban workers and
      farm hands in Germany and Austria will quickly discern the
      betrayal of the cause of socialism by the the Scheidemanns and
      Kautskys, the Austerlitzes and Renners.  The proletariat will
      cast aside these "social traitors" — Socialists in word and
      betrayers of socialism in practice — as it did in Russia
      with the same kind of petty-bourgeois and philistines — the
      Mensheviks and "
      Socialist Revolutionaries ".  The more complete the
      domination of the above minded "leaders", the quicker the
      proletariat will see that only the replacement of the bourgeois
      state, be it the most democratic bourgeois republic, by a state
      of the type of the  Paris
      Commune  (about which so much was said by Marx, who has been
      distorted and betrayed by the Scheidemanns and Kautskys) or by a
      state of the Soviet
      type, can open the way to socialism.  The dictatorship of the
      proletariat will deliver humanity from capitalist oppression and
      war.

    

      Moscow, December 23, 1918
    
 


[A]
      The last joint preface to the Communist Manifesto written by
      Marx and Engels was the 
      Russian Edition of 1882 .


 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive









==========

## Heroism Of the Presnya Workers











Heroism Of The Presnya Workers



V. I. Lenin
Heroism Of The Presnya Workers

Delivered: 24 December, 
      1918
First Published: Byednota No. 222, December 24, 1918; Published according to
      the Byednota text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 373-374
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

Thirteen years ago the workers of Moscow raised the
    standard of revolt against tsarism. This was the culminating point
    in the development of the first workers’ revolution against
    tsarism. The workers were defeated, and Presnya ran with
    workers’ blood.
The unforgettable heroism of the Moscow workers set an example
    of militancy to the working people throughout Russia. But these
    people were then too ignorant, too disunited, and failed to back
    the heroes of Presnya and Moscow as a whole who rose in arms
    against the tsarist, landlord monarchy.
The defeat of the Moscow workers was followed by the defeat of
    the first revolution as a whole. For twelve long and painful years
    the savage landlord reaction tortured all the workers and peasants
    of all nationalities of Russia.
The heroism of the Presnya workers was not in vain. Their
    sacrifices bore fruit. The first breach was made in the tsarist
    monarchy; the breach was slowly but surely widened, weakening the
    obsolete, medieval regime. The heroism of the Moscow workers
    started a deep ferment among the urban and rural working people,
    the effects of which never died down, in spite of all
    persecution.
Before the armed insurrection of December 1905, the people of
    Russia were incapable of waging a mass armed struggle against
    their exploiters. After December they were no longer the same
    people. They had been reborn. They had received their baptism of
    fire. They had been steeled in revolt. They trained the fighters
    who were victorious in 1917 and who now, despite the incredible
    difficulties, and overcoming the torments of hunger arid
    devastation caused by the imperialist war, are fighting for the
    world victory of socialism.
Long live the workers of Red Presnya, the vanguard of the world
    workers’ revolution!
N. Lenin


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Speech to the Second All-Russia
Congress Of Economic Councils, December 25, 1918











Speech To The Second All-Russia Congress Of Economic Councils, December 25, 1918



V. I. Lenin
Speech To The Second
All-Russia Congress Of Economic Councils[1]
December 25, 1918

Delivered: 25 December, 
1918
First Published: Izvestia No. 284 and Ekonomicheskaga Zhizn No. 42, December 26, 1918; First published in full in 1919 in the book Transactions of the Second All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils. Verbatim Report, MOSCOW; Published according to the book

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 375-381
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002


(Ovation.) Comrades, first I want to say a few words about the Soviet Republic’s international situation. Of course, you all know that the main issue at stake is the victory of the British, French and American imperialists and their attempts to seize complete possession of the whole world, and, particularly, to destroy Soviet Russia.
At the beginning of the October Revolution, as you know, not only the majority of the West-European bourgeoisie, but also a certain section of the Russian bourgeoisie believed that what was going on in our country was a sort of socialist experiment which could have no essential and serious significance from a world pointof view. Particularly arrogant and short-sighted bourgeois people frequently maintained that the communist experiments in Russia could serve no other purpose than to give satisfaction to German imperialism. And, unfortunately, there were people who allowed themselves to be blinded by such words and who, incidentally, regarded the fantastically harsh and coercive terms of the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty from this angle. In actual fact, these people were wittingly or unwittingly fostering petty-bourgeois class patriotism and regarding the growing unfavourable situation not from the point of view of its world significance, nor from the development of events on a world scale, but from the point of view that German imperialism, is the chief enemy, and that these harsh and immensely extortionate peace terms were a triumph for the German imperialists.
Indeed, if we regard the events of that period from the point of view of the situation in Russia, more ruinous terms can scarcely be imagined. But the folly of the calculations of the German imperialists became apparent within a few months, when the Germans were conquering the Ukraine and bragging to the German bourgeoisie, and even more so to the German proletariat, that the moment had arrived to reap the fruits of imperialist policy, and that in the Ukraine they would get everything Germany needed. That was a very short-sighted and shallow judgement of events.
For it soon became apparent that the only people who were right were those who regarded events from the point of view of their influence on the development of the world revolution. The example of the Ukraine, which had suffered tremendously, in fact showed that the only correct judgement of events was one based on a study and careful observation of the international proletarian revolution. Imperialism found itself hard pressed by the working people, whose condition had become intolerable. And we can now see that the Ukrainian episode was one of the links in the process of growth of the world revolution.
The German imperialists were able to procure from the Ukraine far less material benefits than they had anticipated. On the other hand, this transformation of the war into a patently predatory one demoralised the entire German army, while contact. with Soviet Russia started in this army of German working people the process of disintegration which was to make itself felt a few months later. And now that the British and American imperialists have become even more arrogant, and regard themselves as overlords whom nobody can resist, we have no illusions about the extremely difficult, situation in which we find ourselves. The Entente powers have now overstepped the bounds of the possible for bourgeois policy; they have overdone it, just as the German imperialists overdid it in February and March 1918 in concluding the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. The cause that led to the collapse of German imperialism is again clearly perceptible in the case of Anglo-French imperialism. The latter has imposed peace terms on Germany that are far worse, far harsher than those which Germany imposed on us when concluding the Brest-Litovsk Peace Treaty. In doing so, Anglo-French imperialism has overstepped the bounds and this will later prove fatal. Beyond these bounds imperialism forfeits the hope of holding down the working people.
In spite of the hullabaloo raised by the chauvinists around Germany’s defeat and destruction, in spite of the fact that the war is not yet officially over, we can already discern signs in France and Britain of an extremely rapid growth of the labour movement and a change of attitude by politicians who were formerly chauvinists but who are now opposing their governments’ attempt to meddle in Russian affairs. If we add to this the recent newspaper reports about the beginnings of fraternisation on the part of the British and American soldiers, and if we remember that imperialist armies consist of citizens who are being held in check by deceit and threats, we can see that Soviet. Russia is standing on fairly firm ground. With this general picture of world war and revolution before us, we are absolutely calm, and regard the future with complete confidence. And we assert that Anglo-French imperialism has gone so far as to overstep all the bounds of peace practically obtainable by imperialists and to fall in danger of complete collapse.
The tasks that the Entente powers, who are continuing the imperialist war, have set themselves are to stifle revolution and to seize and divide up all countries of the world. But although Britain and America have been more exempt from the horrors of war than Germany, and although their democratically organised bourgeoisie are much more far-sighted than the German, the British and American imperialists have lost their heads and are now compelled by objective conditions to undertake a task that is beyond their power. They are being forced to maintain troops for purposes of pacification and suppression.
Nevertheless, our present situation demands a maximum exertion of effort. And we must still set greater value on a month than we formerly did on a whole decade, because we are now doing a hundred times more. Besides safeguarding the Russian Republic, we are doing a great job for the world proletariat. Intense effort is demanded of us, immense work in compiling a plan of organisation and in defining general relations.
Passing to the question of our immediate tasks, I must say that the main thing has already been accomplished, and that in the interval between the First and Second Congresses of the Economic Councils the principal type of work has been outlined. A general plan of running industry, nationalised undertakings and whole branches of industry has been drawn up and put on a firm basis with the help of the trade unions. Incidentally, we shall continue to combat all syndicalist, separatist, parochial and regional tendencies, which can only harm our cause.
The military situation imposes a special responsibility and grave duties on us. Collegiate management with the participation of the trade unions is essential. Collegiate bodies are necessary, but collegiate management must not be allowed to become a hindrance to practical work. And when I personally now see the way economic tasks are being carried out by our undertakings, what strikes me most is that the executive part of our work, associated as it is with collective discussion, at times impedes the execution. This transition from collective execution to personal responsibility is the urgent problem of the day.
We shall unreservedly demand that all the Economic Councils, Central Boards and Central Administrations see that the collegiate system of management is not reduced to empty discussion, to writing resolutions, to compiling plans and to regional favouritism. That would be intolerable. We shall firmly insist that every member of an Economic Council and every member of a Central Board shall know for which branch of economy, in the narrow sense, he is responsible. When we receive reports that raw material is available, but people do not know how much, cannot work it out, when we hear complaints that warehouses filled with goods are under lock and key while the peasants are demanding, and justly demanding, commodity exchange, and are refusing to surrender grain in exchange for devaluated paper notes, we must know what member of what particular collegiate board is guilty of red tape. We must say that this member is responsible for the red tape and will be made to answer for it from the defence point of view, i.e., he will be liable to immediate arrest and court martial, even if he is a member of the most important union in the most important Central Board. He must be made to answer for the practical performance of the most simple and elementary things, such as keeping account of goods in the warehouses and putting them to proper use. It is in the performance of such elementary duties that obstructions most frequently arise.
From the historical standpoint, this should not evoke any misgivings, because in breaking new ground a certain amount of time has to be spent in outlining the general plan, which is then developed in the actual process of work. On the contrary, it is astonishing how much has been done in this respect in so short a time. From the military and the socialist standpoint, however, when the proletariat demands all-out efforts from us so that there may be bread and warm coats, so that they are not so short of footwear, foodstuffs, and so on, commodity exchange must be increased to three times and ten times as much as at present. This side of the matter must be made the immediate task of the Economic Councils.
What we require is practical work by people who will be responsible for exchanging grain for goods, for seeing that grain is not lying about, for proper account of the raw materials in every warehouse, as well as for seeing that they do not lie about unutilised, and for real assistance being given in production.
The co-operatives, too, must be approached in a businesslike way. When I hear members of the Economic Councils asserting that the co-operative societies are a matter for shopkeepers, that they are full of Mensheviks and whiteguards, and that we must therefore keep them at arm’s length, I maintain that these people display complete ignorance of the matter. They absolutely fail to understand the tasks of the moment when, instead of referring to the good co-operators as experts, they refer to them as people who are stretching out a hand to the whiteguards. They should mind their own business: we have the Extraordinary Commissions for ferreting out whiteguards, and that business should be left to them. The co-operatives, after all, are the only apparatus created by capitalist society which we must utilise. And we shall therefore ruthlessly punish by military law any attempt to replace action by arguments that are the epitome of short-sightedness, gross stupidity and intellectual conceit. (Stormy applause.)
When to this day, after the lapse of a year, matters are not organised as they should be, when, confronted by practical problems, we still continue to discuss plans while the country is demanding bread, felt boots and the distribution of raw materials on time, such red tape and meddling in other people’s affairs are not to be tolerated.
There are sometimes people in our apparatus who incline towards the whiteguards, but given communist control in all our institutions these people cannot acquire political significance or leading positions. There cannot be the slightest doubt on this score. But we need them as practical workers, and there is no need to fear them. I have no doubt that Communists are splendid people, that there are splendid organisers among them, but it will take years and years to obtain such organisers in large numbers, and we cannot wait.
Now we can obtain these workers from among the bourgeoisie, from among the experts and intellectuals. And we shall ask all comrades working in the Economic Councils: what, sirs, have you done to enlist experienced people in the work? What have you done to secure experts, salesmen, efficient bourgeois co-operators, who must work for you in no worse a manner than they did for the Kolupayevs and Razuvayevs?[2] Time to abandon the old prejudices and enlist all the experts we need in our work. Every collegiate body, every Communist executive must know this. The pledge of success lies in this attitude.
Let’s cut out the idle talk and get down to practical work to extricate our country from the ring in which the imperialists have surrounded it. That must be the position of every Soviet and co-operative organisation. We need action and more action! The proletariat will forfeit much if, once in power, it cannot utilise that power, put the problem practically and solve it practically. It is about time you dropped the idea that only Communists, among whom there are unquestionably excellent people, can perform a particular job. It. is about time you lost this prejudice; we need many workers who know their job, and we must enlist them all in the work.
Capitalism has left us a valuable legacy in the shape of its biggest experts. And we must be sure to utilise them and utilise them on a broad and mass scale; we must put every one of them to work. We have no time to spend on training experts from among our Communists, because everything now depends on practical work and practical results.
We must demand that every member of a collegiate body, every member of a responsible institution take charge of a job and be fully responsible for it. It is absolutely essential that everyone who takes charge of a definite branch of work should be responsible for everything, both for production and distribution. I must tell you that our Soviet Republic’s situation is such that given proper distribution of bread and other goods we can hold on for a very, very long time. But we must have a proper policy of definitely abandoning all red tape. We must act swiftly and decisively, we must appoint definite people for definite responsible work, every one of them must know his job exactly, must answer for it exactly, answer for it even with his head. That is the policy we are pursuing in the Council of People’s Commissars and in the Council of Defence[3] and to this policy all the activities of the Economic Councils and the co-operatives must be subordinated. That is the path the proletariat’s policy must take.
We must see to it that the wheels of commodity exchange revolve properly. That is the whole problem right now. An enormous amount of work has to be done in this sphere, and, in conclusion, my emphatic appeal to all of you is to do your share of this work. (Prolonged applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The Congress was held in the Second House of Soviets (the Metropol Hotel) in Moscow. On the sixth day of the proceedings, December 25, Lenin delivered a speech on the international situation and economic tasks of the Soviet Republic. On the basis of Lenin’s report the Congress adopted a resolution on one-man management, which established personal responsibility of heads of enterprises and organisations for their functioning.
[2] Kolupayev and Razuvagev—capitalist sharks described by Saltykov-Shchedrin.
[3] The Council of Defence (The Council of Workers’ and Peasants Defence) was set up by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee on November 30, 1918. It was organised in accordance with the decree of the C.E.C. of September 2, 1918, which proclaimed martial law. The Council of Defence was an emergency organ brought into being by the country’s extreme difficulties. It was vested with full powers for mobilising the country’s resources. Lenin was appointed Chairman of the Council.
The decisions of the Council of Defence were binding on the ]central and local departments and institutions and on all Soviet Citizens. During the Civil War and foreign intervention it was the chief military, economic and planning centre of the Republic. It exercised constant control over the activity of the Revolutionary Military Council and other military organs. From December 1, 1918, to February 27, 1920, it held 101 sessions and discussed some 2,300 questions relating to the country’s defence. Lenin presided at all but two sessions. The Council conducted its work through its members and special commissions which dealt with the most important problems of the country’s defence. To settle urgent local problems, the Council delegated its members and prominent Party workers and statesmen.
In early April 1920 the Council of Workers’ and Peasants’ Defence was reorganised into the Council of Labour and Defence. By decision of the Eighth All-Russia Congress of Soviets held in December 1920, the Council of Labour and Defence began to function as a commission of the Council of People’s Commissars whose main task was to coordinate the work of all departments in the sphere of economic construction. It existed until 1937 when many of it’s leading members were purged during the last of the Stalinist Purge Trials. 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive


 
 
 



==========

## Tasks of the Trade Unions











Tasks Of The Trade Unions



V. I. Lenin
Tasks Of The Trade Unions

Delivered:  December, 
1918 and January 1919
First Published: 1933; Published according to the          manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 382-385
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert  Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

I

      The theses by Tomsky, Radus-Zenkovich and Nogin each express the
      viewpoint of the particular job they represent: trade unions,
      commissariat and co-operatives with mutual benefit
      societies.
Each group of theses therefore suffers from a lopsided emphasis
    of only one side of the picture and an overshadowing and
    suppression of the fundamental points at issue.
A correct picture of these fundamental issues concerning the
    trade union movement today and its attitude towards the Soviet
    government requires above all proper consideration for the
    specific features of the present, given situation in the
    transition from capitalism to socialism.
All three gave insufficient attention or virtually no attention
    at all to this vital aspect of the matter.
II

      The chief feature of the present situation in this respect is as
      follows.
The Soviet government as the dictatorship of the proletariat is
    victorious both among the urban proletariat and among the poor
    peasants but has far from won over by communist propaganda and
    strong organisation all trades and the whole mass of
    semi-proletarians.
Hence the special importance, particularly at the moment, of
    stepping up our propaganda and organisational work so that, on the
    one hand, we extend our influence over those workers and employees
    who are the least Soviet (that is, the furthest from
    fully accepting Soviet policy), and subordinate them to the
    general proletarian movement. And so that, on the other hand, we
    shake up and rouse ideologically, and rally organisationally, the
    most backward sections and individuals among the proletariat and
    semi-proletariat, such as the unskilled workers, the town
    servants, rural semi-proletariat, and so on.
Then, the second principal feature of the present situation is
    that the construction of socialist society is based on a solid
    foundation, that is, we have not only done more than map it out
    and set it as our immediate practical goal; we have formed several
    highly important bodies of this construction (the Economic
    Councils, for example), had certain experience of their
    relationship with mass organisations (trade unions,
    co-operatives), and obtained certain practical results. All the
    same, however, our construction is not yet finished by any means,
    we still have very many flaws to iron out, the very essentials are
    not yet guaranteed (for instance, proper collection and
    distribution of grain, production and distribution of fuel), and
    the main body of working people are still not playing a big enough
    part in the construction.
III

      With this in view, the trade unions have the following tasks at
      present.
There can be no talk of any sort of trade union
    "neutrality". Any campaign for neutrality is either a hypocritical
    screen for counter-revolution or a complete lack of
    class-consciousness.
We are now strong enough in the basic core of the trade union
    movement to be able to bring under our influence and proletarian
    discipline both the backward and the passive non-Communists inside
    the unions, and those workers who are still in some respects
    petty-bourgeois.
So the chief aim now is, not to break the resistance of a
    strong enemy, for Soviet Russia no longer has such an enemy among
    the proletarians and semi-proletarians, but to overcome by
    stubborn, persistent, more extensive educational and
    organisational work the prejudices of certain pettybourgeois
    sections of the proletariat and semi-proletariat.

    The unions must steadily extend the insufficiently wide base of
    the Soviet government (that is, increase the number of workers and
    poor peasants directly taking part in state administration),
    educate the backward working people (by practical experience in
    management as well as by books, lectures and newspapers), and
    discover new organisational / orins both for these new tasks of
    the trade union movement in general, and for attracting a far more
    numerous mass of semi-proletarians, like the poor peasants, for
    example.
Thus, they must attract all trade union members into
    state administration-through the system of commissars, through
    participation in lightning control groups, and so on and so
    forth. They must attract the housemaid, first into co-operative
    work, in supplying the population with provisions, supervising
    their production, etc., and then into more responsible and less
    "narrow" work-but of course with the necessary gradualness.
They must get the specialists into state work together with the
    workers and keep an eye on them.
Transitional forms demand new bounds of organisation. Thus, for
    instance, the Poor Peasants' Committees are playing a tremendous
    role. There may be a danger that their merging with the Soviets
    would somewhere end up by leaving the mass of semi-proletarians
    outside of the bounds of permanent organisation. But we
    cannot forgo the task of organising the poor peasants under the
    pretext that they are not hired hands. It is possible and even
    necessary to search, search and search again for new forms, if
    only, for example, by forming unions of poor peasants (perhaps the
    very same Poor Peasants' Committees) as unions of the very
    poor (a) uninterested in grain profiteering and high grain
    prices, (b) interested in improving their lot by common measures
    for everyone, (c) interested in strengthening socialised farming,
    (d) interested in a permanent alliance with the urban workers,
    etc.
Such a poor peasant union could make up a special
    section of the All-Russia Trade Union Council to prevent it
    overwhelming the completely proletarian elements. The form can be
    modified and must be sought through applying it to practice, to
    the new task of embracing the new, transitional social types (the
    village poor are not the proletariat, and now not even
    semi-proletariat, but those who stand closest to the
    semi-proletariat since capitalism is not yet dead, and at the same
    time those who are most sympathetic to the transition to
    socialism)...[Here the manuscript
    ends—Editor].


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive








==========

## A Little Picture In Illustration
Of Big Problems











 Little Picture In Illustration Of Big Problems



V. I. Lenin
A Little Picture In Illustration
Of Big Problems

Delivered:  End of 1918 or beginning of 1919

First Published: Pravda No. 258, November 7, 1926; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 386-389
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert  Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002


Comrade Sosnovsky, editor of Byednota has brought me a remarkable book. As many workers and peasants as possible should be made familiar with it. Most valuable lessons, splendidly illustrated by vivid examples, are to be drawn from it on some of the major problems of socialist construction. The book, by Comrade Alexander Todorsky, is called A Year with Rifle and Plough and was published in the little town of Vesyegonsk by the local uyezd Executive Committee to mark the anniversary of the October Revolution.
The author describes the year's experience of the men in charge of organising Soviet power in the Vesyegonsk Uyezd—first the Civil War, the revolt of the local kulaks and its suppression, and then “peaceful creative life”.The author has succeeded in giving such a simple, and at the same time such a lively, account of the course of the revolution in this rural backwater, that to attempt to retell it could only weaken its effect. This book should be distributed as widely as possible, and it would be very good if many more of those who have been working among the people and with the people, in the very thick of life, sat down to describe their experiences. The publication of several hundred, or even several dozen, such descriptions, the best, most truthfully and plainly told and containing numerous valuable facts, would be infinitely more useful to the cause of socialism than many of the newspaper and magazine articles and books by professional journalists and writers who only too often cannot see real life for the paper they write on.
Let me give a brief example from Comrade Todorsky's narrative. It was suggested that “merchant hands” should not be allowed to go “unemployed”, but should be encouraged to “set to work”.
“. . .With this end in view, three young, energetic and very businesslike manufacturers, E. Yefremov, A. Loginov and N. Kozlov, were summoned to the Executive Committee and ordered on pain of imprisonment and confiscation of all property to set up a sawmill and tannery. The work was started immediately.
“. . .The Soviet authorities were not mistaken in their choice of men, and the manufacturers, to their credit, were among the first to realise that they were not dealing with ‘casual and temporary guests’, but with real masters who had taken power firmly into their hands.
“. . .Having quite rightly realised this, they set to work energetically to carry out the orders of the Executive Committee, with the result that Vesyegensk now has a sawmill going at full swing, covering the needs of the local population and filling orders for a new railway under construction.
“. . .As to the tannery, the premises are now ready, and the engine, drums and ether machinery, obtained from Moscow, are being installed, so that in a month and a half, or two at the most, Vesyegonsk will be getting fine leather of its own make.
“. . .The building of two Soviet plants by ‘non-Soviet’ hands is a good example of how to fight a class which is hostile to us.
“. . .To rap the exploiters over the knuckles, to render them harmless or ‘finish them off’, is only half the job. The whole job will be done only when we compel them to work, and with the fruits of their labour help to improve the new life and strengthen Soviet power.”

These fine and absolutely true words should be carved in stone and prominently displayed in every Economic Council, food organisation, factory, land department and so on. For what has been understood by our comrades in remote Vesyegonsk is all too often stubbornly ignored by Soviet officials in the capitals. It is quite common to meet a Soviet intellectual or worker, a Communist, who turns his nose up at the mere mention of co-operative societies and declares with an air of profound importance—and with equally profound stupidity—that these are not Soviet hands, they are bourgeois people, shopkeepers, Mensheviks, that at such and such a time and place the co-operators used their financial manipulations to conceal aid given to whiteguards, and that in our Socialist Republic the supply and distribution apparatus must be built up by clean Soviet hands.

Such arguments are typical insofar as the truth is so mixed with falsehood that we consequently get a most dangerous distortion of the aims of communism that can do incalculable harm to our cause.
The co-operatives certainly are an apparatus of bourgeois society, an apparatus which grew up in an atmosphere of “shopkeeping” and which has trained its leaders in the spirit of bourgeois politics and in a bourgeois outlook, and has therefore been producing a large proportion of whiteguards or their accomplices. That is undeniable. But it is a bad thing when absurd conclusions are drawn from undeniable truths, by their oversimplification and slapdash application. We can only build communism out of the material created by capitalism, out of that refined apparatus which has been moulded under bourgeois conditions and which-as far as concerns the human material in the apparatus-is therefore inevitably imbued with the bourgeois mentality. That is what makes the building of communist society difficult, but it is also a guarantee that it can and will be built. In fact, what distinguishes Marxism from the old, utopian socialism is that the latter wanted to build the new society not from the mass human material produced by bloodstained, sordid, rapacious, shopkeeping capitalism, but from very virtuous men and women reared in special hothouses and cucumber frames. Everyone now sees that this absurd idea really is absurd and everyone has discarded it, but not everyone is willing or able to give thought to the opposite doctrine of Marxism and to think out how communism can (and should) be built from the mass human material which has been corrupted by hundreds and thousands of years of slavery, serfdom, capitalism, by small individual enterprise, and by the war of every man against his neighbour to obtain a place in the market, or a higher price for his product or his labour.
The co-operatives are a bourgeois apparatus. Hence they do not deserve to be trusted politically; but this does not mean we may turn our backs on the task of using them for administration and construction. Political distrust means we must not put non-Soviet people in politically responsible posts. It means the Cheka must keep a sharp eye on members of classes, sections or groups that have leanings towards the whiteguards. (Though, incidentally, one need not go to the same absurd lengths as Comrade Latsis, one of our finest, tried and tested Communists, did in his Kazan magazine, Krasny Terror. He wanted to say that Red terror meant the forcible suppression of exploiters who attempted to restore their rule, but instead, he put it this way [on page 2 of the first issue of his magazine]: “Don't search [!!?] the records for evidence of whether his revolt against the Soviet was an armed or only a verbal one”)
Political distrust of the members of a bourgeois apparatus is legitimate and essential. But to refuse to use them in administration and construction would be the height of folly, fraught with untold harm to communism. If anybody tried to recommend a Menshevik as a socialist, or as a political leader, or even as a political adviser, he would be committing a great mistake, for the history of the revolution in Russia has definitely shown that the Mensheviks (and the Socialist-Revolutionaries) are not socialists, but petty-bourgeois democrats who are capable of siding with the bourgeoisie every time the class struggle between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie becomes particularly acute. But petty-bourgeois democracy is not a chance political formation, not an exception, but a necessary product of capitalism. And it is not only the old, pre-capitalist, economically reactionary middle peasants who are the “purveyors” of this democracy. So, too, are the co-operative societies with their capitalist training that have sprung from the soil of large-scale capitalism, the intellectuals, etc. After all, even backward Russia produced, side by side with the Kolupayevs and Razuvayevs, capitalists who knew how to make use of the services of educated intellectuals, be they Menshevik, Socialist-Revolutionary or non-party. Are we to be more stupid than those capitalists and fail to use such “building material” in erecting a communist Russia?

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
  









==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin And
  Dzerzhinsky











Telegram To Stalin And Dzerzhinsky



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To Stalin And
      Dzerzhinsky[1]

Sent:  14 January, 1919
      
First Published: 1934 Published according to
      the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 390
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert  Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

14.1.19

      Glazov, for Stalin and Dzerzhinsky
Received and read first code message. Request both
    of you personally to see to execution of intended measures on
    spot, otherwise no guarantee of success.
Lenin

Endnotes
[1]
    On January 1, 1919, in view of the critical situation at Perm, the
    Central Committee of the Party and the Council of Defence set up a
    special commission to investigate the causes that had led to the
    town's surrender, and to restore the situation at the front
    defended by the Third Army. The commission was made up of
    Dzerzhinsky and Stalin, members of the C.C. of the Party.
Lenin sent the telegram in reply to “The
      Preliminary Report on the Progress of Investigation into the
      Causes of Surrender of Perm”, which was compiled by
      Dzerzhinsky and Stalin and gave account of measures taken by the
      commission to redress the
      situation. The measures adopted by the Central Committee of
      the Party and the Council of Defence bolstered up the left flank
      of the Eastern Front, defended by the Third Army. In the latter
      half of January 1919 the Third Army units launched an offensive
      on some sectors of the front. By February 1919 the Third Army
      had fully recovered its fighting efficiency and took part in the
      general offensive of troops on the Eastern Front.

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech at a Joint Session Of the
All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet And All-Russia Trade
Union Congress











Speech at a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee,The Moscow Soviet and All-Russia Trade Union Congress, January 17, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee, The Moscow Soviet and All-Russia Trade Union Congress
      January 17, 
      1919[1] 

Delivered:  17 January, 1919
      
First Published: Brief report published in Izvestia No. 12, January18, 1919; First published in full in 1929; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 391-404
Translated: Clemens Dutt; Edited by Robert  Daglish
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002



      (Stormy ovation.) Comrades, allow me to begin by
      briefly mentioning the chief facts relating to our food
      policy. I think these brief remarks will be useful in enabling
      us to form a correct judgement of the significance of the
      resolution we are recommending today for adoption by the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee. They should also enable
      us to form an opinion of our whole food policy in general, and
      of the role which now, when a difficult change is coming, falls
      to the organised proletariat —that vanguard and chief
      buttress of Soviet Russia and the socialist revolution.
Our food policy has been marked by three major acts, which,
    taken chronologically, are as follows: first—the decision to
    form Poor Peasants’ Committees, a step which lies at the
    very basis of our food policy and which, moreover, was a
    tremendously important turning-point in the whole course of
    development and structure of our revolution. By taking this step
    we crossed the boundary dividing the bourgeois from the socialist
    revolution. By themselves, the victory of the working class in the
    cities and the transfer of all factories to the proletarian state
    would not have been enough to create and consolidate the
    foundation of a socialist system, if we had not also created for
    ourselves not a general peasant, but a really proletarian buttress
    in the countryside. In October, we had to confine ourselves to
    uniting the proletariat and the peasants in general, as a
    whole. And thanks to this alliance we were able rapidly to destroy
    the landlord system and sweep it off the face of the earth. But it
    was only when we proceeded to organise the poor peasants, the
    peasant proletariat and semi-proletariat, that a durable alliance
    could be formed between the mass of the urban proletariat and
    rural proletariat. Only then could the war against the kulaks and
    the peasant bourgeoisie be fought in real earnest. This radical
    step continues to be the keystone of our food policy.
The second step, less important perhaps, was the decree passed
    with the participation and on the initiative of our
    representatives, the decree on utilising the co-operative
    societies. There we resolved that, we must make use of the
    machinery created by the co-operatives and capitalist society in
    general, and which, for obvious reasons, was weaker in Russia than
    in Western Europe. In this respect we were guilty of many sins and
    many omissions in the towns and big proletarian centres, as well
    as in the countryside. Here we are up against a lack of
    understanding and ability, prejudices and traditions which tend to
    repel us from the co-operatives. It is quite natural that there
    should be many non-proletarians in the upper ranks of the
    co-operative movement. We must fight these people, who are capable
    of swinging over to the bourgeoisie, and the counter-revolutionary
    elements and their scheming. But at the same time we must preserve
    this machinery, the co-operative machinery—which is likewise
    a capitalist heritage—this machinery of distribution among
    millions of people, without which we cannot build socialism with
    any success. In this respect the Food Commissariat has outlined a
    correct policy, but we have not yet put it fully into effect. The
    proposals we are submitting today to the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee on behalf of the Communist group, which
    insists that the co-operative machinery be utilised, are one more
    step in the same direction. We must know how to combat the
    undesirable top officials in the co-operative machinery—we
    have forces and authority enough for that, for it would be silly
    to think they can put up any serious resistance. We must know how
    to combat them, but we must utilise the co-operative machinery
    without fail so as not to squander our forces, so that this
    machine may be united, and so that the Communists may devote their
    energies not only to political, but also to organisational work,
    and make technical use of the machinery which stands ready for
    this work—the co-operative machinery.
The third step in our food policy is the formation of
    workers’ food organisations. 1-lore, a responsible task
    confronts you, the food workers. Our path is the right path for us
    to follow, and we must see to it that it is followed by all the
    Commissariats. It is a measure of general social and class
    importance as well as of importance for food supplies. To make the
    socialist revolution lasting, a new class must run the country. We
    know that prior to 1861[2] it was the feudal landowners who were
    the power that governed Russia. We know that since then, generally
    speaking, the power that governed was the bourgeoisie, those from
    the wealthy. The permanence of the socialist revolution will
    depend on the extent we can elevate the new class, the
    proletariat, to the work of government, have Russia governed by
    the proletariat. We must make this work of government a step
    towards the universal training of the working people in the art of
    governing the state, a training not derived from books or
    newspapers, speeches or pamphlets, but from practice, enabling
    everyone to try his hand at this work.
That, comrades, is the chief stage in our food policy, which at
    the same time is indicative of the very character of its
    structure. Very responsible duties here confront our food supply
    comrades. It need scarcely be said that there is no more cruel and
    dreadful calamity than famine, that the people are naturally
    driven to impatience, anger and indignation by every flop in this
    sphere, for it is a calamity that cannot be endured. Nor need it
    be said that the Food Commissariat’s task is a most
    difficult one. You know, and the comrades from the trade unions
    know it particularly, how much chaos and disorder there is in
    running the big factories, in keeping stock of their output. Yet
    this is a thousand times easier than keeping stock of food which
    is gathered in by millions of peasants. But we have no
    alternative. There is a general food shortage in the country.
    There is not enough to go round.
What do we mean when we say that certain foodstuffs are scarce?
    It means we could avoid starvation, although living on reduced
    rations, if we were now to distribute them among the whole
    population, if every peasant were to turn over all his produce, if
    everybody were to cut consumption somewhat below the standard of
    sufficiency—because there is not enough for a full standard
    all round—if every peasant were to agree to reduce his
    consumption somewhat below the standard of sufficiency and turn
    over all the rest to the state, and if we distributed it all
    properly. But, if we set ourselves this aim, it is obviously
    impossible to carry it out by ordinary means amidst the present
    state of economic disruption and with our nation-wide
    inefficiency—we are only just getting the knack; we had
    nowhere to get it from before. If there is a shortage of food, it
    means ... what does it mean? It means that if you were to sanction
    free trade when there is a shortage of vitally essential
    foodstuffs, the result would be frantic profiteering and prices
    would be inflated to what is called monopoly or famine prices, and
    only a few top people, with incomes considerably above the
    average, would be able to satisfy their needs at these fantastic
    prices, while the vast majority of the people would starve. That
    is what it means when there is a food shortage in the country,
    when the country is in a state of famine. Ever since the
    imperialists began to march on Russia, she has been
    surrounded. They cannot come out openly with their predatory
    plans; but that does not mean the end of their intervention, as
    Comrade Kamenev has rightly remarked. We are a besieged country, a
    besieged fortress. In this besieged fortress want is
    inevitable. And therefore the Food Commissariat’s job is the
    most difficult organisational job of all the Commissariats.
Our enemy today, if we take the enemy within, is not so much
    the capitalist or landowner—this exploiting minority was
    easy to vanquish, and it has been. It is the profiteer and the
    bureaucrat. And every peasant is a profiteer by inclination, who
    has a chance to line his pockets taking advantage of the desperate
    want and agonising famine in the cities and in some of the
    villages. And you know very well, especially the comrades from the
    trade unions, that the urge, the tendency to go in for
    profiteering occurs in the industrial centres, too, when certain
    goods are not to be had, or are scarce, and that everybody who
    manages to lay his hands on them tries to hoard and make a profit
    out of them. If we were to allow free trade, prices would at once
    be inflated to fantastic levels, levels beyond the reach of the
    vast majority of people.
That, comrades, is the situation, and that is why among the
    less educated people, exhausted as they are and worn out by
    starvation and suffering, there is a tendency, or an undefined
    feeling of resentment and anger against the comrades engaged in
    food supplies. They are all people who cannot think, cannot see
    further than the end of their noses, and it seems to them that
    food could be procured somehow. They have heard that there is food
    in some place or other, that somebody went there and got
    some—but they are incapable of calculating on a large scale
    whether there is enough for ten million people, and how much is
    required for such a number. It seems to them that someone is
    holding things up, that our food workers are putting obstacles in
    their way. They do not understand that the food workers are acting
    like wise and thrifty managers, saying that if you observe the
    utmost stringency and the utmost organisation, you shall at best,
    at the very best, be able to maintain a standard that will keep
    you from starvation, even if it does fall short of
    sufficiency. This is the position the country is in for we have
    been cut off from the chief food-supplying centres—Siberia
    and the Donets region; we have been cut off from fuel and raw
    material, food for the population and for industry, without which
    the country is forced to suffer the most desperate agonies.
The food workers are acting like sensible managers. They say we
    must stick together, which is the only way we can keep going; we
    must take systematic action against all attempts by individuals
    acting for themselves only, willing to pay any price to fill their
    own belly, and who do not give a hang for anything else. We must
    not think and act individually, each for himself, for that spells
    ruin. We must combat such tendencies and habits, which have been
    fostered in all of us, in the millions of working people, by
    capitalist private enterprise, by the system of working for the
    market: “I shall sell and make my bit; the more I make the
    less I shall starve, and the more others will.” That is the
    accursed legacy of private property, which left the people to
    starve even when there was enough food in the country, when a
    measly minority grew rich both on wealth and on poverty, while the
    people lived in want and perished in the war. That, comrades, is
    the position with regard to our food policy. That is the economic
    law which says that when there is a food shortage, frantic
    profiteering is engendered by every step towards what is called
    free trade. That is why all talk about free trade, all attempts to
    encourage it are utterly pernicious and are a retreat, a step back
    from that socialist constructive work which the Food Commissariat
    is doing amidst incredible difficulties in a fight against
    millions of profiteers, whom we have inherited from capitalism
    with its old petty-bourgeois, private-property maxim: “Every
    man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost.” If we
    cannot root out this evil, we shall never build socialism.
Only unity, only the closest alliance, achieved in everyday
    life, in everyday work, where it is hardest of all to achievein
    dividing up a crust of bread when bread is short—will allow
    us really to build socialism. We know that this cannot be
    accomplished in a single year, that people who have suffered so
    long from hunger are tremendously impatient and demand that at
    least from time to time we retreat from this only correct food
    policy. And we do have to retreat from it now and then; but we
    shall not desert or depart from our policy as a whole.
That, comrades, was the situation six months ago, when the food
      crisis reached its climax, when we had no stocks at all, when the
      Czech victories had robbed us of the greater part of the Volga
      region. We had to consent to the pood and a 

      half.[3] 

      This measure cost us a big fight, a sharp fight both sides were
      in a very bad state. The food workers said: “Yes, things
      are grim, but we must not make them worse. By giving relief to a
      few for a week, we will be making things worse for the
      millions.” Others said: “You are demanding ideal
      organisation from people who are exhausted and starving; you are
      demanding the impossible; you must allow some relief, even if it
      spoils the general policy for a while. This measure will bring
      new courage, and that is the main thing.” That was the
      plight we were in when we proposed the pood and a half idea. We
      kept to the general, fundamental, radical line, but when the
      position became unbearable, we had to retreat from it to afford
      at least some temporary relief and preserve the people’s
      courage and morale.
The same thing is happening now, when we are on the border
    line, when six comparatively easy months are behind us and six
    hard months are about to begin. To make this clear, let me tell
    you that during the first half of 1918 the Food Commissariat
    procured 28,000,000 poods, and during the second half
    67,000,000 poods, that is, two and a half times as
    much. So you can clearly see that the first halfyear is one of
    particularly dire and acute want, whereas the second, owing to the
    harvest, offers an opportunity of improvement. Now, in 1919, the
    success of our food organisations, thanks chiefly to the Poor
    Peasants’ Committees in the countryside and the
    workers’ food inspectors in the towns, is immense and has
    enabled us to procure two and a half times as much grain. But the
    success of the first year of our work, when a new edifice had to
    be built and new methods tested, was not and could not have been
    enough to ensure us supplies for the whole year, although it
    afforded us a six-month respite. That respite is coming to an end,
    and another six months are beginning, the most difficult and
    hardest of all. We must bring all our resources into play to help
    the workers, to secure them a short respite, to improve their
    position in every way we can. And it is only natural that the
    Presidium of the Moscow Soviet and its Chairman, Kamenev, should
    have been so insistent that we lay down our policy as clearly as
    possible and make a clearcut division between monopoly and
    non-monopoly foodstuffs, which would enable us to attain certain
    results, if only for a time, so that the workers in the towns and
    the non-agricultural areas might get at least some slight relief
    and gain new courage and energy. These are particularly necessary
    just now, when we are on the eve of these difficult six months,
    but when there are signs that the forces in the imperialist camp
    and their attacks on us are slacking off.
Comrade Kamenev, it is true, has mentioned not only signs but
    facts to show that, in spite of the severe trials and reverses we
    suffered at Perm, the Red Army is being built on a firm
    foundation, that it can and will win. The coming six months,
    however, will be very difficult, and from the very outset we must
    therefore do whatever is necessary and possible to alleviate the
    situation and lay down a clearcut food policy. That is our most
    urgent task. There was a conflict over the pood and a half idea
    among us, the Communists, and it sometimes assumed acute
    forms. But it has not weakened us. Rather, it has led us to
    examine our policy in an even more critical and cautious
    way. There may be mutual recriminations, but we are arriving at a
    decision which is being adopted rapidly and unanimously, and
    which, at this difficult juncture, when we are beginning another
    and trying six months, demands that we once more clarify for
    ourselves the reason why a situation has arisen which compels us
    once more to muster all our strength and strain every nerve.
We have had an exception ally hard year, and we are now on the
    verge of an even harder six months. But every six months since the
    German revolution and since the beginning of ferment in Britain
    and France brings us nearer to the victory not only of the Russian
    revolution, but of the world revolution as well. That is the
    situation as it now stands. We have decided to present a draft of
    the fundamental principles of food policy, which we shall request
    the AllRussia Central Executive Committee to affirm, so that it
    may be immediately embodied by the food workers in appropriate
    decrees that will enable us, those in the centre, the workers of
    the towns and the non-agricultural areas, to multiply our efforts
    once more. For in our efforts alone lies the pledge that we shall
    win, that, though we make certain temporary concessions,
    necessitated by fatigue and famine, we shall uphold the
    fundamental principles of our communist food policy and preserve
    them intact until the time comes when the victory of communism
    will be complete and world-wide. I shall now read, clause by
    clause, the motion which the Communist group on the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee submits for its consideration:

      This joint session of the All-Russia Central Executive
      Committee, the All-Russia Trade Union Congress, the Moscow
      Soviet, and representatives of factory committees and trade
      unions of the city of Moscow hereby lays down the following
      fundamental principles of food policy and instructs the
      People’s Commissariat of Food to draw up forthwith decrees
      embodying these principles.
1. The Soviet food policy is confirmed as correct
    and unassailable, this policy consisting in:
(a) registration and state distribution on the
    class principle;
(b) monopoly of the principal foodstuffs;
(c) transfer of supply from private hands to
    state hands.
2. Unless the state monopoly of the chief items
    of food (bread, sugar, tea and salt) already decreed is strictly
    enforced, and unless mass procurements of other of the more
    important foodstuffs (meat, seafish, hemp, sunflower-seed and
    linseed oil, animal fats, except butter, and potatoes) are made by
    the state at fixed prices, it will be impossible to ensure a
    regular supply of food to the population under present
    conditions. Furthermore, such mass procurements at fixed prices
    are only a preliminary measure, in preparation for a state
    monopoly of those foodstuffs, too, which will be the next task of
    the Food Commissariat to introduce.
The procurement and transportation of all
    foodstuffs enumerated in this clause, with the exception of
    potatoes, are forbidden to all but the state food bodies. The
    right to mass procurement of potatoes at the established fixed
    prices shall, in addition to state bodies, be granted also to
    workers’ organisations, trade unions and co-operative
    societies.
3. As a temporary measure, workers’
    organisations and co-operative societies shall be granted the
    right to procure all foodstuffs other than those enumerated in
    Clause 2.
4. The local food bodies are hereby compelled to
    assist the food procuring organisations in the exercise of this
    right.
From the standpoint of old habits and the old idea of
    government, the use of the word “compelled” may
    surprise you. You may perhaps say: “Can things be so bad in
    the Soviet Republic that people have to be compelled to obey the
    will of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee?” Yes, we
    have to compel, and it is better to say so frankly than to hide
    our heads under our wing and pretend everything is going
    swimmingly. Just let our comrades, the representatives of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee and the delegates at the
    All-Russia Trade Union Congress, give good thought to what they
    say among themselves. Let them give a thought to whether they are
    properly carrying out everything decreed long ago concerning the
    proper registration of foodstuffs and the full delivery to the
    state of those foodstuffs which cannot be left for commodity
    exchange purposes. When there is no commodity exchange the
    peasants say: “No, you’ll get nothing from us for your
    Kerensky money.” If you give a thought to what you say
      in private among yourselves and bear in mind how many of the
    orders of the central authorities remain unfulfilled, you must
    admit it is better to tell the truth and say that our local bodies
    have to be compelled, firmly and ruthlessly. (Applause.) At this
    meeting, in which the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, as
    our supreme body, has come together with the All-Russia Trade
    Union Congress bodies, which have the most numerous
    representation—and that just now is the main
    thing—these most influential comrades must firmly say, and
    make it known in their localities, that the local bodies must get
    accustomed to the idea that we have to compel them to carry out
    the policy of the central authorities consistently. That is very
    difficult, and it is natural that many millions of people, who are
    accustomed to looking on the central authorities as robbers,
    landowners, exploiters, can have no trust in the centre. But this
    distrust must be overcome. Socialism cannot be built if it is not,
    for that means building a centralised economic system, an economic
    system directed from the centre, and that can only be done by the
    proletariat, which has been trained in this spirit by the factory
    and by its whole mode of life. Only the proletariat can do
    this. The fight against parochial tendencies, against the habits
    of the small property-owner, is a difficult one. We know this
    cannot be done all at once, but we shall never tire of urging the
    workers to reiterate this truth and put it into practice, for
    socialism cannot be built otherwise.
Clause 4 explains further:
The transportation and marketing of these
    foodstuffs shall be absolutely unrestricted. No pickets, cordons,
    guards, etc., shall have the right to prevent the unrestricted
    transportation and sale of the said foodstuffs in bazaars or
    markets, from carts, etc.
This point is particularly important. Comrade Kamenev has
    mentioned many things here which, naturally, in the haste of our
    work, we have not carried out; our Food and other Commissariats
    have to issue one order on top of another, with the result that
    our local bodies find it very difficult to get them all
    straight. We are accused of issuing decrees too hastily; but what
    are we to do when we have to make haste because of the advance of
    imperialism, when we are compelled to make haste by the strongest
    scourge imaginable—the lack of bread and fuel. This being
    so, we must use every means to explain our tasks, to elucidate
    particular mistakes, and that is why the clear and precise
    demarcation now achieved by this struggle is so important. To
    achieve this on a far larger scale ’we must now make sure
    that the local bodies do not act as if they are a law to
    themselves, that they do not dare to plead they remembered
    yesterday’s decree but forgot today’s. We must make
    sure they know quite clearly and definitely which foodstuffs are a
    state monopoly, and which are open to unrestricted transportation
    and sale—that is everything except what is specifically
    enumerated in clauses I and 2. Let this be made generally
    known. Let those who are now about to return home convey it to the
    localities. Let them do what their official position requires of
    them. Let them take along with them copies of the decrees that
    will be drawn up on the subject, so that these may be implicitly
    obeyed and carried out in the localities, so that the orders of
    the centre may really be carried out, and the former indecision
    stopped. 

    

      Further, the end of Clause 4 reads:

      Note. With respect to eggs and butter, this decision shall apply
      only to districts where mass procurements of eggs and butter are
      not made by the Food Commissariat.
Comrades, I am now going to read the remaining clauses of the
    decree in brief. As I am unable to go into detail, and as there is
    no need to do so since several other comrades, some of them better
    qualified than myself, will speak after me, I shall only stress
    what I consider most important. I shall read only the basic
    principles which we recommend the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee to adopt and instruct the Council of People’s
    Commissars and all other authorities of the Soviet Republic to
    embody in decrees and carry out unreservedly and
    implicitly. (Applause.)

      5. With a view to increasing procurements, and to the more
         efficient performance of individual tasks, the principle of
         surplus appropriation and procurement shall be extended to
         non-monopoly foodstuffs, and a bonus system introduced for
         co-operative and other organisations engaged in procuring
         both monopoly and non-monopoly produce for the state.

      Measures of organisation for introducing fresh forces into the
      food bodies and for the wider participation of workers:
(a) Workers’ food inspectors shall be widely utilised and
    their functions extended to include control over the way the
    December 10 decrees are observed by the food bodies, and over the
    procurement of non-monopoly foodstuffs;
(b) Worlcers’ inspection shall be introduced at the
    earliest possible date in all food bodies in the localities and
    extended to the Food Commissariat departments, with the object of
    vigorously combating bureaucracy and red tape;
(c) Connections with the workers’
    organisations—trade unions and workers’ co-operative
    societies—shall be strengthened by reinforcing the local
    bodies with active members of the aforesaid organisations;
(d) A system of workers’ trainees shall be introduced in
    all central and local bodies and institutions in order to train
    workers as practical specialists in food affairs capable of
    filling responsible posts.
6. The co-operative apparatus shall be employed to the full in
    the work of procurement and distribution. Responsible
    representatives of the state supply bodies shall be appointed to
    the co-operative societies to control the activities of the
    co-operative organisations and co-ordinate them with the
    government’s food policy.
That, incidentally, is one of the ways of fighting the top
    people in the co-operatives. But it would be a great mistake and
    positively fatal to scorn the entire co-operative apparatus, to
    reject it out of hand or in a contemptuous way, saying: “We
    shall build ourselves a new one; this is no business of ours, this
    is something for Communists only.” We must make use of the
    machinery ready at hand—we cannot build socialism unless we
    utilise what capitalism has left us. We must utilise everything in
    the way of cultural values capitalism created against our
    interests. Therein lies the difficulty of socialism, that it has
    to be built of materials made by our adversaries; but therein lies
    the only possibility for socialism. We all know this
    theoretically, and now that we have got over this year, we have
    seen in practice that socialism can only be built from what
    capitalism has created against our interests, and that we must
    employ all this to build and consolidate socialism. 

    

      Clause 7 reads:
7. Supervision to ensure the proper observance of the
    regulations governing the transportation of foodstuffs and the
    strict enforcement of the monopolies shall devolve on the workers,
    aided by armed detachments formed by the Food Commissariat.
All food pickets other than the teams of the Food Commissariat
      and the Guberriia Food Committees shall be withdrawn
      immediately.
      The teams of the Food Commissariat and the Gubernia Food
      Committees shall be withdrawn as and when the respective bodies of
      workers’ Inspectors are formed in the localities.

      My time is up, comrades, and I shall only point out that here,
      in these last clauses, we find the main principles
      underlying our food policy and Soviet policy in general. I have
      already said that hard times have come, that a more drastic six
      months has begun, that the respite in food difficulties is over
      and a most difficult period has commenced. Every time the Soviet
      government encounters difficulties in the extremely difficult
      job of building socialism, it knows only one way to overcome
      them, and that is to turn to the workers, to wider and wider
      sections of the workers every time. I have already said
      socialism can be built only when ten and a hundred times more
      people themselves begin to build the state and the new economic
      life. Our food workers have, as their reports show, already got
      to a stage where no less than one-third of the members of the
      district food committees are workers, chiefly workers from
      Petrograd, Moscow and Ivanovo—Voznesensk—the flower
      of our proletarian army. That is good, but it is not
      enough. What we need is two-thirds, and we must go on working
      for it. As you know, the advanced sections of the workers have
      already set about governing the state, building a new life. We
      know we must reach down deeper and more boldly enlist new
      sections. They still lack training, they will inevitably make
      mistakes, but we are not afraid of that. We know that in this
      way we shall get young trained workers and recompense errors a
      hundred-fold by securing scores of younger and fresher
      forces. There is no other source we can draw on. We must move
      ahead all the time, take our young workers from wherever we can
      and put them in more and more responsible posts.
The present food crisis is due to the fact that a more
      difficult six months has begun. It is also due to the state of
      transport. As I have already said, in the second half of 1918 we
      procured 67,500,000 poods. But we were unable to get
      out 20,000,000 of this amount. The latest severe crisis in
      Petrograd is due to the fact that our stocks are held up on the
      Volga-Bugulma Railway, and we cannot move them out. The railways
      are in a desperate state. The rolling stock is in a dreadful
      state, because no country has suffered so badly as Russia owing
      to her prevailing backwardness, and because the rail workers are
      not so well organised. I would ask you, on leaving this meeting,
      to make the people aware of our need for numerous workers for
      food organisation and the railways, who would help us with their
      experience. Give them a job, keep an eye on the novices, and
      they will do a lot more than the old organisations. Everybody on
      food and transport work! Let every organisation, no matter which
      branch it belongs to, review all its forces and ask itself
      whether it has taken enough men, whether it has done all it
      should in the way of sending commissars, as we send them for the
      army. The workers are suffering from lack of food. We must put
      our best people on the job, appoint them all to responsible
      military, food or transport posts. Everybody can be of use here,
      even if he is not an expert. On the railways it is sometimes the
      aid of a Party comrade that is required, the influence of an
      ideologically staunch proletarian who has had his schooling and
      will influence the less proletarian sections of railway
      employees by control and supervision. Comrades, I once more
      repeat the slogan: “Everybody on food and transport
      work!” We must do what we did in the army, where we sent
      our political commissars and achieved the tasks we set
      ourselves. I am sure we shall this time, too, in these difficult
      six months, conquer famine and devastation!
    

Endnotes
[1]
      The session was called because of the critica1 food situation. It
      was held at the Bolshoi Theatre. In his speech, Lenin explained
      the draft of his theses of food policy which he submitted to the
      session on behalf of the Bolshevik group in the All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee. The draft was unanimously approved. The
      resolution recognised that it was correct to introduce a state
      monopoly of staple foodstuffs like grain, tea, salt and sugar. The
      products whose monopolisation was recognised as untimely (meat,
      seafish, etc.) were to be procured only by the Food
      Commissariat’s organs at fixed prices. The basic
      propositions of the resolution were incorporated in the decree On
      the Procurement of Foostuffs, which was endorsed by the Council of
      People’s Commissars on January 21, 1919, and published in
      Izvestia on January 24. These government measures formed
      part of a whole system of measures known as the policy of war
      communism. 

    
[2]
      The year 1861 saw the abolition of serfdom in Russia.
[3]
      Lenin refers to the decision of the Moscow Soviet of August 24,
      1918, and the decision of the Petrograd Soviet of September 5,
      1918 which permitted workers of Moscow and Petrograd free carriage
      of foodstuffs in quantities up to 1 1/2 poods of personal
      consumption. This measure was necessitated by the difficult food
      situation and adopted as an exception from the decision of the
      Council of People’s Commissars on grain monopoly. The
      Council of People’s Commissars made these decisions
      effective until October 1, 1918.
    

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech at the Moscow City
Conference Of the Russian Communist Party
(Bolsheviks)











Speech At The Moscow City Conference Of The Russian Communist Party(Bolsheviks), January 18, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech At The Moscow City Conference Of
 The Russian Communist Party
(Bolsheviks)
January 18, 1919[1]
Brief Newspaper Report

Delivered: 18 January, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 19, January 28, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 405-406
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

 As far as I can see from the resolutions, from the two drafts submitted after the discussion on the relations be-tween centre and districts-the first for improving Soviet affairs, and the second for completely reconstructing the Soviet apparatus-the second, contained in the motion of a group of comrades, gives the impression that something is lacking, inasmuch as no definite grounds exist for the change in the Soviet apparatus proposed in this resolution.
Our enemy today is bureaucracy and profiteering. We cannot see the improvements for the devastation. But the devastation can be overcome only by centralisation, by foregoing purely local interests. It looks like it is these interests that have given rise to the opposition to central-ism, which, nevertheless, is the only way out of our present predicament. The group of comrades who submitted this resolution are abandoning centralism for the quagmire of localism.
The districts appear to be dissatisfied because certain decisions of the central Soviet authorities are being taken without consulting them. If that is so, the districts have every right to convene conferences to discuss all questions in which they are interested. We are being ground down by red tape, which is very difficult to cope with. It has to be vigorously fought, and more workingmen have to be appointed to government offices. But when the attack on red tape is directed to the wrong quarter, things become very dangerous, as, for example, in’re1ation to specialists. The reason we are in a bad way is not because we have got
  a lot of specialists, but because we have not got strict centralisation. There are fields of Soviet work which suffer from a shortage of specialists. We must appoint more workers of average qualifications to the government offices, who would learn their jobs from the specialists and be able to replace them eventually and do the practical work inde-pendently. Thus, it is evident that the theses submitted by Comrade Ignatov do not say what these comrades really want. The attack is being levied at the wrong quarter.

Endnotes
[1] The Conference was called to discuss relations between central
 and local Soviet bodies and between the Party and the Communist groups in the Soviets. I. V. Tsivtsivadze addressed the Conference on behalf of the Moscow Committee and submitted a draft reso-
 lution recognising the need for an improvement in the work of the Soviets and rejecting the demands for the dissolution of the Council of People’s Commissars and a fundamental revision of the Soviet Constitution, which were contained in the draft submitted by the tendency within the Party led by Y. N. Ignatov. In his speech Lenin sharply criticised Ignatov’s draft. The Conference adopted by a majority the resolution moved by the Moscow Committee. The Conference resolutely condemned attempts to belittle the Party’s authority over the Communist groups in the Soviets.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at the Second All-Russia
Congress Of Internationalist Teachers











Speech at the Second All-Russia Congress Of Internationalist Teachers January 18, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech at the Second All-Russia Congress
 Of Internationalist Teachers[1] 
January 18, 1919

Sent: 14 January, 1919
First Published: Short report published in Izvestia No. 13, January 19, 1919; First published in full in 1926; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 407-410
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

(Stormy applause passing into ovation.) Comrades, greetings to your Congress on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars. The teachers are now faced with tasks of the highest importance. I hope that after the year we have just been through, after a year of struggle, after what has taken place in international affairs, the struggle—that has been going on among the teachers—between those who took their stand from the very first with the Soviet government to work for the socialist revolution, and those who have so far stood by the old system, by the old prejudices that teaching can continue to be based on the old system—must come to an end, and is in fact coming to an end. There can be no doubt that the vast majority of teachers, who stand close to the working class and the working peasants, are now convinced that the socialist revolution is deeply rooted and is inevitably spreading all over the world. And I think that now the vast majority of teachers will quite sincerely come over to the side of the government of working and exploited people in the struggle for the socialist revolution and against those teachers who still stand by the old bourgeois prejudices, the old system and hypocrisies, and imagine that some part of that system can be salvaged.
One of these bourgeois hypocrisies is the belief that the school can stand aloof from politics. You know very well how false this belief is. The bourgeoisie themselves, who advocated this principle, made their own bourgeois politics the cornerstone of the school system, and tried to reduce schooling to the training of docile and efficient servants of the bourgeoisie, to reduce even universal education from top to bottom to the training of docile and efficient servants of the bourgeoisie, of slaves and tools of capital. They never gave a thought to making the school a means of developing the human personality. And now it is clear to all that this can be done only by socialist schools, which have inseparable bonds with all the working and exploited people and wholeheartedly support Soviet policy.
Of course, the reconstruction of education is no easy matter. And, naturally, mistakes have been and still are being made, as are attempts to misinterpret the principle of the ties between education and politics and to give it a crude and distorted meaning. Awkward attempts are being made to put politics into the minds of the younger generation when they have not been prepared enough for it. Undoubtedly, we shall always have to combat such crude applications of this basic principle. But today the chief task of those members of the teaching profession who have sided with the International and the Soviet government is to work for the creation of a wider and, as nearly as possible, an all-embracing teachers’ union.
There is no place in your union, the union of internationalists, for the old teachers’ union, which clung to bourgeois prejudices and revealed a lack of understanding. It has been fighting longest of all to uphold these privileges, longer even than other top unions, which were formed at the very beginning of the 1917 revolution and which we combated in all spheres of life. In my opinion, your internationalist union may very well become a single schoolteachers’ trade union, siding, like all the other trade unions—as has been very clearly shown by the Second All-Russia Trade Union Congress—with Soviet government policy. The task facing the teachers is immense. They have to combat the survivals of the slackness and disunity left by the last revolution.
Next, as regards propaganda and agitation. It is only natural that disunity should still prevail in every sphere of propaganda and education when we consider the lack of confidence in the teachers caused by the sabotage and prejudices of the bourgeois section of the teaching body, who are accustomed to thinking that only the rich are entitled to real education, while the majority of the working people need only be trained to be good servants and good workers, but not real masters of life. This condemns a section of the teachers to a narrow sphere, the sphere of pseudo-education, and has prevented us from properly creating a single apparatus in which all scholastic forces would merge and collaborate with us. We shall only succeed when we discard the old bourgeois prejudices. This is where it is your union’s task to draw the broad mass of teachers into your family, to educate the most backward sections of the teaching profession, to bring them under general proletarian policy, and weld them together into one common organisation.
In trade union organisation, the teachers have a big job on their hands with our country in its present predicament, when all the issues of the Civil War are becoming quite clear, and when the petty-bourgeois democratic people are being compelled by the logic of events to come over to the Soviet government. For they have seen for themselves that any other course will, whether they like it or not, drive them towards defending the whiteguards and international imperialism. Now that the whole world is faced with one cardinal task, the issue is: either extreme reaction, military dictatorship and shootings—of which we have had striking illustrations from Berlin—either this vicious reaction from the capitalist brutes who feel they will not go unpunished for these four years of war, and are therefore prepared to go to any lengths, to go on drenching the earth in the blood of the working people, or the complete victory of the working people in a socialist revolution. Today there can be no middle course. Hence, those teachers who sided with the International from the very first, and who now clearly perceive that their opponents among the teachers of the other camp cannot put up any serious resistance, must launch into far wider activities. Your union should now become a broad teachers’ trade union embracing vast numbers of teachers, a union which will resolutely stand by Soviet policy and the struggle for socialism through the dictatorship of the proletariat.
This is the formula adopted by the Second Trade Union Congress now in session. The Congress demands that everyone engaged in a given trade, in a given sphere of activity, should join a single union. At the same time it declares that the trade union movement cannot hold aloof from the fundamental tasks of the struggle for the emancipation of labour from capital. And, consequently, only those unions which recognise the revolutionary class struggle for socialism by the dictatorship of the proletariat can be full and equal members of the trade unions. Your union is a union of this kind. If you stand by that position, you will be sure of success in winning over the greater bulk of the teachers and in working to make knowledge and science no longer something for the privileged, no longer a medium for reinforcing the position of the rich and exploiters, but a weapon for the emancipation of the working and exploited people. Allow me to wish you every success in this endeavour.

Endnotes
[1] The Congress was held in Moscow from January 12 to January 19, 1919. The union of internationalist teachers was formed shortly after the organisation of the People’s Commissariat of Education and assisted the latter in its work. The union played a considerablerole in the struggle against the former All-Russia Teachers’ Union whose Socialist-Revolutionary and Cadet leadership took a counter-revolutionary, anti-Soviet stand, and which was dissolvedin December 1918. Members of the internatiodalist teachers’ union popularised socialist ideas and actively fought against politically backward teachers who maintained that the school should be divorced from politics and separated from the state. Speaking at the Congress, Lenin advocated setting up “a widerand, as nearly as possible, an all-embracing teachers’ union” The Congress resolutioln recognised the need for an “All-Russia Union of Workers in Education and Socialist Culture”  The Congress heard several reports on a single labour school and worked out measures for the improvement of cultural and educationalwork in the Red Army.

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Protest Rally
Following the Murder Of Karl Liebknecht And Rosa
Luxemburg











Speech at a Protest Rally Following the Murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg, January 19, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Protest Rally Following the 
Murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg
January 19, 1919[1]
Brief Newspaper Report


Sent: 19 January, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 14, January 21, 1919; Published according to
the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 411
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002


      Today the bourgeoisie and the social-traitors are jubilating in
      Berlin-they have succeeded in murdering Karl Liebknecht and Rosa
      Luxemburg. Ebert and Scheidemann, who for four years led the
      workers to the slaughter for the sake of depredation, have now
      assumed the role of butchers of the proletarian leaders. The
      example of the German revolution proves that "democracy" is only
      a camouflage for bourgeois robbery and the most savage
      violence. 

    

      Death to the butchers!

Endnotes
[1]
      On January 15, 1919, Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg were
      murdered by officers of Noske’s counter-revolutionary troops
      with the connivance of the government of the Right
      Social-Democrats Ebert and Scheidemann. News of the murder
      reached Moscow on January 17 and on the same day it was
      announced by Y. M. Sverdlov by to a joint session of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet and
      All-llussia Congress of Trade Unions. On January 18 Izvestia and
      Pravda published an appeal “To All Soviets in Germany and
      All Workers” signed by Sverdlov on behalf of the joint
      session. The Party’s Central Committee and the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee called on all Party organisations
      and all Soviets to hold demonstrations and protest meetings. On
      January 19 Moscow workers and Red Army units assembled in
      mourning on Sovetskaya Square. Lenin, Sverdlov, Lunacharsky and
      others addressed the demonstrators from the balcony of the
      Moscow Soviet building. 
    

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive








==========

## Report At the Second All-Russia
Trade Union Congress,











Report at the Second All-Russia Trade Union Congress January 20, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Report at the Second All-Russia Trade Union Congress
January 20, 1919[1]

Delivered: 20 January, 1918
First Published: Newspaper reports published January 21, 1919 in 
Economicheskaya Zhizn No. 14 and in Pravda Nos. 15, 16, 17 for January 22, 24, 
25; Published in 1921 in the book Second All-Russia Trade Union Congress. Verbatim 
Report; Published according to the book checked with the verbatim report and the 
newspaper texts
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 412-428
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002

(Stormy, prolonged applause.) Comrades, owing to a slight indisposition, I must first ask you to excuse me for having to confine myself today to only a few remarks on the question now put before you—the tasks of the trade unions. 
The resolution now before you has been submitted to the Trade Union Congress by the Communist group, which has given it thorough deliberation. As the resolution has already been printed, I presume that all present are acquainted with it, and I shall therefore dwell only on two main points, which in my opinion are the most significant of those dealt with, generally speaking, in this resolution. 
I think that the first of these points, a negative one, so to speak, is the statement regarding the slogan of unity or independence of the trade union movement. Clause 3 of the resolution refers to this slogan, saying that in practice it has led the groups behind this slogan to an open struggle against the Soviet government, and that this attempt has placed them outside the bounds of the working class. 
This notorious independence slogan deserves attention, I think, from more than the trade union standpoint. In my opinion, only if we realise that the independence slogan is self-deception for some people and plain deception for others, can the struggle over the issue of dictatorship of the proletariat or dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, which is now going on all over the world and which is obviously coming to a head with fantastic speed, be properly understood and properly reckoned with, and enable the working class, its class-conscious representatives, to take a proper part in this struggle. First of all, I should like to point out, if only briefly, how false this slogan is theoretically, and how open it is to criticism from the theoretical point of view. 
What has lately happened in Germany, the brutal and treacherous murder of Liebknecht and Luxemburg, is not merely the most dramatic and tragic event in the revolution beginning in Germany. It is something more. It sheds an extraordinarily vivid light on the way the problems of the present-day struggle are presented by the various trends of political thought and in the various theoretical systems of today. It was from Germany that we heard most talk, for example, on the celebrated subject of democracy, on the slogan of democracy in general, and on the slogan that the working class must be independent of government. These slogans may at first glance seem to be unconnected, but they are actually very closely connected. They are closely connected because they show how strong petty-bourgeois prejudices are to this day, despite the proletariat’s immense experience of the class struggle; how to this day often lip service is paid to the class struggle which is not recognised by the minds or hearts of those who talk about it. Indeed, if we recall even the rudiments of political economy as we learnt it from Marx’s Capital, that theory of the class struggle by which we all firmly stand, how can there be any talk of democracy in general or independence when the struggle has grown as acute and far-flung as it is today, when it is clear that the socialist revolution is facing the whole world, and when this has been palpably demonstrated in the most democratic countries? Whoever thinks there can shows that, as far as the theory of political economy is concerned, he has not understood a single page of Marx’s Capital, by which all socialists without exception now swear. 
But, as a matter of fact, although they swear by this work, now that they are on the verge of that cardinal struggle to which Marx’s Capital led, they retreat from this class struggle and imagine there can be an extra-class or above class democracy. They imagine that in modern society while the capitalists still retain their property, there can be a democracy other than bourgeois democracy, that is, other than a bourgeois dictatorship masked by false and hypocritical democratic labels. It was from this very Germany that we recently heard voices saying that over there the dictatorship of the proletariat, possibly, in fact most probably, would not transcend the bounds of democracy, that there democracy would remain. It was there that people who claim to be teachers of Marxism, people who from 1889 to 1914 were the ideologists of the entire Second International, people like Kautsky, unfurled the banner of democracy and failed to understand that as long as property remains in the hands of the capitalists democracy is nothing but a thoroughly hypocritical cover for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. They failed to understand that there cannot be any serious question of the emancipation of labour from capital as long as this hypocritical cover is not torn away. Not as long as we do not put the question as Marx always taught us to put it, and as we have been taught to put it by the proletariat’s day-to-day struggle, by every strike and by every acute turn in the trade union struggle—namely, that while property remains in the hands of the capitalists, all democracy will be nothing but a hypocritical cover for the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie. All talk about universal suffrage, about the popular will and about equality at the polls will be a sheer fraud, for there can be no equality between the exploiter and the exploited, between the owner of capital and property and the modern wage-slave. 
Of course, compared with tsarism, absolutism, monarchy and all feudal survivals, bourgeois democracy historically denotes immense progress. Of course, we shall have to utilise it. And until the time comes for the struggle of the working class for full power it is incumbent on us to make use of the forms of bourgeois democracy. But the fact is that we have now arrived at this decisive moment of the struggle internationally. For the issue now is whether the capitalists can maintain their power over the means of production and, above all, their ownership of the implements of production. And this means they are preparing for new wars. The imperialist war has quite clearly demonstrated how capitalist property is connected with that slaughter of the nations, how it led up to it irresistibly and inexorably. But that being so, all talk of democracy expressing the popular will is obviously sheer deception, nothing but the privilege of the capitalists and the rich to dupe the more backward sections of the working people both through their press, which remains in the hands of the property-owners, and by all other means of political influence. 
There is and can be only one alternative: either the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, disguised by constituent assemblies, all kinds of voting systems, democracy and similar bourgeois frauds that are used to blind fools, and that only people who have become utter renegades from Marxism and socialism all along the line can make play of today—or the dictatorship of the proletariat for suppressing with an iron hand the bourgeoisie, who are inciting the most backward elements against the finest leaders of the world proletariat. This dictatorship means the victory of the proletariat for the purpose of suppressing the bourgeoisie, who are now putting up a most desperate resistance, which gets all the more furious the more clearly the bourgeoisie perceive that it is the people that have raised this issue. Previously, in the vast majority of cases, they regarded dissatisfaction and indignation among the workers as only a temporary expression of discontent. That, in fact, is the way the matter is quite often regarded to this day by the British capitalists, for example, who are perhaps the most experienced in deceiving the workers politically, and politically the best trained and the best organised. They realise that the war has, of course, led to discontent, and that this discontent inevitably gives rise and will continue to give rise to unrest among the workers. But, they argue, the workers have not yet said who is to head the state, who is to hold state power, and whether the capitalists are to be allowed to retain their property. But events have shown that this is undoubtedly a pressing issue not only in Russia, but in a number of West-European countries as well, and, what is more, not only in countries which took part in the war, but in neutral countries, too, which have suffered relatively little, such as Switzerland and Holland. 
The bourgeoisie have above all been brought up, and have trained the people, in the spirit of bourgeois parliamentarism. Yet it has become perfectly clear that a Soviet movement, a movement for Soviet government, has been ripening among the people. The Soviet movement has ceased to be a Russian form of the power of the proletariat; it has become the policy of the international proletariat in its struggle for power. It has become the second step in the world-wide development of the socialist revolution. The first step was the Paris Commune, which showed that the working class cannot arrive at socialism except by way of dictatorship, by the forcible suppression of the exploiters. That is the first thing the Paris Commune showed, namely, that the working class cannot get to socialism via the old, bourgeois-democratic parliamentary state, but only via a new type of state, which will smash both parliamentarism and the bureaucracy from top to bottom. 
The second step from the point of view of the world-wide development of the socialist revolution was the Soviet government. It was at first considered a purely Russian phenomenon—as it might well have been, and was in fact bound to have been when judged only by the facts. But today events have shown that it is also the international form of the struggle of the proletariat. The wars which have reshuffled the proletarian and semi-proletarian masses have furnished them with a new form of organisation which is patently in direct opposition to rapacious imperialism, to the capitalist class and its fabulous profits, profits without precedent before the war. The wars have everywhere created these new mass fighting organisations, organisations of the proletariat for the overthrow of the power of the bourgeoisie. 
Not everybody realised that this in fact was what the Soviets signified when they came into being. Not everybody realises it even today. But to us the picture could not be clearer for we saw the germs of these Soviets in 1905 and, after the February Revolution of 1917, we witnessed a long period of hesitation and vacillation between the Soviet organisation of the people and the compromising, treacherous, petty-bourgeois ideology. It lies before us as though in the palm of our hand, and it is with this picture in mind—and knowing the way the struggle of the proletariat against capitalist property for state power has developed and is growing wider and deeper every day—that we approach the matter. And knowing this, what is the sense of all the references to democracy and all talk about “independence” and suchlike, which are constantly tending towards some classless position? We know that in capitalist society it is the bourgeoisie that rule, that capitalist society in fact arises from the bourgeoisie’s political and economic power. Either the power of the proletariat or dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, there is no middle course on issues of any seriousness for any length of time. And anyone who talks about independence, about democracy in general, consciously or unconsciously presupposes something intermediate, something standing between classes or above classes. In every case that is self-deception or deception of others. It serves to conceal the fact that as long as capitalist power remains, as long as the capitalists retain the ownership of the means of production, democracy may be broad or narrow, more or less civilised, and so on and so forth, but it actually remains dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, and all the more obviously and palpably does civil war spurt from every big contradiction. 
The nearer the French political forms are to democracy, the more easily something like the Dreyfus case causes civil war. The broader democracy is in America, with its proletariat, its internationalists, and even pure pacifists, the more easily cases of lynching and outbreaks of civil war arise. The meaning of this is even clearer now, when the first-week of bourgeois freedom, of democracy, in Germany has led to a most frenzied outbreak of civil war, far more acute and far more desperate than in our country. 
And whoever judges these outbreaks from the point of view of whether proceedings were brought by parties, whoever judges them simply from the point of view of the murder of Liebknecht and Luxemburg, reveals blindness and intellectual cowardice, refusing to understand that these are outbreaks of an irresistible civil war, a war that springs irresistibly from all the contradictions of capitalism. There is not and cannot be any middle course. All talk of independence or democracy in general, no matter what sauce it may be served up with, is a sheer fraud and a down-right betrayal of socialism. And if the theoretical propaganda of the Bolsheviks, who are now the virtual founders of the International, if the theoretical teaching of the Bolsheviks on civil war did not reach very far and was all too often halted by obstacles of censorship and the military barrages of the imperialist states, today it is no longer the teaching, no longer the theory, but the facts of civil war that are becoming all the more violent the older the democracy of the West-European states and the longer it has lasted. These facts will pierce even the hardest and most obtuse skulls. The people who talk about democracy in general, about independence, may now be called fossils. 
Nevertheless, bearing in mind the difficult conditions of the struggle in which the trade union movement of Russia has so recently arisen and grown up—and it has now almost reached full growth—we must, in passing, glance back and recall recent events. Such recollections and reminders are, I think, all the more necessary since the trade union movement, as such, is having to undergo a particularly abrupt change now that world-wide socialist revolution has begun. 
It was in the trade union movement especially that the ideologists of the bourgeoisie tried to fish in troubled waters. They endeavoured to make the economic struggle, which is the basis of the trade union movement, independent of the political struggle. But now, precisely now, especially after the political revolution, which has transferred power to the proletariat, the time has come for the trade unions, as the broadest organisation of the proletariat on a class scale, to play a very great role, to take the centre of the political stage, to become, in a sense, the chief political organ. For all the old concepts and categories of politics have been upset and reversed by the political revolution which has turned power over to the proletariat. The old state, even the best and most democratic bourgeois republics, was never, I repeat, and never could be, anything but the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, that is, of those who own the factories, the implements of production, the land, the railways—in a word, all the material means, all the instruments of labour, without the possession of which labour remains in slavery. 
That is why, when political power passed into the proletariat’s hands the trade unions had increasingly to take on the tasks of builders of working-class politics, the task of people whose class organisation was to replace the old exploiting class after upsetting all the old traditions and prejudices of the old science which, in the words of one scholar, told the proletariat: “You look after your economic affairs and the party of the bourgeoisie will look after politics.” All these ideas have proved to be a direct weapon in the hands of the exploiting class and its thugs for keeping down the proletariat, which is beginning to revolt and struggle everywhere. 

      And here the trade unions must take up an entirely new question
      in their state organisation work—the question of
      “governmentalising” the trade unions, as it is
      termed in the Communist group’s resolution. In this
      connection the trade unions must give very serious thought to
      the profound and famous words of the founders of modern
      communism to the effect that “the broader and deeper the
      revolution  going on in society, the larger should be the number
      of people who make the revolution, who are its makers in the
      true sense of the 

      word[2] Take the old society of the feudal
      nobility. There revolutions were absurdly easy, as long as it
      was only a matter of taking power from one handful of nobles or
      feudal lords and turning it over to another. Take bourgeois
      society, which boasts of its universal suffrage. In actual fact,
      as we know, this universal suffrage, this whole machine, becomes
      a fraud, for even in the most advanced, cultured and democratic
      countries the overwhelming majority of the working people are
      downtrodden and crushed—crushed by the hell of capitalism,
      so that actually they do not and cannot take any part in
      politics. 
Now for the first time in history a revolution has begun which can lead to the complete victory of socialism—provided only that new and large masses of people set about the work of governing independently. The socialist revolution does not imply a change in the form of state, not the replacement of a monarchy by a republic, nor new elections in which people are assumed to be absolutely “equal” but which are actually nothing but an artificial obfuscation, a screen for the fact that some own property and others do not. From the point of view of bourgeois society, once there is “democracy", and once capitalist and proletarian alike take part in the voting, this is the “popular will", this is “equality” and an expression of the people’s will. We know what an abominable fraud this talk is, which only serves as a cover for butchers and murderers like Ebert and Scheidemann. In bourgeois society, the mass of the working people are governed by the bourgeoisie with the help of more or less democratic forms. They are governed by a minority, the property-owners, those who have a share in capitalist property and who have turned education and science, that supreme bulwark and flower of capitalist civilisation, into an instrument of exploitation, into a monopoly, in order to keep the overwhelming majority of the people in slavery. The revolution we have begun and have been making for two years, and which we are firmly determined to carry through to the end (applause ), is possible and feasible only provided we manage to transfer power to the new class, provided the bourgeoisie, the capitalist slaveowners, the bourgeois intellectuals, the representatives of all the owners and property-holders are replaced by the new class in all spheres of government, in all state affairs, in the entire business of running the new life, from top to bottom. (Applause.) 
That is the task before us now. The socialist revolution can only be lasting when this new class learns, not from books, not from meetings or lectures, but from the practical work of government. Only when it enlists the vast mass of working people for this work, when it elaborates forms which will enable all working people to adapt themselves easily to the work of governing the state and establishing law and order. Only on this condition is the socialist revolution bound to be lasting. Given this condition, it will constitute a force which will brush away capitalism and all its survivals as easily as straw or dust. 
From the class standpoint, generally speaking, that is the task before us as a condition for the victory of the socialist revolution. It is a task closely and directly associated with the tasks of those organisations which even under capitalist society worked for the broadest possible mass struggle to destroy that society. And of the organisations that then existed, the trade unions were the broadest. And now, while formally remaining independent organisations, they can and should, as one of the passages in the resolution before you states, take an active part in the work of the Soviet government by directly working in all government bodies, by organising mass control over their activities, etc., and by setting up new bodies for the registration, control and regulation of all production and distribution, relying on the organised initiative of the broad mass of the interested working people themselves. 
The trade unions have never embraced more than one-fifth of the wage-workers in capitalist society, even under the most favourable circumstances, even in the most advanced countries, after decades and sometimes even centuries of development of bourgeois-democratic civilisation and culture. Only a small upper section were members, and of them only a very few were lured over and bribed by the capitalists to take their place in capitalist society as workers’ leaders. The American socialists called these people “labour lieutenants of the capitalist class” In that country of the freest bourgeois culture, in that most democratic of bourgeois republics, they saw most clearly the role played by this tiny upper section of the proletariat who had virtually entered the service of the bourgeoisie as its deputies, who were bribed and bought by it, and who came to form those groups of social-patriots and defence advocates of which Ebert and Scheidemann will always remain the perfect heroes. 
In our country things are now different. The trade unions are in a position to start the economic development of the state on new lines, making use of everything created by capitalist culture and capitalist production. They can build socialism on that material basis, on that large-scale industry, whose burden used to weigh on us, which was created against our interests, was made for the endless oppression of the working people, but which united and welded them, and thus created the vanguard of the new society. And since the October Revolution, since the transfer of power to the proletariat, this vanguard has begun to perform its real task—to educate the working and exploited people, to enlist them in the work of governing the state and administering industry without officials, without the bourgeoisie and without capitalists. That is why the resolution we submit to you rejects all bourgeois plans and all that treacherous talk. That is why it declares the governmentalisation of the trade unions to be unavoidable. It also takes a step forward. We are no longer raising the question of the governmentalisation of the trade unions merely in its theoretical aspect. We have, thank God, passed the stage when such questions were raised purely as subjects for theoretical discussion. We may even forget at times the days when we used to engage in such free discussions on purely theoretical themes. Those times have long since passed, and today we are raising these questions on the basis of a year’s experience of the trade unions, which, in their role as organisers of production, have created such organisations as the Supreme Economic Council. In this incredibly difficult business, the trade unions have committed innumerable blunders, and constantly still are committing them, but they are not deterred by the malicious sneers of the bourgeoisie; who say the proletarians decided to do things themselves and are making a mess of it. 
The bourgeoisie imagine they made no blunders when they took over from the tsar and the nobles. They imagine the 1861 Reform, which attempted to repair the edifice of serfdom, and left power and abundant sources of revenue in the hands of the serf-owners, went off quite smoothly and that it was not followed by chaos in Russia for several decades. There is no country in the world in which the nobility did not scoff at the upstart bourgeoisie and commoners when they set out to govern the state. 
It goes without saying that the entire flower, or, rather, sterile blossom, of the bourgeois intellectuals is now also scoffing at every mistake the new government is making, especially since the new class, the alliance of all working people, has had to make its revolution at a furious rate because of the frantic resistance of the exploiters and the campaign of the world alliance of exploiters against Russia—one of the weakest and least prepared of countries. We had to act under conditions in which we had to think not so much of making the course of revolution smooth, as of holding on as best we could until the West-European proletariat came to life. We have accomplished this task. In this respect, we can already say we have done far better than the men who made the French Revolution, which was defeated by an alliance of monarchical and backward countries. The French Revolution, in the form of the power of the lower ranks of the bourgeoisie of that time, held on for a year only, and did not at once evoke a similar movement in other countries. Nevertheless, it did so much for the bourgeoisie, for the bourgeois democracy, that the entire development of civilised humanity throughout the nineteenth century sprang from the great French Revolution, and was indebted to it for everything. 
We have done much better. What was done in a year for the development of the bourgeois democracy at that time, we have done on a far larger scale for the new proletarian regime in about the same time. And we have done it so successfully that already now the movement in Russia, whose beginning was due to a special set of circumstances rather than any merit of ours, to special conditions that put Russia between two imperialist giants of the modern civilised world—that the effect of this movement and the victory of the Soviet system during the past year has been to make the movement international. The Communist International has been founded, the slogans and ideals of the old bourgeois democracy have been shattered, and today there is no intelligent politician anywhere in the world, whatever his party may be, who can fail to see that the world socialist revolution has begun, really is taking place. (Applause.) 
I have digressed somewhat in speaking about how we have left the theoretical aspect of the question far behind and are now about to tackle its practical solution. We have had a year’s experience, and we have already accomplished incomparably more for the victory of the proletariat and its revolution than was accomplished by a year’s dictatorship of bourgeois democrats for the victory of bourgeois democracy all over the world at the end of the century before last. But, besides this, we have, during this year, acquired a vast amount of practical experience. This enables us, if not to calculate every one of our steps with absolute precision, at least to indicate the rate of development, its speed, to see its practical difficulties and take the practical steps which will lead from one partial victory in overthrowing the bourgeoisie to another.
Looking back, we can see the mistakes we have to correct. We can clearly see what we have to build and how we have to build in the future. That is why our resolution is not confined to proclaiming the governmentalisation of the trade unions, to proclaiming the dictatorship of the proletariat in principle and the need for us to proceed, as one passage in the resolution states, “inevitably to the fusion of the trade union organisations with state bodies” That we already know from theory, we outlined it before October, and we should have outlined it even sooner. But it is not enough. The whole crux of the question has changed for a party which is now about to tackle the practical job of building socialism, for trade unions which have already set up bodies to run industry on a countrywide, state scale, which have already formed a Supreme Economic Council, and which have at a cost of thousands of mistakes acquired thousands of useful bits of experience in organisation. 
Today we can no longer confine ourselves to proclaiming the dictatorship of the proletariat. The trade unions have to be governmentalised; they have to be fused with state bodies. The work of building up large-scale industry has to be entrusted entirely to them. But all that is not enough. 
We must also learn from our practical experience to determine the next immediate step. That is the essence of our task just now. And that is what the resolution has in mind when it says that if the trade unions were arbitrarily to attempt to take over government functions now, they would only make a mess of it. We have suffered enough from this sort of thing. We have fought hard enough against the survivals of the accursed bourgeois system, against the anarchistic and selfish tendencies of the small holder, which are so deeply ingrained even among the workers. 
The workers were never separated by a Great Wall of China from the old society. And they have preserved a good deal of the traditional mentality of capitalist society. The workers are building a new society without themselves having become new people, or cleansed of the filth of the old world; they are still standing up to their knees in that filth. We can only dream of clearing the filth away. It would be utterly utopian to think this could be done all at once. It would be so utopian that in practice it would only postpone socialism to kingdom come. 
No, that is not the way we intend to build socialism. We are building while still standing on the soil of capitalist society, combating all those weaknesses and shortcomings which also affect the working people and which tend to drag the proletariat down. There are many old separatist habits and customs of the small holder in this struggle, and we still feel the effects of the old maxim: “Every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost.” There used to be quite enough of that in every trade union, in every factory, which often thought only of itself, and left everything else to the tender care of the Lord and our betters. We have been through all that, and know the cost. It has been the cause of so many mistakes, so many dreadful mistakes, that now, on the strength of that experience, we give our comrades a most emphatic warning against any arbitrary action in this field. Instead of building socialism, it would mean we had all succumbed to the weaknesses of capitalism. 
We have now learnt to appreciate the difficulties of the task in front of us. We stand at the very heart of the work of building socialism, and in the interests of this cardinal work we are against all arbitrary actions. The class-conscious workers must be warned against arbitrary actions of this kind. They must be told that we cannot merge the trade unions with the state bodies at once, at one stroke. It would be a mistake. That is not the way to tackle the job. 
We know that the proletariat has promoted several thousands, perhaps several tens of thousands of workers to state administration. We know that the new class—the proletariat—now has its representatives in every branch of state administration, in every section of the enterprises already socialised or about to be socialised, and in every branch of the economy. The proletariat knows this. It has set about the job practically. It can now see that we must continue along the same lines, that we shall have to take quite a number of steps more before we are in a position to say that the trade union organisations of the working people have definitely merged with the entire state apparatus. That will be so when the workers completely take over the organs of suppression of one class over the other. And we are quite certain that will be so. 
I now want to focus your attention on the next practical job. We must go on extending the participation of the working people in economic administration and in building a new economy. We shall never bring the work of communist construction to its completion unless we cope with this task; unless we convert the trade unions into organs for training ten times as many people as at present for direct participation in state administration. That we realise quite clearly. It is dealt with in our resolution, and it is a matter I want to direct your attention to particularly. 
In this greatest revolution in history, when the proletariat has taken state power into its own hands, All the functions of the trade unions are undergoing a profound change. The trade unions are becoming the chief builders of the new society, for only the millions can build this society. In the era of serfdom these builders numbered hundreds; in the capitalist era the builders of the state numbered thousands and tens of thousands. The socialist revolution can be made only with the active and direct practical participation of tens of millions in state administration. That is our goal but we are not there yet. 
The trade unions should know that there is a higher and more important task than those tasks which are partly still in force and partly have already lapsed, and which, at any rate, even if they are still in force, call only be minor ones in our eyes: registration, establishing work standards, amalgamation of organisations. This task is to teach the people the art of administration, not from books, not from lectures or meetings, but from practical experience, so that instead of just the vanguard of the proletariat which has been set to command and organise, more and more fresh blood may enter the departments, and this new section may be reinforced by ten others like it. This may seem an immense and difficult task. But it will not seem so overpowering if we stop to think how rapidly the experience of the revolution has enabled us to cope with the immense tasks that have cropped up since the October Revolution and how the working people who had had no access to and no use for knowledge are now thirsting for it. 
We shall find that we can cope with this task and teach vast numbers of working people how to run the state and industry. We shall discover we can develop practical activity, and shatter that pernicious prejudice which for decades and centuries has been implanted among the working people, namely, that state administration is the preserve of the privileged few, that it is a special art. That is not true. We shall inevitably make mistakes; but now every mistake will serve to teach, not handfuls of students taking some course of theory in state administration, but millions of working people who will personally suffer the consequences of every mistake. They will themselves see that they are faced with the urgent task of registering and distributing products, of increasing labour productivity, and will see from experience that power is in their own hands and that nobody will help them if they do not help themselves. That is the new mentality which is awakening in the working class. That is the new task of tremendous historical importance which faces the proletariat and which must, more than any other, strike root in the minds of trade unionists and the leaders of the trade union movement. They are not only trade unions. Today they are trade unions only to the extent that they are constituted within the only possible framework linked with the old capitalist system, and embrace the largest number of working people. But their task is to advance these millions and tens of millions of working people from simple to higher forms of activity, untiringly drawing new forces from the reserve of working people and advancing them to the most difficult tasks. In this way they will teach more and more people the art of state administration. It is their job to identify themselves with the struggle of the proletariat, which has established the dictatorship and is retaining it in the face of the whole world, every day winning over more industrial workers and socialists everywhere who only yesterday tolerated the orders of the social-traitors and social-defence advocates, but who are today coming more and more to accept the banner of communism and the Communist International. 

Hold on to this banner, and at the same time steadily enlarge the ranks of the builders of socialism. Remember that the tasks of the trade unions are to build the new life and train millions and tens of millions, who will learn by experience not to make mistakes and will discard the old prejudices, who will learn by their own experience how to run the state and industry. That is the only sure guarantee that the cause of socialism will completely triumph, precluding any chance of a reversion to the past.

Endnotes
[1] The Congress met in Moscow’s Trade Union House from January 10 to January 25, 1919. At that time the trade unions had 4,420,000 members. The Congress was attended by 648 delegates with the right to vote, of whom 449 were Communists and their sympathisers. The other delegates were Mensheviks, Left Socialist-Revolutionaries, Bundists and the Left Menshevik group of “internationalist Social-Democrats”
The agenda included a report on the activity of the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, the question of the tasks of the trade unions and a number of matters concerning organisation.
Lenin spoke on the central item on the agenda—the tasks of trade unions—at the third plenary session which met on January 20. During the debate the Mensheviks and their supporters from other petty-bourgeois parties tried to push through a resolution declaring the “independence of the trade unions from the Soviet state. By a majority of 430 the Congress adopted a resolution moved by the Communist group. It pointed out that an attempt to set the proletariat against the Soviet state on the plea of the “unity” and “independence” of the trade union movement has led “the groups supporting this slogan to an open struggle against the Soviet government and has divorced them from the working class” The resolution also rejected the anarcho-syndicalist demands that the trade unions be charged with state functions. 
The Congress worked out measures for eliminating duplication in the work of the People’s Commissariat of Labour and the trade unions. The trade unions were asked to devote particular attention to raising labour productivity and reinforcing labour discipline. The tariff rates of payment were based on the piece rate and bonus system with fixed rates of additional payment for over fulfilling work quotas. The Congress also devoted much attention to social security and labour protection and enhancing the role of trade unions in training skilled workers. It established the production principle of trade union organisation (until then, workers and other employees of one and the same enterprise were members of different trade unions). The Congress emphasised the need for the trade unions to embrace those proletarians and semi-proletarians who had not yet been organised and enlist them for socialist construction. 

[2] The quotation is taken from The Holy Family or Critique of Critical Critique by Marx and Engels (Moscow, 1956, p. 110). 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Letter to the Workers Of Europe
And America











Letter to the Workers of Europe and America



V. I. Lenin
Letter to the Workers of Europe and America[1]

Written: 21 December, 1918
First Published: Pravda;No. 16, January 24, 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 453-477
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002


Comrades, at the end of my letter to American workers dated August 20, 1918, I wrote that we are in a besieged fortress so long as the other armies of the world socialist revolution do not come to our aid. I added that the workers are breaking away from their social-traitors, the Gomperses and Renners. The workers are slowly but surely coming round to communist and Bolshevik tactics. 
 Less than five months have passed since those words were written, and it must be said that during this time, in view of the fact that workers of various countries have turned to communism and Bolshevism, the maturing of the world proletarian revolution has proceeded very rapidly. 
 Then, on August 20, 1918, only our Party, the Bolshevik Party, had resolutely broken with the old, Second International of 1889-1914 which so shamefully collapsed during the imperialist war of 1914-18. Only our Party had unreservedly taken the new path, from the socialists and social-democracy which had disgraced themselves by alliance with the predatory bourgeoisie, to communism; from petty-bourgeois reformism and opportunism, which had thoroughly permeated, and now permeate, the official Social-Democratic and socialist parties, to genuinely proletarian, revolutionary tactics. 
 Now, on January 12, 1919, we already see quite a number of communist proletarian parties, not only within the boundaries of the former tsarist empire—in Latvia, Finland and Poland, for example—but also in Western Europe—Austria, Hungary, Holland and, lastly, Germany. The foundation of a genuinely proletarian, genuinely internationalist, genuinely revolutionary Third International, the Communist International, became a fact when the German Spartacus League, with such world-known and world-famous leaders, with such staunch working-class champions as Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Clara Zetkin and Franz Mehring, made a clean break with socialists like Scheidemann and Südekum, social-chauvinists (socialists in words, but chauvinists in deeds) who have earned eternal shame by their alliance with the predatory, imperialist German bourgeoisie and Wilhelm II. It became a fact when the Spartacus League changed its name to the Communist Party of Germany. Though it has not yet been officially inaugurated, the Third International actually exists. 
 No class-conscious worker, no sincere socialist can now fail to see how dastardly was the betrayal of socialism by those who, like the Mensheviks and “Socialist-Revolutionaries” in Russia, the Scheidemanns and Südekuns in Germany, the Renaudels and Vanderveldes in France, the Hendersons and Webbs in Britain, and Gompers and Co. in America, supported “their” bourgeoisie in the 1914-18 war. That war fully exposed itself as an imperialist, reactionary, predatory war both on the part of Germany and on the part of the capitalists of Britain, France, Italy and America. The latter are now beginning to quarrel over the spoils, over the division of Turkey, Russia, the African and Polynesian colonies, the Balkans, and so on. The hypocritical phrases uttered by Wilson and his followers about “democracy” and “union of nations” are exposed with amazing rapidity when we see the capture of the left bank of the Rhine by the French bourgeoisie, the capture of Turkey (Syria, Mesopotamia) and part of Russia (Siberia, Archangel, Baku, Krasnovodsk, Ashkhabad, and so on) by the French, British and American capitalists, and the increasing animosity over the division of the spoils between Italy and France, France and Britain, Britain and America, America and Japan. 
 Beside the craven, half-hearted “socialists” who are thoroughly imbued with the prejudices of bourgeois democracy, who yesterday defended “their” imperialist governments and today limit themselves to platonic “protests” against military intervention in Russia - beside these there is a growing number of people in the Allied countries who have taken the communist path, the path of Maclean, Debs, Loriot, Lazzari and Serrati. These are men who have realised that if imperialism is to be crushed and the victory of socialism and lasting peace ensured, the bourgeoisie must be overthrown, bourgeois parliaments abolished, and Soviet power and the dictatorship of the proletariat established. 
 Then, on August 20, 1918, the proletarian revolution was confined to Russia, and “Soviet government”, i.e., the system under which all state power is vested in Soviets of Workers’, Soldiers’ and Peasants’ Deputies, still seemed to be (and actually was) only a Russian institution. 
 Now, on January 12, 1919, we see a mighty “Soviet” movement not only in parts of the former tsarist empire, for example, in Latvia, Poland and the Ukraine, but also in West-European countries, in neutral countries (Switzerland, Holland and Norway) and in countries which have suffered from the war (Austria and Germany). The revolution in Germany—which is particularly important and characteristic as one of the most advanced capitalist countries—at once assumed “Soviet” forms. The whole course of the German revolution, and particularly the struggle of the Spartacists, i.e., the true and only representatives of the proletariat, against the alliance of those treacherous scoundrels, the Scheidemanns and Südekums, with the bourgeoisie—all this clearly shows how history has formulated the question in relation to Germany: 
 “Soviet power” or the bourgeois parliament, no matter under what signboard (such as “National” or “Constituent” Assembly) it may appear. 
 That is how world history has formulated the question. Now, this can and must be said without any exaggeration. 
 “Soviet power” is the second historical step, or stage, in the development of the proletarian dictatorship. The first step was the Paris Commune. The brilliant analysis of its nature and significance given by Marx in his The Civil War in France showed that the Commune had created a new type of state, a proletarian state. Every state, including the most democratic republic, is nothing but a machine for the suppression of one class by another. The proletarian state is a machine for the suppression of the bourgeoisie by the proletariat. Such suppression is necessary because of the furious, desperate resistance put up by the landowners and capitalists, by the entire bourgeoisie and all their hangers-on, by all the exploiters, who stop at nothing when their overthrow, when the expropriation of the expropriators, begins. 
 The bourgeois parliament, even the most democratic in the most democratic republic, in which the property and rule of the capitalists are preserved, is a machine for the suppression of the working millions by small groups of exploiters. The socialists, the fighters for the emancipation of the working people from exploitation, had to utilise the bourgeois parliaments as a platform, as a base, for propaganda, agitation and organisation as long as our struggle was confined to the framework of the bourgeois system. Now that world history has brought up the question of destroying the whole of that system, of overthrowing and suppressing the exploiters, of passing from capitalism to socialism, it would be a shameful betrayal of the proletariat, deserting to its class enemy, the bourgeoisie, and being a traitor and a renegade to confine oneself to bourgeois parliamentarism, to bourgeois democracy, to present it as “democracy” in general, to obscure its bourgeois character, to forget that as long as capitalist property exists universal suffrage is an instrument of the bourgeois state. 
 The three trends in world socialism, about which the Bolshevik press has been speaking incessantly since 1915, stand out with particular distinctness today, against the background of the bloody struggle and civil war in Germany. 
 Karl Liebknecht is a name known to the workers of all countries. Everywhere, and particularly in the Allied countries, it is the symbol of a leader’s devotion to the interests of the proletariat and loyalty to the socialist revolution. It is the symbol of really sincere, really self-sacrificing and ruthless struggle against capitalism. It is the symbol of uncompromising struggle against imperialism not in words, but in deeds, of self-sacrificing struggle precisely in the period when “one’s own” country is flushed with imperialist victories. With Liebknecht and the Spartacists are all those German socialists who have remained honest and really revolutionary, all the best and dedicated men among the proletariat, the exploited masses who are seething with indignation and among whom there is a growing readiness for revolution. 
 Against Liebknecht are the Scheidemanns, the Südekums and the whole gang of despicable lackeys of the Kaiser and the bourgeoisie. They are just as much traitors to socialism as the Gomperses and Victor Bergers, the Hendersons and Webbs, the Renaudels and Vanderveldes. They represent that top section of workers who have been bribed by the bourgeoisie, those whom we Bolsheviks called (applying the name to the Russian Südekums, the Mensheviks) “agents of the bourgeoisie in the working-class movement”, and to whom the best socialists in America gave the magnificently expressive and very fitting title: “labour lieutenants of the capitalist class”. They represent the latest, “modern”, type of socialist treachery, for in all the civilised, advanced countries the bourgeoisie rob—either by colonial oppression or by financially extracting “gain” from formally independent weak countries—they rob a population many times larger than that of “their own” country. This is the economic factor that enables the imperialist bourgeoisie to obtain superprofits, part of which is used to bribe the top section of the proletariat and convert it into a reformist, opportunist petty bourgeoisie that fears revolution. 
 Between the Spartacists and the Scheidemann men are the wavering, spineless “Kautskyites”, who in words are “independent”, but in deeds are entirely, and all along the line, dependent upon the bourgeoisie and the Scheidemann men one day, upon the Spartacists the next, some following the former and some the latter. These are people without ideas, without backbone, without policy, without honour, without conscience, the living embodiment of the bewilderment of philistines who stand for socialist revolution in words, but are actually incapable of understanding it when it has begun and, in renegade fashion, defend “democracy” in general, that is, actually defend bourgeois democracy. 
 In every capitalist country, every thinking worker will, in the situation varying with national and historical conditions, perceive these three main trends among the socialists and among the syndicalists, for the imperialist war and the incipient world proletarian revolution engender identical ideological and political trends all over the world.
*     *
*
 The foregoing lines were written before the brutal and dastardly
      murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg by the Ebert and
      Scheidemann government. Those butchers, in their servility to the
      bourgeoisie, allowed the German whiteguards, the watchdogs of sacred
      capitalist property, to lynch Rosa Luxemburg, to murder Karl
      Liebknecht by shooting him in the back on the patently false plea that
      he “attempted to escape” (Russian tsarism often used that
      excuse to murder prisoners during its bloody suppression of the 1905
      Revolution). At the same time those butchers protected the whiteguards
      with the authority of the government, which claims to be quite
      innocent and to stand above classes! No words can describe the foul
      and abominable character of the butchery perpetrated by alleged
      socialists. Evidently, history has chosen a path on which the role of
      “labour lieutenants of the capitalist class” must be
      played to the “last degree” of brutality, baseness and
      meanness. Let those simpletons, the Kautskyites, talk in their
      newspaper Freiheit[2] about a “court” of
      representatives of “all” “socialist” parties
      (those servile souls insist that the Scheidemann executioners are
      socialists)! Those heroes of philistine stupidity and petty-bourgeois
      cowardice even fail to understand that the courts are organs of state
      power, and that the issue in the struggle and civil war now being
      waged in Germany is precisely one of who is to hold this
      power—the bourgeoisie, “served” by the Scheidemanns
      as executioners and instigators of pogroms, and by the Kautskys as
      glorifiers of “pure democracy”, or the proletariat, which
      will overthrow the capitalist exploiters and crush their
      resistance. 
 The blood of the best representatives of the world proletarian
      International, of the unforgettable leaders of the world
      socialist revolution, will steel ever new masses of workers for
      the life-and-death struggle. And this struggle will lead to
      victory. We in Russia, in the summer of 1917, lived through the
      “July days”,[3] when the Russian
      Scheidemanns, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, also
      provided “state” protection for the
      “victory” of the whiteguards over the Bolsheviks,
      and when Cossacks shot the worker Voinov in the streets of
      Petrograd for distributing Bolshevik leaflets.[4] We
      know from experience how quickly such “victories” of
      the bourgeoisie and their henchmen cure the people of their
      illusions about bourgeois democracy, “universal
      suffrage”, and so forth. 
*     *
*
 The bourgeoisie and the governments of the Allied countries seem to be wavering. One section sees that demoralisation is already setting in among the Allied troops in Russia, who are helping the whiteguards and serving the blackest monarchist and landlord reaction. It realises that continuation of the military intervention and attempts to defeat Russia—which would mean maintaining a million strong army of occupation for a long time—is the surest and quickest way of carrying the proletarian revolution to the Allied countries. The example of the German occupation forces in the Ukraine is convincing enough of that.
 Another section of the Allied bourgeoisie persists in its policy of military intervention, “economic encirclement” (Clemenceau) and strangulation of the Soviet Republic. The entire press in the service of that bourgeoisie, i.e., the majority of the capitalist-bought daily newspapers in Britain and France, predicts the early collapse of the Soviet government, draws lurid pictures of the horrors of the famine in Russia, lies about “disorders” and the “instability” of the Soviet Government. The whiteguard armies of the landowners and capitalists, whom the Allies are helping with officers, ammunition, money and auxiliary detachments, are cutting off the starving central and northern parts of Russia from the most fertile regions, Siberia and the Don. 
 The distress of the starving workers in Petrograd and Moscow, in Ivanovo-Voznesensk and other industrial centres is indeed great. If the workers did not understand that they are defending the cause of socialism in Russia and throughout the world they would never be able to bear the hardships, the torments of hunger to which they are doomed by the Allied military intervention (often covered up by hypocritical promises not to send their “own” troops, while continuing to send “black” troops, and also ammunition, money and officers). 
 The “Allied” and whiteguard troops hold Archangel, Perm, Orenburg, Rostov-on-Don, Baku and Ashkhabad, but the “Soviet movement” has won Riga and Kharkov. Latvia and the Ukraine are becoming Soviet republics. The workers see that their great sacrifices are not in vain, that the victory of Soviet power is approaching, spreading, growing and gaining strength the world over. Every month of hard fighting and heavy sacrifice strengthens the cause of Soviet power throughout the world and weakens its enemies, the exploiters. 
 The exploiters are still strong enough to murder the finest
      leaders of the world proletarian 
      revolution,[5] to in
      crease the sacrifices and suffering of the workers in occupied or
      conquered countries and regions. But the exploiters all over the
      world are not strong enough to prevent the victory of the world
      proletarian revolution, which will free mankind from the yoke of
      capital and the eternal menace of new imperialist wars, which are
      inevitable under capitalism. 
    
N. Lenin
January 21, 1919

Endnotes
[1]
      Lenin’s letter to the workers of Europe and America helped
      the advanced workers to rally round the Communist Parties and
      unite their forces in the struggle against international
      imperialism.
[2]The letter was published in Berlin in the March
      issue of the magazine Die Aktion and in the April issue
      of the magazine Der Arbeiter-Rat (The Workers’
Council ) for 1919. It also appeared as a separate pamphlet
      in English.
[3]
Die Freiheit—a daily newspaper, organ of the
      Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany, published in
      Berlin from November 15, 1918, to September 30, 1922.
[4]
      This refers to mass demonstrations in Petrograd on July 3-4
      (16-17) 1917. The obviously hopeless offensive launched by the
      Provisional Government and which ended in expected failure aroused
      indignation among the workers, soldiers and sailors who turned out
      for a demonstration. The movement was initiated by the 1st Machine
      Gun Regiment which took action on July 3 (16) in the Vyborg
      District. The demonstration threatened to develop into armed
      action against the government.
The Bolshevik Party was opposed to armed
      action, considering that a revolutionary crisis had not yet
      matured in the country. At a meeting of the Central Committee
      called on July 3 (16) at 4 p.m. it was decided to attempt to
      stop the demonstration. A similar decision was adopted at the
      Second Petrograd City Conference of the Bolsheviks, which met at
      the same time. The delegates went to the factories and the
      districts to dissuade the people from demonstrating. But it was
      too late, the demonstration had already begun.
Late at night on July 3 (16) the Central und
      Petrograd Committees and the Military Organisation, taking into
      account the popular mood, decided to take part in the
      demonstration with a view to keeping it peaceful and
      organised. Lenin had been out of town at the time, resting for a
      few days from the strain of his work. As soon as he learned
      about the developments in Petrograd, he left for the city where
      he arrived on the morning of July 4 (17) and took over the
      leadership of the movement. That same day he addressed the
      Kronstadt sailors from the balcony of the Kshesinskaya
      Palace. He called on them to be staunch, steadfast and
      vigilant.
Over 500,000 people took part in the
      demonstration under the slogan “All Power to the
      Soviets!” and other Bolshevik slogans. The demonstrators
      demanded that the Central Executive Committee take over power. The
      Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik leaders did not comply with
      the demand.
With the knowledge and connivance of the
      Socialist-Revolutionary-Menshevik Central Executive Committee, the
      Provisional Government ordered officer cadet and Cossack units to
      deal with the demonstrators. The troops opened
      fire. Counter-revolutionary units had been brought from the front
      to crush the demonstration.
The meeting of the Central and Petrograd
      Committees, which took place on the night of July 4-5 with Lenin
      in the chair, decided to call off the demonstration in an
      organised way. It was a wise move, as it enabled the Party to make
      a timely retreat and stave off the defeat of the main forces of
      the revolution. The Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries
      actually turned out to have aided and abetted the
      counter-revolutionary repression. They lined up with the
      bourgeoisie to attack the Bolshevik Party. Pravda,
      Soldatskaya Pravda and other Bolshevik papers were
      suppressed and the printing-plant Trud, acquired with
      workers’ money, was wrecked. Workers were disarmed and
      arrests, house searches and pogroms began. Revolutionary units of
      the Petrograd garrison were withdrawn from the capital and sent to
      the front.
 After the July days power in the country
      completely passed into the hands of the Provisional Government,
      and the Soviets became its impotent appendage. Dual power came
      to an end, as did the peaceful period of the revolution’s
      development. The Bolsheviks were now faced with the task of
      preparing an armed uprising to overthrow the Provisional
      Government. Lenin described the July days in his articles 
      “Three Crises”,

      “An Answer”, 

      “Marxism and
Insurrection”, 

      “The Russian Revolution
      and Civil War” 

      and others (Collected Works. Vol. 25,
      pp. 169-73 and 208-18, and Vol. 26, pp. 22-27 and 28-42).
    
[5]
      Lenin refers to the murder on July 6 (19), 1917, of the Bolshevik
      I. A. Voinov, an active correspondent of Pravda and a
      worker at the Pravda print-shop. After the
      Pravda offices had been wrecked, he took part in the
      publication of Listok Pravdy;(Pravda Newssheet )
      during the July days and was killed as he was distributing the
      newspaper on Shpalernaya Street (now Voinov Street). 


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive








==========

## Speech at the Second Conference Of
Heads Of Adult Education Divisions Of Gunernia Education
Departments











Speech At The Second Conference Of Heads Of Adult Education Divisions Of Gubernia Education Departments



V. I. Lenin
Speech At The Second Conference Of 

Heads Of Adult Education Divisions Of Gubernia Education Departments
January 24, 1919

Delivered: 20 January, 1918
First Published: Adult Education No. 2-3, February-March 
1919; Published according to the journal Adult  Education
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 437-438
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002


Comrades, you are all here as representatives of local adult education departments of gubernia Soviets. I have not got a lot to say since, unfortunately, I am not very closely acquainted with your work. Greetings to your congress of adult educationalists-you certainly have some important tasks to fulfil!
There are many schoolteachers in our schools trained in the old ways and this makes things difficult to change over from the capitalist to the socialist system. Although it may seem strange, many learned people are putting up stubborn resistance to us. Those who are used to looking on the old apparatus as their own private domain, merely look after themselves and serve the propertied class.
Adult education is better off than children's school education.
We recently discussed the question in the Council of People's Commissars of setting up a commission for amalgamating several scattered educational organisations. Adult education isimportant for transforming the whole of our life. New ways have to be sought.
It must be admitted that some new and inexperienced representatives of the Soviet government frequently use the old methods and give the government a bad name.
I think you adult educationalists have a hard job on your hands. In our Party work we have set our own ways of far-reaching influence on the masses, but they must be linked up with educational methods, and particularly with school and, above all, adult education. This is not always done.
In your adult education work you get assistance from the working people in the sense that they thirst for knowledge and this makes it easier for you to get across to them. This is the last place you can gallop ahead, especially with masses at a very low level of education. You must try to work more closely with Party organisations, as propaganda organs, and get the masses into the adult education campaign. If the popular initiative meets the necessary response from you, you can expect the best results. Allow me to wish you the best of luck.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Everybody On Food And Transport
Work!











Everybody On Food And Transport Work!



V. I. Lenin
Everybody On Food And Transport Work!

Written: 26 January, 1918
First Published: Pravda No. 19, January 28, 1919; Published according 
      to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
      Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 439-442
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I. Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002
    

 I have already had occasion at the last session of
      the Central Executive Committee to point out that the next six
      months will be particularly difficult for the Soviet
      Re-public. During the first six months of 1918 we procured
      28,000,000 poods of grain, and during the second 67,000,000
      poods. The first six months of 1919 will be more difficult than
      the preceding.
The food shortage is growing more and more acute. Typhus is
    becoming an extremely serious menace. Heroic efforts are required,
    but what we are doing is far from enough.
Can we save the situation?
Certainly. The capture of Ufa and Orenburg, our victo-ries in
    the South and the success of the Soviet uprising in the Ukraine[1] open up very favourable prospects.
We are now in a position to procure far more grain
    than is required for semi-starvation food rations.
Millions of poods of grain have already been delivered in the
    East. They are being held up by the bad state of the transport
    system. In the South, the liberation of the entire Voronezh
    Gubernia and part of the Don region from Krasnov’s Cossacks
    makes it fully possible to procure considerable quantities of
    grain, over and above our previous calculations. Finally, the
    grain surplus in the Ukraine is truly enormous, and the Soviet
    Government of the Ukraine is offering to help us.
Not only can we now obviate famine, but we can even fully
      satisfy the starving population of non-agricultural Russia.

    

      The whole trouble lies in the bad state of transport and the
      tremendous shortage of food workers.
Every effort must be made and we must stir the mass of workers
    into action. We must definitely get out of the habitual, everyday
    rut of life and work. We must pull ourselves together. We must set
    about the revolutionary mobilisation of people for food
    and transport work. We must not confine ourselves to
    “current” work, but go beyond its bounds and discover
    new methods of securing additional forces.
On the most “cautious” and even pessimistic
    estimate, we now have very weighty grounds for believing that a
    victory over famine and typhus in these six months (and such a
    victory is perfectly feasible) will lead to a radical
    improvement in the whole economic situation, for the
    es-tablishment of contact with the Ukraine and Tashkent removes
    the main and basic causes of the shortage and dearth of raw
    materials.
Of course, the hungry masses are exhausted, and that exhaustion
    is at times more than human strength can endure. But there is a
    way out, and renewed energy is undoubtedly possible, all the more
    since the growth of the proletarian ossi revolution all over the
    world is becoming increasingly apparent and promises a radical
    improvement in our foreign as well as our home affairs.
We must pull ourselves together.
Every Party organisation, every trade union, every group of
    organised workers, and even workers who are not organised but are
    anxious to “tackle” the famine-every group of Soviet
    workers and citizens generally must ask themselves the following
    questions:
What can we do to extend and intensify the national crusade
    against the famine?
Can we replace male labour by female labour and thus release
    more men for the difficult duties of transport and food work?
Can we provide commissars for the engine and carriage repair
    shops?
Can we provide rank-and-file workers for the food army?
Should we not assign every tenth or fifth man from our midst,
    from our-group, from our factory, etc., to the food army, or for
    exceptionally difficult and arduous work in the railway shops?
Are not some of us engaged in Soviet or other work which might
    be relaxed or even suspended altogether without undermining the
    main foundations of the state? Is it not our duty to mobilise such
    workers immediately for food and transport work?
Let as many people as possible go into action and deal one more
    blow to that accursed maxim of the old capital-ist society, a
    maxim which we have inherited from that society and which infects
    and spoils every one of us in one degree or another, the maxim
    “every man for himself, and the devil take the hindmost". It
    is this heritage from predatory, sordid and bloody capitalism that
    is stifling us, crushing us, oppressing, ruining and frustrating
    us more than anything else. We cannot rid ourselves of this
    heritage at once. It must be fought incessantly; more than one
    cru-sade will have to be declared and conducted against it.
We can save the millions and tens of millions from fa-mine and
    typhus. Salvation is at hand. The famine and typhus crisis
    hovering over us can be vanquished, and vanquished completely. It
    would be absurd, foolish, shame-ful to give way to despair. To
    stampede pelimell, every man for himself, and each as he knows
    best, just to “get out of the fix” oneself somehow, to
    shove back the more feeble and push forward alone, would be to
    desert, to aban-don the sick and exhausted comrades and to make
    the over-all situation even worse.
We have created the firm foundation of a Red Army, which has
    now forced its way through incredible difficulties,
    through the iron wall of the armies of the landowners and
    capitalists supported by the fabulously wealthy British and French
    multimillionaires, forced its way through to the principal sources
    of raw materials, to grain, cotton and coal. We created that
    foundation by working in a new way, by political propaganda at the
    front, by organising the Communists of our army, by the
    self-sacrificing organisation and struggle of the best of the
    workers.
We have gained a number of successes botli on the exter-nal,
    military front and on the home front, in the fight against the
    exploiters, against sabotage, and for the difficult, arduous,
    thorny but correct path of socialist construction. We are
    on the verge of a complete and decisive victory both at home and
    on an international scale.
A little more effort, and we shall escape from the tenacious
    clutches of famine.
What we have done and are doing for the Red Army we must also
    do, and with redoubled energies, to step up, extend and intensify
    food and transport work. All our best workers must do
    this work. A place will be found for every-body who is
    anxious and able to work. Everybody who wishes can help to achieve
    an organised and mass victory over devastation and famine. Every
    active force, every talent, every speciality, every trade, every
    thoughtful individual can and must be found employment in this
    peace army of food and transport workers-a peace army
    which, to achieve complete victory, must now support the Red Army
    and consolidate and follow up its victories.
Everybody on food and transport work!
N. Lenin
January 26, 1919

Endnotes
[1]
      In November-December 1918 the Ukrainian workers and peasants rose
      up against the German invaders and their stooge, Hetman
      Skeropadsky. On December 14 Skoropadsky fled from Kiev. On January 3,
      1919, the Red Army occupied Kharkov, and on February 5, Kiev,
      capital of the Ukraine.
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Measures Governing the Transition
From Bourgeois-Co-Operative to Proletarian-Communist Supply And
Distribution.











Measures Governing The Transition From Bourgeois-Co-Operative To, Proletarian-Communist Supply And Distribution



V. I. Lenin
Measures Governing the Transition From Bourgeois-Co-Operative
      to, Proletarian-Communist Supply and 
      Distribution[1]


Written: 2 February, 1919
First Published: 1931;Published according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 443-444
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet Archive May, 2002

The question of the co-operatives and
    consumers’ communes (see Izvestia, February 2)
    recently discussed in the Council of People’s Commissars
    involves the most vital problem of the day, measures of
    transition from the bourgeois co-operatives to a
    communist consumers’ and pro-ducers’ union of the
    whole population.
Let us imagine co-operatives embrace 98 per cent of the
    population. This happens in the countryside.
Does this make them communes?
No, if the co-operative (1) gives advantages
    (dividends on shares, etc.) to a group of special shareholders;
    (2) pre-serves its own special apparatus which shuts out the
    popu-lation at large, in particular the proletariat and
    semi-proletariat; (3) does not give preference in produce
    distri-bution to the semi-proletariat over the middle peasants, to
    the middle peasants over the rich; (4) does not confis-cate the
    surplus produce first from the rich, then from the middle
    peasants, and does not rely on the proletariat and
    semi-proletariat. And so on and so forth.
The whole difficulty of the task (and the whole
    essence of the present task which confronts us right now)
    springs from the fact that we have to work out a system of
    practical measures governing the transition from the
    old co-ope-ratives (which are bound to be bourgeois since they
    have a group of shareholders who constitute a
    minority of the population, as well as for other reasons)
    to a new and to a real commune. These are measures for
    the transition from bourgeois-co-operative to
    proletarian-communist supply and distribution. 

    

      It is essential:
(1) to discuss this question in the press;
(2) to organise the movement of all the central
    and local government institutions (particularly of the Supreme
    Eco-nomic Council and the other Economic Councils, the Food
    Commissariat and food departments, the Central Statisti-cal Board
    and the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture) to tackle this
    task;
(3) to instruct the Co-operative Department of
    the Supreme Economic Council and the institutions enumerated in
    par. 2 to work out a programme of these measures and a
    form for collecting information on such measures and facts which
    enable us to develop these measures;
(4) to award a bonus for the best programme of
    measures, for the most practicable programme, for the most
    conve-nient and effective form and means of collecting information
    about it.
    

Endnotes
[1]
    On Lenin’s instructions this letter was forwarded to the
    People’s; Commissariat of Food, the People’s
    Commissariat of Finance and to the Supreme Economic Council. The
    question of the co-operatives and consumers’ communes was
    discussed at the Council of People’s Commissars on January
    28, 1919.

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Telegram to Ufa Gubernia
Revolutionary Committee











Telegram To Ufa Gubernia Revolutionary Committee



V. I. Lenin
Telegram to UFA Gubernia Revolutionary Committee [1]


Written: 5 or 6 February, 1919
First Published:  February 16, 1919 in Zhizn Natsionalnostei 
No. 5 (13); Published according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 445
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002

Ufa, Gubernia Revolutionary Committee Chairman
Propose not to alienate Khalikov and to grant amnesty on condition that a common front with Bashkir regiments is set up against Kolchak. The Soviet government pledges its full guarantee for Bashkir national freedom. But naturally, you must deal severely with counter-revolutionaries among Bashkir population and achieve de facto control to ensure proletarian reliability of Baslikir forces.
Lenin, Stalin

Endnotes

[1]  The telegram was
      sent in reply to the Ufa Gubernia Revolutionary Committee's
      inquiry as to how it should act with regard to the  spokesman of
      the Bashkir bourgeois nationalist government. Khalikov, who had
      come for negotiations. Khalikov wanted an amnesty for Bashkirs
      who had fought Soviet power; he also in-formed the Committee
      that Bashkir troops were now joining the Red Army. The telegram,
      beginning with the words “But naturally”, was
      written by Lenin. 
    

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Draft Wireless Message From
People’s Commissar For Foreign Affairs











Draft Wireless Message From People’s Commissar For Foreign Affairs



V. I. Lenin
Draft Wireless Message From
 People’s Commissar For Foreign Affairs[1]


Written: 19 February, 1919
First Published:  February 20, 1919 in Izvestia No. 39; 
Published according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 446
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002


In reply to your wireless message I hasten to inform you that although we do not consider the Berne Conference either socialist or in any way representative of the working class, we nevertheless permit the commission appointed by you to come to Russia and guarantee it the opportunity to fully acquaint itself with the situation, just as we permit the entry of any bourgeois commission on a fact-finding mission, directly or indirectly connected with any bourgeois government, even if it is engaged in attacking the Soviet Republic. Permitting the entry of your commission we would like to know whether your democratic government, and the governments of other democratic countries, whose citizens take part in the commission, will permit the entry of our commission from the Soviet Republic.

Endnotes
[1]  The draft was written by Lenin in reply to the wireless message of the German Foreign Ministry of February 19, 1919, which conveyed the request of the Berne Socialist Conference to permit entry for a special fact-finding commission appointed by the Conference. People’s Commissar for Foreign Affairs Chicherin made the following addendum to Lenin’s draft: “Let us know of the exact date when the commission is arriving so that we can take all steps for facilitating their journey by getting agreement of the Lithuanian and Byelorussian Soviet Republics.” The telegram signed by Chicherin was broadcast to Germany.
The Berne Conference was the first post-war conference of the :social-chauvinist and Centrist parties, called for the purpose of restoring the Second international. It met in Berne from Februa-ry 3 to February 10, 1919.
One of the main items of the agenda was the question of democ-racy and dictatorship. In his report on this question the Centrist Branting tried to prove that the socialist revolution and dictator-ship of the proletariat could not lead to socialism. Kautsky and Bernstein wanted the Conference to condemn the Bolsheviks and the socialist revolution in Russia. Branting moved a resolution which, while hypocritically greeting the revolutions in Soviet Russia, Austria-Hungary and Germany, actually denounced the dictatorship of the proletariat and extolled bourgeois democracy. In view of the sympathetic attitude of the workers towards Soviet Russia the sponsors of the resolution worded it in very ambiguous terms and did not dare to refer specifically to Soviet Russia. The Conference did not discuss the question of the Soviets of Workers’ Deputies. A group of delegates led by Adler and Longuet tabled a resolution suggesting that the Conference refrain from taking a definite stand on Soviet Russia in view of the paucity of infor-mation about the situation there. TBranting’s resolution received a large number of votes.
The Conference decided to send a commission to Russia to study the economic and political situation in the country, and to include the question of Bolshevism in the agenda of the next congress. The commission consisted of Adler, Kautsky, Hilferding and others. While agreeing to admit the commission, the Soviet Govern-ment requested the admittance of a Soviet commission to the countries whose representatives were on the Berne commission. The Soviet Government, however, received no reply to its request. As it turned out, the commission of “auditing dignitaries from Berne”, as Lenin called it, did not come to Russia.
The First Congress of the Communist International adopted a resolution entitled “On the Attitude Towards ‘Socialist’ Trends and the Berne Conference”, which criticised the Rerun decisions. In particular, it denounced the attempts of the Right-wing socialist
leaders to compel the Conference to adopt a resolution that would
provide a cover for the imperialist armed intervention in Soviet
Russia. 

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Closure Of the Menshevik Newspaper
Undermining the Country’s Defence. a All-Russia Central Executive
  Committee Draft Resolution











Closure Of The Menshevik Newspaper Undermining The Country’s Defence



V. I. Lenin
Closure Of The Menshevik Newspaper 
Undermining The Country’s Defence
All-Russia Central Executive Committee Draft
      Resolution[1]


Written: 22 February, 1919
First Published:  1945 in Lenin Miscellany XXXV
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
      Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 447-448
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002


      Taking into consideration that

    

      1) the Menshevik newspaper Vsegda Vperyod published an
         article "Stop the Civil War" on 20.2.19, which proved once
         and for all that it is counter-revolutionary;

    

      2) the slogan “Down with the Civil War”, openly
         advo-cated in the paper at a time when the landlord and
         capi-talist troops, led by Kolchak, have captured Perm as
         well as Siberia, is equivalent to support for Kolchak and an
         obstacle to the workers and peasants of Russia winning the
         war against Kolchak;

    

      3) the Mensheviks, who in their conference resolution condemned
         the overwhelming majority of Menshevik party members who have
         lined up with the propertied classes, i.e., the landowners
         and capitalists in Siberia, Archangel, on the Volga, in
         Georgia and the South, are thus now start-ing to pursue the
         same policy in fact, while hypocritically denying it in
         words;

    

      4) those of the Mensheviks who are not hypocritical friends of
         the landowners and capitalists are now again displaying the
         spineless vacillation bringing them to serving Koichak;

    

      5) the Soviet Government, right at the time of the last,
         decisive and sharpest armed clash with the landlord and
         capitalist troops, cannot put up with people who are
         un-willing to endure great sacrifices alongside the workers
         and peasants fighting for their just cause;

    

      6) such people are again and again leaning towards the Kolchak
         brand of democracy under which the bourgeoisie and their
         hangers-on do so well, the Central Executive Committee
         decrees that a) the newspaper Vsegda Vperyod shall
         be closed down until the Mensheviks show by actions their
         resolve to break once and for all with Kolchak and firmly
         stand for the defence and support of the Soviet government;
         b) all the necessary measures shall be taken to exile
         Mensheviks hampering the victory of the workers and peasants
         over Kolchak to a life under the Kolchak brand of democracy.
    

Endnotes
[1]
    Lenin compiled this draft for discussion by the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee on the question of the Menshevik newspaper
    Vsegdn Vperyed (Always Forward) (the paper was
    published in Moscow; one issue appeared in 1918, and in 1919 it
    appeared from January 22 to February 25).
The minutes of the Council of People’s
    Commissars for February 22, 1919, contain a note from Secretary of
    the All-Bussia Central Executive Committee Avaoesov addressed to
    Lenin: “Have you received the resolution on the
    Mensheviks?” It appears that Lenin had seen a preliminary
    draft of the resolution in question and compiled his own draft On
    February 25, 1919, the Presidium of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee adopted a decision to close down the
    news-paper. On the following day the plenary session of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee confirmed the decision and
    Inani-mously passed a lengthy resolution which incorporated the
    main. ideas of Lenin’s draft. On February 27 the decision
    was published in Izvestia No. 45 over the signatures of
    Sverdlov and Avanesov.


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the People’s
Commissariat Of Education











To the People’s Commissariat of Education



V. I. Lenin
To The People’s Commissariat Of 
      Education[1]


Written: February, 1919
First Published:  1933 in Lenin Miscellany XX IV; Published according to the manuscript 

Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
      Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 451-452
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Online Version: V. I.Lenin Internet 
Archive May, 2002





Please pass on to your library departments (both
      adult education and public library, etc.) my supplementary ideas
      on the question recently raised in the Council of People’s
      Commissars and let me know your conclusions (and those of the
      respective departments).
*     *
*
More than anything else the libraries, including of course
      reading hues, all kinds of reading rooms, etc., require
      competition between individual provincial libraries,
      groups, reading rooms, etc.
The proper way to send in accounts, which is now
      demand-ed by the Council of People’s Commissars, should
      serve three aims:
I) authentic and complete information to the Soviet
      government and all citizens about what is going on;
2) enlisting the public in library work;
3) encouraging competition among library workers.
To these ends lists and forms of accounting should be
      immediately drawn up that will suit the purposes.
Account lists should, I think, be drawn up at the centre and
      then reprinted in the gubernias and distributed among all
      educational departments and all libraries, reading rooms,
      clubs, etc.
These account lists should enumerate (printed, say, in
      heavy type) the compulsory questions which library
      man-agers, etc., must answer on pain of prosecution.
      Apart from these compulsory questions there should be a
      considerable number of non-compulsory questions
      (in the sense that failure to answer does not necessarily carry
      the threat of prosecution).
The compulsory questions should include the library’s (or
      reading room’s, etc.) address, name and address of the
      manager and his board members, quantity of books and newspapers,
      working hours, etc. (the big libraries will have to give more
      information).
The non-compulsory questions should include all
      improve-ments being applied in Switzerland and America (and
      elsewhere) so that we can reward (by giving bonuses in
      the form of valuable books, collections, and so on) those who make
      the most improvements and carry them out best of all.
For example: t) Can you supply precise information to prove
      more books have been lent from your library? or 2) how
      many people visit your reading room? or 3) book and newspaper
      exchange with other libraries and reading rooms? or 4) compilation
      of a central catalogue? or 5) work on Sundays? or 6) work in the
      evenings? or 7) encourage. ment of new readers, women, children,
      non-Russians, etc.? or 8) satisfaction of readers’
      references? or 9) simple and practical means of storing books and
      newspapers? Saving them? Mechanical means of obtaining the book
      and returning it to its place? or 10) lending a book? or 11)
      simplification of guarantees in lending a book? or 12) send-ing it
      through the post?
And so on, ad infinitum ....
Bonuses are to be awarded for the best accounts and forthcoming
      successes.
The Library Department of the People’s Commissariat of
      Education must inform the Council of People’s
      Commis-sars about the number of accounts received monthly
      and the answers to which questions are given; and the totals.

Endnotes
[1]
      On January 30, 1919, at a Meeting of the Council of
      People’s, Commissars Lenin raised the question of the
      library service. The decision compiled by Lenin and adopted by the
      Council of People’s Commissars instructed the People’s
      Commissariat of Education to publish and send to the Council of
      People’s Commissars brief monthly reports on the progress
      achieved in increasing the number of libraries and reading rooms
      and the circulation of books.
    

Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## First Congress of the
Communist International








First Congress of the Communist International



V. I. Lenin

      First Congress of the Communist International
    


Delivered: March 
2-6,  1919

First Published: (see details at the end of each section); 1920 (in 
      full)

      
Source: Lenin Collected Works, Volume
      28 (p. 455-477)

      
Transcription\Markup: Brian Baggins
      
      
Online Version:
Lenin Internet Archive (marxists.org)
      2000

    

Background
and Description of the First Congress


 

Speech at the Opening Session of the Congress
March 2

      On behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian Communist
      Party I declare the First Congress of the Communist
      International open.  First I would ask all present to rise in
      tribute to the finest representatives of the Third
      International: 
      Karl Liebknecht  and 
      Rosa Luxemburg .  ( All rise .)

    

      Comrades, our gathering has great historic significance.  It
      testifies to the collapse of all the illusions cherished by
      bourgeois democrats.  Not only in Russia, but in the most
      developed capitalist countries of Europe, in Germany for
      example, civil war is a fact.

    

      The bourgeois are terror-stricken at the growing workers’
      revolutionary movement.  This is understandable if we take into
      account that the development of events since the imperialist war
      inevitably favors the workers’ revolutionary movement, and that
      the world revolution is beginning and growing in intensity
      everywhere.

    

      The people are aware of the greatness and significance of the
      struggle now going on. All that is needed is to find the
      practical form to enable the proletariat to establish its rule.
      Such a form is the  Soviet
      system  with the dictatorship of the proletariat.
      Dictatorship of the proletariat—until now these words
      were Latin to the masses.  Thanks to the spread of the Soviets
      throughout the world this Latin has been translated into all
      modern languages; a practical form of dictatorship has been
      found by the working people.  The mass of workers now understand
      it thanks to Soviet power in Russia, thanks to the 
      Spartacus League  in Germany and to similar organizations in
      other countries, such as, for example, the 
      Shop Stewards Committees in Britain .  All this shows that a
      revolutionary form of the dictatorship of the proletariat has
      been found, that the proletariat is now able to exercise its
      rule.

    

      Comrades, I think that after the events in Russia and the
      January struggle in Germany, it is especially important to note
      that in other countries, too, the latest form of the workers’
      movement is asserting itself and getting the upper hand.  Today,
      for example, I read in an anti-socialist newspaper a report to
      the effect that the British government had received a deputation
      from the Birmingham Workers’ Counsel and had expressed its
      readiness to recognize the Councils as economic bodies.  [A] The Soviet
      system has triumphed not only in backward Russia, but also in
      the most developed country of Europe—in Germany, and in
      Britain, the oldest capitalist country.

    

      Even though the bourgeoisie are still raging, even though they
      may kill thousands more workers, victory will be ours, the
      victory of the worldwide Communist revolution is assured.  

    

      Comrades, I extend hearty greetings to you on behalf of the
      Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party.  I move that
      we elect a presidium.  Let us  have nominations. [B]



      First published in 1920, in German,
      in the book “Der I. Kongress der Kommunistischen
      Internationale. Protokoll” in Petrograd.

      First published in Russian in 1921 in the book “First Congress
      of the Communist International.  Minutes” in Petrograd.
    

 


      Thesis and Report on Bourgeois Democracy and the Dictatorship of
      the Proletariat
      March 4
    

      1.  Faced with the growth of the revolutionary workers’ movement
      in every country, the bourgeoisie and their agents in the
      workers’ organizations are making desperate attempts to find
      ideological and political arguments in defense of the rule
      of the exploiters.  Condemnation of dictatorship and a sense
      of democracy are particularly prominent among these
      arguments.  The falsity and hypocrisy of this argument,
      repeated in a thousand strains by the capitalist press and
      at the 
Berne yellow International Conference  in February 1919,
      are obvious to all who refuse to betray the fundamental
      principles of socialism.

    


      2.  Firstly, this argument employs the concepts of
      “democracy in general” and “dictatorship
      in general “, without posing the question of the class
      concerned.  This nonclass or above class presentation, which
      supposedly is popular, is an outright travesty of the basic
      tenet of socialism, namely, its theory of class struggle,
      which Socialists who have sided with the bourgeoisie
      recognize in words but disregard in practice.  For in no
      civilized capitalist country does “democracy in
      general” exist; all that exists is bourgeois
      democracy, and it is not a question of “dictatorship
      in general", but of the dictatorship of the oppressed class,
      i.e., the proletariat, over its oppressors and exploiters,
      i.e., the bourgeoisie, in order to overcome the resistance
      offered by the exploiters in their fight to maintain their
      domination.

    

      3.  History teaches us that no oppressed class ever did, or could, achieve power without going through a period of dictatorship, i.e., the conquest of political power and forceable suppression of the resistance always offered by the exploiters—the resistance that is most desperate, most furious, and that stops at nothing.  The bourgeoisie, whose domination is now defended by the Socialists who denounce “dictatorship in general” and extol “democracy in general", won power in the advanced countries through a series of insurrections, civil wars, and the forcible suppression of kings, feudal lords, slaveowners and their attempts at restoration.  In books, pamphlets, Congress resolutions, and propaganda speeches, Socialists have everywhere thousands and millions of times explained to people the class nature of these bourgeois revolutions and this bourgeois dictatorship.  That is why the present defense of bourgeois democracy under the cover of talk about “democracy in general", and the present howls and shouts against proletarian dictatorship under the cover of shouts about “dictatorship in general", are an outright betrayal of socialism.  They are, in fact, desertion to the bourgeoisie, denial of the proletariat’s right to its own, proletarian revolution, and a defense of bourgeois  reformism  at the very historical juncture when bourgeois reformism throughout the world has collapsed and
 the war has created a revolutionary situation.

    

      4.  In explaining the class nature of bourgeois civilization,
 bourgeois democracy and the bourgeois parliamentary system,
 all Socialists have expressed the idea formulated with the
 greatest scientific precision by Marx and Engels [Engels
 Introduction to the The Civil War in France],
 namely, that the most democratic bourgeois republic is no
 more than a machine for the suppression of the working class
 by the bourgeoisie, for the suppression of the working
 people by a handful of capitalists. There is not a single
 revolutionary, not a single Marxist among those now shouting
 against dictatorship and for democracy, who has not sworn
 and vowed to the workers that he excepts this basic truth of
 socialism.  But now, when the revolutionary proletariat is
 in a fighting mood and taking action to destroy this machine
 of oppression and to establish proletarian dictatorship,
 these traitors to socialism claim that the bourgeoisie have
 granted the working people “pure democracy", have abandoned
 resistance and are prepared to yield to the majority of the
 working people.  They assert that in a democratic republic
 there is not, and never has been, any such thing as a state
 machine for the suppression of labor by capital.

    

      5.  The 
Paris Commune —to which all who parade as
      Socialists pay lip service (for they know that the workers
      ardently and sincerely sympathize with though Commune)
      —showed very clearly the historically conventional
      nature and limited value of the bourgeois parliamentary
      system and bourgeois democracy; institutions which, though
      highly progressive compared with medieval times, inevitably
      require a radical alteration in the era of proletarian
      revolution.  It was Marx who best appraised the historical
      significance of the Commune.  

      In
his analysis, 

      he revealed the exploiting nature of
      bourgeois democracy in the bourgeois parliamentary system
      under which the oppressed classes enjoy the right to decide
      once in several years which representative of the propertied
      classes shall “represent and suppress” ( ver- und
zertreten ) the people in parliament. And it is now,
      when the Soviet movement is embracing the entire world and
      continuing the work of the Commune for all to see, that the
      traitors to socialism are forgetting the concrete experience
      and concrete lessons of the Paris Commune and repeating the
      old bourgeois rubbish about “democracy in general”.  The
      Commune was not a parliamentary institution.
      
    

      6.  The significance of the commune, furthermore, lies in the
 fact that it endeavored to crush, to smash to its very
 foundations, the bourgeois state apparatus, the
 bureaucratic, judicial, military and police machine, and to
 replace it by a self-governing, mass workers’ organization
 in which there was no division between legislative and
 executive power.  All contemporary bourgeois-democratic
 republic’s, including the German republic—which the
 traitors to socialism, in mockery of the truth, describe as
 a proletarian republic—retain this state apparatus.
 We therefore again get quite clear confirmation of the point
 that shouting in defense of “democracy in general” is
 actually defense of the bourgeoisie and their privileges as
 exploiters.

    

      7.  “Freedom of assembly” can be taken as a sample of the
 requisites of “pure democracy”.  Every class conscience
 worker who has not broken with his class will readily
 appreciate the absurdity of promising freedom of assembly to
 the exploiters at a time and in a situation when the
 exploiters are resisting the overthrow of their rule and are
 fighting to retain their privileges.  When the bourgeoisie
 were revolutionary, they did not, neither in England in 1649
 nor in France in 1793, grant “freedom of assembly” to the
 monarchists and nobles, who summoned foreign troops and
 “assembled” to organize attempts at restoration.  If the
 present day bourgeoisie, who have long since become
 reactionary, demand from proletariat advance guarantees of
 “freedom of assembly” for the exploiters, whatever the
 resistance offered by the capitalists to being expropriated,
 the workers will only laugh at their hypocrisy.

    

      The workers know perfectly well, too, that even in the most
      democratic bourgeois republic “freedom of assembly” is a hollow
      phrase, for the rich have the best public and private buildings
      at their disposal, and enough leisure to assemble at meetings,
      which are protected by the bourgeois machine of power.  The
      rural and urban workers and small peasants—the
      overwhelming majority of the population—are denied all
      these things.  As long as that state of affairs prevails,
      “equality", i.e., “pure democracy", is a fraud.  The first thing
      to do to win genuine equality and enable the working people to
      enjoy democracy in practice is to deprive the exploiters of all
      the public and sumptuous private buildings, to give to the
      working people leisure and to see to it that their freedom of
      assembly is protected by armed workers, not by heirs of the
      nobility or capitalist officers in command of downtrodden
      soldiers.

    

      Only when that change is affected can we speak of freedom of
      assembly and of equality without mocking at the workers, at
      working people in general, at the poor.  And this change can be
      affected only by the vanguard of the working people, the
      proletariat, which overthrows the exploiters, the bourgeoisie.

    

      8.  “Freedom of the press” is another of the principal slogans
      of “pure democracy”.  And here, too, the workers know —
      and Socialists everywhere have explained millions of times
      —that this freedom is a deception because the best
      printing presses and the biggest stocks of paper are
      appropriated by the capitalists, and while capitalist rule
      over the press remains—a rule that is manifested
      throughout the whole world all the more strikingly, sharply
      and cynically—the more democracy and the republican
      system are developed, as in America for example.  The first
      thing to do to win really equality and genuine democracy for
      the working people, for the workers and peasants, is to
      deprive capital of the possibility of hiring writers, buying
      publishing houses and bribing newspapers.  And to do that
      the capitalists and exploiters have to be overthrown and
      their resistance oppressed.  The capitalists have always use
      the term “freedom” to mean freedom for the rich to get
      richer and for the workers to starve to death.  And
      capitalist usage, freedom of the press means freedom of the
      rich to bribe the press, freedom to use their wealth to
      shape and fabricate so-called public opinion.  In this
      respect, too, the defenders of “pure democracy” prove to be
      defenders of an utterly foul and venal system that gives the
      rich control over the mass media.  They prove to be
      deceivers of the people, who, with the aid of plausible,
      fine-sounding, but thoroughly false phrases, divert them
      from the concrete historical task of liberating the press
      from capitalist enslavement.  Genuine freedom and equality
      will be embodied in the system which the Communists are
      building, and in which there will be no opportunity for
      massing wealth at the expense of others, no objective
      opportunities for putting the press under the direct or
      indirect power of money, and no impediments in the way of
      any workingman (or groups of workingman, in any numbers) for
      enjoying and practicing equal rights in the use of public
      printing presses and public stocks of paper.
      
    

      9.  The history of the nineteenth and twentieth centuries
 demonstrated, even before the war, what this celebrated
 “pure democracy” really is under capitalism.  Marxists have
 always maintained that the more developed, the “purer"
 democracy is, the more naked, acute and merciless the class
 struggle becomes, and the “purer” the capitalist oppression
 and bourgeois dictatorship.  The Dreyfus case in republican
 France, the massacre of strikers by hired bands armed by the
 capitalists in the free and democratic American republic
—these and thousands of similar facts illustrate the
 truth which the bourgeoisie are mainly seeking to conceal,
 namely, that actually terror and bourgeois dictatorship
 prevail in the most democratic of republics and are openly
 displayed every time the exploiters think the power of
 capital is being shaken.

    

      10.  The imperialist war of 1914-18 conclusively revealed even
  to backward workers the true nature of bourgeois democracy,
  even in the freest republics, as being a dictatorship of
  the bourgeoisie.  Tens of millions were killed for the sake
  of enriching the German or the British group of
  millionaires and multimillionaires, and bourgeois military
  dictatorships were established in the freest republics.
  This military dictatorship continues to exist in the Allied
  countries even after Germany’s defeat.  It was mostly the
  war that opened the eyes of the working people, that
  striped bourgeois democracy of its camouflage and showed
  the people the abyss of speculation and profiteering that
  existed during because of the war.  It was in the name of
  “freedom and equality” that the bourgeoisie wage the war,
  in the name of “freedom and equailty” that the munitions
  manufacturers piled up fabulous fortunes.  Nothing that the
  yellow Berne International does can conceal from the people
  the now thoroughly exposed exploiting character of
  bourgeois freedom, bourgeois equality and bourgeois
  democracy.

    

      11.  In Germany, the most developed capitalist country of
  Continental Europe, the very first months of full
  Republican freedom, establish as a result of imperialist
  Germany’s defeat, have shown the German workers and the
  whole world the true class substance of the
  bourgeois-democratic republic.  The murder of  Karl
  Liebknecht  and Rosa Luxemburg  is an event of epoch-making
  significance not only because of the tragic death of these
  finest people and leaders of the truly proletarian,
  Communist International, but also because the class nature
  of an advanced European state—it can be said without
  exaggeration, of an advanced state, on a worldwide scale
 —has been conclusively exposed.  If those arrested,
  i.e., those placed under state protection, could be
  assassinated by officers and capitalists with impunity, and
  this under the government headed by social patriots, in the
  democratic republic where such a thing was possible is a
  bourgeois dictatorship.  Those who voice their indignation
  at the murder of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg but
  fail to understand this fact are only demonstrating their
  stupidity, or hypocrisy.  “Freedom” in the German republic,
  one of the freest and advanced republics of the world, is
  freedom to murder arrested leaders of the proletariat with
  impunity.  Nor can it be otherwise as long as capitalism
  remains, for the development of democracy sharpens rather
  than dampens the class struggle which, by virtue of all the
  results and influences of the war and of its consequences,
  has been brought to boiling point.

    

      Throughout the civilized world we see Bolsheviks being exiled,
      persecuted and thrown into prison.  This is the case, for
      example, in Switzerland, one of the freest bourgeois republics,
      and in America, where there has been anti-Bolshevik pogroms,
      etc. .  From the standpoint of “democracy in general", or “pure
      democracy", it is really ridiculous that advanced, civilized,
      and democratic countries, which are armed to the teeth, should
      fear the presence of a few score men from backward, famine
      stricken and ruined Russia, which the bourgeois papers, in tens
      of millions of copies, described as savage, criminal, etc..
      Clearly, the social situation that could produce this crying
      contradiction is in fact a dictatorship of the bourgeoisie.

    

      12.  In these circumstances, proletarian dictatorship is not
  only an absolutely legitimate means of overthrowing
  exploiters and suppressing the resistance, but also
  absolutely necessary to the entire mass of working people,
  being their only defense against the bourgeois dictatorship
  which led to the war and is preparing new wars.

    

      The main thing that Socialists fail to understand—which
      constitutes their shortsightedness in matters of theory, their
      subservience to bourgeois prejudices, and their political
      betrayal of the proletariat—is that in capitalist
      society, whenever there is any serious aggravation of the class
      struggle intrinsic to that society, there can be no alternative
      but the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie or the dictatorship of
      the proletariat.  Dreams of some third way are reactionary,
      petty-bourgeois limitations.  That is borne out by more than a
      century of development of bourgeois democracy in the
      working-class movement in all the advanced countries, and
      notably by the experience of the past five years.  This is also
      borne out by the whole science of political economy, by the
      entire content of Marxism, which reveals the economic
      inevitability, wherever commodity economy prevails, of the
      dictatorship of the bourgeoisie that can only be replaced by the
      class which the very growth of capitalism develops, multiplies,
      welds together and strengthens; that is, the proletarian class.

    

      13.  Another theoretical and political error of the Socialists
  is their failure to understand that ever since the
  rudiments of democracy first appeared in antiquity, its
  forms notably changed over the centuries as one ruling
  class replaced another.  Democracy assumed different forms
  and was applied in different degrees in the ancient
  republics of Greece, the medieval cities and the advanced
  capitalist countries.  It would be sheer nonsense to think
  that the most profound revolution in human history, the
  first case in the world of power being transferred from the
  exploiting minority to the exploited majority, could take
  place within the time-worn framework of the old, bourgeois,
  parliamentary democracy, without drastic changes, without
  the creation of new forms of democracy, new institutions
  that embody the new conditions for applying democracy, etc.

    

      14.  Proletarian dictatorship is similar to dictatorship of
  other classes in that it arises out of the need, as every
  other dictatorship does, to forcibly suppresses the
  resistance of the class that is losing its political sway.
  The fundamental distinction between the dictatorship of the
  proletariat and a dictatorship of the other classes —
  landlord dictatorship in the Middle Ages and bourgeois
  dictatorship in all civilized capitalist countries —
  consists in the fact that the dictatorship of landowners
  and bourgeoisie was a forcible suppression of the
  resistance offered by the vast majority of the population,
  namely, the working people.  In contrast, proletarian
  dictatorship is a forcible suppression of the resistance of
  the exploiters, i.e., of an insignificant minority the
  population, the landlords and capitalists.

    

      It follows that proletarian dictatorship must inevitably entail
      not only a change in the democratic forms and institutions,
      generally speaking, but precisely such change as provides an
      unparalleled extension of the actual enjoyment of democracy by
      those oppressed by capitalism—the toiling classes.

    

      And indeed, the form of proletarian dictatorship that has
      already taken shape, i.e., Soviet power in Russia, the
      Räte-System in Germany, the Shop Stewards Committees in
      Britain and similar Soviet institutions in other countries, all
      this implies and presents to the toiling classes, i.e., the vast
      majority of the population, greater practical opportunities for
      enjoying democratic rights and liberties than ever existed
      before, even approximately, in the best and the most democratic
      bourgeois republics.

    

      The substance of Soviet government is that the permanent and
      only foundation of state power, the entire machinery of state,
      is the mass scale organization of the classes oppressed by
      capitalism, i.e., the workers and semi-proletarians (peasants
      who do not exploit the labor of others and regularly resort to
      the sale of at least a part of their own labor power).  It is
      the people, who even in the most democratic bourgeois republics,
      while possessing equal rights by law, have in fact been debarred
      by thousands of devices and subterfuges from participation in
      political life and enjoyment of democratic rights and liberties,
      that are now drawn into constant and unfailing, moreover,
      decisive, participation in the democratic administration of the
      state.

    

      15.  The equality of citizens, irrespective of sex, religion,
  race, or nationality, which bourgeois democracy everywhere
  has always promised but never affected, and never could
  affect because of the domination of capital, is given
  immediate and full effect by the Soviet system, or
  dictatorship of the proletariat.  The fact is that this can
  only be done by a government of the workers, who are not
  interested in the means of production being privately owned
  and in the fight for their division and redivision.

    

      16.  The old, i.e., bourgeois, democracy and the parliamentary
  system were so organized that it was the mass of working
  people who were kept farthest away from a machinery of
  government.  Soviet power, i.e., the dictatorship of the
  proletariat, on the other hand, is so organized as to bring
  the working people close to the machinery of government.
  That, too, is the purpose of combining the legislative and
  executive authority under the Soviet organization of the
  state and of replacing territorial constituencies by
  production units—the factory.

    

      17.  The Army was a machine of oppression not only under the
  monarchy.  It remains as such in all bourgeois republics,
  even the most democratic ones.  Only the Soviets, the
  permanent organizations of government authority of the
  classes that were oppressed by capitalism, are in a
  position to destroy the Army’s subordination to bourgeois
  commanders and really merge the proletariat with the Army;
  only the Soviets can effectively arm the proletariat and
  disarm the bourgeoisie.  Unless this is done, the victory
  of socialism is impossible.

    

      18.  The Soviet organization of the state is suited to the
  leading role of the proletariat as a class most
  concentrated and enlightened by capitalism.  The experience
  of all revolutions and all movements of the oppressed
  classes, the experience of the world Socialist movement
  teaches us that only the proletariat is in a position to
  unite and lead the scattered and backward sections of the
  working and exploited population. 

    

      19.  Only the Soviet government of the state can really affect
  the immediate breakup and total destruction of the old,
  i.e., bourgeois, bureaucratic and judicial machinery, which
  has been, and has inevitably had to be, retained under
  capitalism even in the most democratic republics, and which
  is, in actual fact, the greatest obstacle to the practical
  implementation of democracy for the workers and working
  people generally.  The Paris Commune took the first epoch
  making step along this path.  The Soviet system has taken
  the second.

    

      20.  Destruction of state power is the aim set by all
  Socialists, including Marx above all.  Genuine democracy,
  i.e., Liberty and equality, is unrealizable unless this aim
  is achieved.  But it’s practical achievement as possible
  only through Soviet, or proletarian, democracy, for by
  enlisting the mass organizations of the working people in
  constant and unfailing participation in the administration
  of the state, it immediately begins to prepare the complete
  withering away of any state.

    

      21.  The complete bankruptcy of the Socialists who assembled in
  Berne, their complete failure to understand the new, i.e.,
  proletarian, democracy, is especially apparent from the
  following.  On February 10, 1919, Branting delivered the
  concluding speech at the International Conference of the
  yellow International in Berne.  In Berlin, on February 11,
  1919, Die
  Freiheit, the paper of the International’s affiliates,
  published an appeal from the party of “Independence” to the
  proletariat.  The appeal acknowledged the bourgeois
  character of the Scheidemann government, rebuked it for
  wanting to abolish the Soviets, which are described as
  Träger und Schutzer der Revolution  —
  vehicles and guardians of the revolution—and
  proposed that the Soviets be legalized, invested with
  government authority and given the right to suspend the
  operation of National Assembly decisions pending a popular
  referendum.

    

      That proposal indicates the complete ideological bankruptcy of
      the theorists who defend democracy and failed to see its
      bourgeois character.  This ludicrous attempt to combine the
      Soviet system, i.e., proletarian dictatorship, with the National
      Assembly, i.e. bourgeois dictatorship, utterly exposes the
      paucity of thought of the yellow Socialists and
      Social-Democrats, their 
      reactionary  petty-bourgeois political outlook, and their
      cowardly concessions to the irresistible growing strength of the
      new, proletarian democracy.

    

      22.  From a class standpoint, the Berne yellow International
  majority, which did not dare to adopt a formal resolution
  out of fear of the mass of workers, was right in condemning
  Bolshevism.  This majority is in full agreement with the
  Russian Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the
  Sheidemanns in Germany.  In complaining of persecution by
  the Bolsheviks, the Russian Mensheviks and Socialist
  revolutionaries try to conceal the fact that they are
  persecuted for participating in the Civil War on the side
  of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat.  Similarly, the
  Sheidemanns and their party have already demonstrated in
  Germany that they, too, are participating in the Civil War
  on the side of the bourgeoisie against the workers.

    

      It is therefore quite natural that the Berne yellow
      International majority should be in favor of condemning the
      Bolsheviks.  This was not an expression of defense of “pure
      democracy", but of the self defense of people who know and feel
      that in the Civil War they stand with the bourgeoisie against
      the proletariat.

    

      That is why, from the class point of view, the decision of the
      yellow International majority must be considered correct.  The
      proletariat must not fear the truth, it must face it squarely
      and draw all the necessary political conclusions.

    

      Comrades, I would like to add a word or two to the last two
      points.  I think that the comrades who are to report to us on
      the burn Conference will deal with it in greater detail.

    

      Not a word was said at the Berne Conference about the
      significance of Soviet power.  We in Russia have been discussing
      this question for two years now.  At our Party Conference in
      April 1917, we raised the following question, theoretically and
      politically: “What is Soviet power, what is its substance and
      what is its historical significance?”  We have been discussing
      it for almost two years.  And at our [Seventh] Party Congress we adopted a
      resolution on it. 


      On February 11 the Berlin Die Freiheit  published an
      appeal to the German proletariat signed not only by the leaders
      of the Independent
      Social Democratic Party of Germany, but also by all members
      of the Independent Social Democratic group in the Reichstag.
      In August 1918, Kautsky,
      one of the leading theorists of these Independents, wrote a
      pamphlet entitled  The Dictatorship of the Proletariat,
       in which he declared that he was a supporter of democracy
       and  of Soviet bodies, but that the Soviets must be
      bodies merely of an economic character and that they must not by
      any means be recognized as state organizations.  Kautsky says
      the same thing in Die Freiheit  of November 11 and
      January 12.  On February 9, an article appeared by Rudolf
      Hilferding, who is also regarded as one of the leading and
      authoritative theorists of the Second International, in which he
      proposed that the Soviet system be united with the National
      Assembly juridically, by state legislation.  That was on
      February 9.  On February 11 this proposal was adopted by the
      whole of the Independent Party and published in the form of an
      appeal.

    

      There is vacillation again, despite the fact that the National
      Assembly already exists, even after “pure democracy” has been
      embodied in reality, after the leading theorists of the
      Independent Social Democratic Party have declared that the
      Soviet organizations must not be state organizations!  This
      proves that these gentlemen really understand nothing about the
      new movement and about its conditions of struggle.  But it goes
      to prove something else, namely, that there must be conditions,
      causes, for this vacillation!  When, after all these events,
      after nearly two years of victorious revolution in Russia, we
      are offered resolutions like those adopted at the Berne
      Conference, which say nothing about the Soviets and their
      significance, about which not a single delegate uttered a single
      word, we have a perfect right to say that all these gentlemen
      are dead to us as Socialists and theorists.

    

      However, comrades, from the practical side, from the political
      point of view, the fact that these Independents, who in theory
      and on principle have been opposed to these state organizations,
      suddenly making the stupid proposal to “peacefully” unite the
      National Assembly with the Soviet system, i.e., to unite the
      dictatorship of the bourgeoisie with the dictatorship of the
      proletariat, shows that a great change is taking place among the
      masses.  We see that the Independents are all bankrupt in the
      Socialist and theoretical sense and that an enormous change is
      taking place among the masses.  The backward masses among the
      German workers are coming to us, have come to us!  So, the
      significance of the Independent Social Democratic Party of
      Germany, the best section of the Berne Conference, is nil from
      the theoretical and Socialist standpoint.  Still, it has some
      significance, which is that these waverers serve as an index to
      us of the mood of the backward sections of the proletariat.
      This, in my opinion, is a great historical significance of this
      Conference.  We experienced something of the kind in our own
      revolution.  Our Mensheviks traversed almost exactly the same
      path as that of the theorists of the Independents in Germany.
      At first, when they had a majority in the Soviets, they were in
      favor of the Soviets.  All we heard then was: “Long live the
      Soviets!", “For the Soviets!", “The Soviets are revolutionary
      democracy!”  When, however, we Bolsheviks secured a majority in
      the Soviets, they changed their tune; they said: the Soviets
      must not exist side-by-side with the Constituent Assembly.  And
      various Mensheviks theorists made practically the same
      proposals, like the one to unite the Soviet system with the
      Constituent Assembly and to incorporate the Soviets into the
      state structure.  Once again it is here revealed that the
      general course of the proletarian revolution is the same
      throughout the world.  First the spontaneous formation of
      Soviets, then their spread and development, and then the
      appearance of the practical problem: Soviets, or National
      Assembly, or Constituent Assembly, or the bourgeois
      parliamentary system; utter confusion among the leaders, and
      finally—the proletarian revolution.  But I think we
      should not present the problem in this way after nearly two
      years of revolution; we should rather adopt concrete decisions
      because for us, and particularly for the majority of the West
      European countries, spreading of the Soviet system is a most
      important task.

    

      I would like to quote here just one Mensheviks resolution.  I
      asked Comrade Obolensky to translate it into German.  He
      promised to do so but, unfortunately, he is not here.  I shall
      try to render it from memory, as I have not the full text of it
      with me.

    

      It is very difficult for a foreigner who has not heard anything
      about Bolshevism to arrive at an independent opinion about our
      controversial questions.  Everything the Bolsheviks assert is
      challenged by the Mensheviks, and vice versa.  Of course, it
      cannot be otherwise in the middle of the struggle, and that is
      why it is so important that the last Menshevik Party conference,
      held in December 1918, adopted the long and detailed resolution
      published in full in the Menshevik Gazeta
      Pechatnikov .  In this resolution the Mensheviks themselves
      briefly outline the history of the class struggle and of the
      Civil War.  The resolution states that they condemn those groups
      in their Party which rallied with the propertied classes in the
      Urals, in the South, in the Crimea and in Georgia—all
      these regions are enumerated.  Those groups of the Menshevik
      party which, in alliance with the propertied classes, fought
      against the Soviets are now condemned in the resolution; but the
      last point of the resolution also condemns those who joined the
      Communists.  It follows that the Mensheviks were compelled to
      admit that there was no unity in their party, and that its
      members were either on the side of the bourgeoisie or on the
      side of the proletariat.  The majority of the Mensheviks went
      over to the bourgeoisie and fought against us during the Civil
      War.  We, of course, persecute Mensheviks, we even shoot them,
      when they wage war against us, fight against our Red Army and
      shoot our Red commanders.  We responded to the bourgeois war
      with the proletarian war—there can be no other way.
      Therefore, from the political point of view, all this is sheer
      Menshevik hypocrisy.  Historically, it is incomprehensible how
      people who have not been officially certified as mad could talk
      at the Berne Conference, on the instructions of the Mensheviks
      and Socialist-Revolutionaries, about the Bolsheviks fighting the
      latter, yet keep silent about their own struggle, in alliance
      with the bourgeoisie, against the proletariat.

    

      All of them furiously attack us for persecuting them.  This is
      true.  But they do not say a word about the part they themselves
      have taken in the Civil War!  I think that I shall have to
      provide the full text of the resolution to be recorded in the
      minutes, and I shall ask the foreign comrades to study it
      because it is a historical document in which the issue is raised
      correctly and which provides excellent material for appraising
      the controversy between the “socialist” trends in Russia.  In
      between the proletariat and bourgeoisie there is another class
      of people, who incline first this way and then the other.  This
      has always been the case in all revolutions, and it is
      absolutely impossible in capitalist society, in which the
      proletariat and bourgeoisie formed to hostile camps, for
      intermediary sections not to exist between them.  The existence
      of these waverers is historically inevitable, and,
      unfortunately, these elements, who do not know themselves on
      whose side they will fight tomorrow, will exist for quite some
      time.

    

      I want to make the practical proposal that a resolution be
      adopted in the which three points shall be specifically
      mentioned.

    

 First:  one of the most important tasks confronting
      the West European comrades is to explain to the people the
      meaning, importance and necessity of the Soviet system.  There
      is a sort of misunderstanding on this question.  Although
      Kautsky and Hilferding are bankrupt as theorists, their recent
      articles in Die Freiheit  show that they correctly
      reflect the mood of the backward sections of the German
      proletariat.  The same thing took place in our country: during
      the first eight months of the Russian Revolution the question of
      the Soviet organization was very much discussed, and the workers
      did not understand what the new system was and whether the
      Soviets could be transformed into a state machine.  In our
      revolution we advanced along the path of practice, and not of
      theory.  For example, formally we did not raise the question of
      the Constituent Assembly from the theoretical side, and we did
      not say we did not recognize the Constituent Assembly.  It was
      only later, when the Soviet organizations had spread throughout
      the country and had captured political power, that we decided to
      dissolve the Constituent Assembly.  Now we see that in Hungary
      and Switzerland the question is much more acute.  On the one
      hand, this is very good: it gives us the firm conviction that in
      the West European states the revolution is advancing more
      quickly and will yield great victories.  On the other hand, a
      danger is concealed in it, namely, that the struggle will be so
      precipitous that the minds of the mass of workers will not keep
      pace with this development.  Even now the significance of the
      Soviet system is not clear to a large mass on the politically
      educated German workers, because they have been trained in the
      spirit of the parliamentary system and ingrained with  bourgeois prejudices.

    

 Second:  About the spread of the Soviet system.  When
      we hear how quickly the idea of Soviets is spreading in Germany,
      and even in Britain, it is very important evidence that the
      proletarian revolution will be victorious.  Its progress can
      only be retarded for a short time.  It is quite another thing,
      however, when Comrades Albert and Platten tell us that in the
      rural districts in their countries there are hardly any Soviets
      among the farm laborers and small peasants.  In Die
      Rote Fahne I read in article opposing peasant Soviets, but
      quite properly supporting Soviets of farm laborers and of poor
      peasants.  [C] The bourgeoisie and their lackeys, like
      Sheidemann and company, have already issued the slogan of
      peasant Soviets.  All we need, however, is Soviets of farm
      laborers and poor peasants.  Unfortunately, from the reports of
      Comrades Albert, Platten and others, we see that, with the
      exception of Hungary, very little is being done to spread the
      Soviet system in the countryside.  In this, perhaps, lies the
      real and quite serious danger threatening the achievement of
      certain victory by the German proletariat.  Victory can only be
      considered assured when not only the German workers, but also
      the rural proletarians are organized, and organized not as
      before—in trade unions and cooperative societies —
      but in Soviets.  Our victory was made much easier by the fact
      that in  October
      1917  we marched with the peasants, with all the peasants.
      In that sense, our revolution at that time was a bourgeois
      revolution.  The first step taken by our proletarian government
      was to embody in a law promulgated on October 26 (old-style),
      1917, on the next day after the revolution, the old demands of
      all the peasants which peasant Soviets and village assemblies
      had put forward under Kerensky.  That is where our strength lay;
      that is why we were able to win the overwhelming majority so
      easily.  As far as the countryside was concerned, our revolution
      continued to be a bourgeois revolution, and only later, after a
      lapse of six months, were we compelled within the framework of
      the state organization to start the class struggle in the
      countryside, to establish Committees of Poor Peasants, of
      semi-proletarians, in every village, and to carry on a
      methodical fight against the rural bourgeoisie.  This was
      inevitable in Russia owing to the backwardness of the country.
      In Western Europe things will proceed differently, and that is
      why we must emphasize the absolute necessity of spreading the
      Soviet system also to the rural population in proper, perhaps
      new, forms.

      
    

 Third:  we must say that winning a Communist majority
      in the Soviets is the principal task in all countries in which
      Soviet government is not yet victorious.  Our Resolutions’
      Commission discussed this question yesterday.  Perhaps other
      comrades will express their opinion on it; but I would like to
      propose that these three points be adopted as a special
      resolution.  Of course, we are not in a position to prescribe
      the path of development.  It is quite likely that the revolution
      will come very soon in many West-European countries, but we, as
      the organized section of the working-class, as a party, strive
      and must strive to gain majority in the Soviets.  Then our
      victory will be assured and no power on Earth will be able to do
      anything against the Communist revolution.  If we do not,
      victory will not be secured so easily, and it will not be
      durable.  And so, I would like to propose that these three
      points be adopted as a special resolution.

    


      Thesis published March 6, 1919 in  Pravda  No.  51;
      report first published in 1920 in the German and in 1921 in the
      Russian additions of the minutes of the First Congress of the
      Communist International.

    

 


      Resolution to the Thesis on Bourgeois Democracy and the
      Dictatorship of the Proletarian
    

      On the basis of these thesis and the reports made by the
      delegates from the different countries, the Congress of the
      Communist International declares that the chief task of the
      Communist Parties in all countries where Soviet government has
      not yet been established, is as follows: 

    

      1) to explain to the broad mass of the workers the historic
         significance and the political and historical necessity of
         the new, proletarian, democracy which must replace bourgeois
         democracy and the parliamentary system;

    

      2) to extend the organization of Soviets among the workers in
         all branches of industry, among the soldiers in the Army and
         the sailors in the Navy and also among farm laborers and poor
         peasants;

    

      3) to build a stable Communist majority inside the Soviets.
    

 Pravda  No.  54, March 11, 1919
      and in the journal  Communist International  No.  1,
      May 1, 1919

    

 



      Concluding Speech at the Closing Session of the Congress
      March 6
    
 

      That we have been able to gather, despite all the persecution
      and all the difficulties created by the police, that we have
      been able without any serious differences and in a brief space
      of time, reach important decisions on all the vitally urgent
      questions of the contemporary revolutionary epoch, we owe to the
      fact that the proletarian masses of the whole world, by their
      action, have brought up these questions in practice and begun to
      tackle them.

    

      All we have had to do here has been to record the gains already
      won by the people in the process of their revolutionary
      struggle.

    

      Not only in the East European but also in the West European
      countries, not only in the vanquished but also in the victor
      countries, for example in Britain, the movement in favor of
      Soviets is spreading farther and farther, and this movement is,
      most assuredly, a movement pursuing the aim of establishing the
      new, proletarian democracy.  It is the most significant step
      towards the dictatorship of the proletariat to, towards the
      complete victory of communism.

    

      No matter how the bourgeoisie of the whole world rage, how much
      they deport or jail or even kill 
      Spartacists  and Bolsheviks—all this will no longer
      help.  It will only serve to enlighten the masses, help rid them
      of the old bourgeois-democratic prejudices and steel them in the
      struggle.  The victory of the proletarian revolution on a world
      scale is assured.  The founding of an international Soviet
      republic is on the way.  ( Stormy Applause.  )

    

      First published in 1920 in the German and a 1921 in the Russian
      additions of the minutes of the First Congress of the Communist
      International
    

Endnotes

[A]
      Most probably, it is not the Birmingham Workers’ Counsel that is
      meant here, but the 
      shop stewards committee .  It is very likely that the
      newspaper which Lenin read contained incorrect information.
      Speaking at the First Congress of the Communist International on
      March 3, 1919, J. Fineberg, a delegate from the British
      Communist group, said:

    

      “In industrial areas local workers’ committees were formed,
      including representatives of the shop stewards committees, for
      instance, the Clyde workers’ committee, London and Sheffield
      workers’ committees and so on.  The committees served as
      organizational centers and representatives of organized labor
      and localities.  For some time the employers in the government
      refused to recognize the shop stewards committees, but in the
      end they had to enter into negotiations with these unregistered
      committees.  That Lloyd George agreed to recognize the
      Birmingham committee as an economic organization proves the shop
      stewards committees had become permanent factors in the British
      movement.  In the shop stewards committees, workers’ committees
      and national conferences of shop stewards committees we have an
      organization similar to the one forming the basis of the Soviet
      republic"

    


[B]
      Lenin was among those who were elected to the presidium.

    

[C]
      Lenin refers to Rosa Luxemburg’s article “Der
      Anfang” ( The
Beginning ), published in Die Rote Fahne No. 3,
      November 18, 1918.
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Won And Recorded










Won and Recorded



V. I. Lenin
Won and Recorded


Written: 5 March, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 51, March 6, 1919; Published 
according to the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, Progress Publishers, 
      Moscow, Volume 26, 1972, pages 477-479
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription\HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala and David Walters
      
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

The only firm gain in a revolution is that which has been won
    by the mass of the proletariat. The only gain worth recording is
    that which really has been firmly won.
The founding of the Third, Communist International in Moscow on
    March 2, 1919, was a record of what has been gained not only by
    the Russian workers, but also by the German, Austrian, Hungarian,
    Finnish, Swiss-in a word, by the workers of the world.
Precisely because of this the founding of the Third, Communist
    International really is firm.
Only four months ago it was impossible to say that Soviet
    government, the Soviet form of state, was an international
    achievement.! There was something in it, and moreover something
    essential, which belonged to all capitalist countries as well as
    to Russia. But, until it had been put to the test, it was still
    impossible to say what changes, of what depth and importance, the
    development of the world revolution would bring.
The German revolution has provided this test. An advanced
    capitalist country, coming after one of the most backward, has
    demonstrated to the whole world in a matter of a hundred-odd days
    not only the same principal revolutionary forces and principal
    direction of the revolution, but also the same principal form of
    the new, proletarian democracy-the Soviets.
At the same time in Britain, a victor country, the richest in
    colonies, the longest serving model of "social peace", or so it
    was reputed, the oldest capitalist country, we can see an
    extensive, irrepressible, intense and powerful growth of Soviets
    and of new Soviet forms of mass proletarian struggle-the Shop
    Stewards Committees.
In America, the strongest and youngest capitalist country, the
    workers have tremendous sympathy with the Soviets.
The ice has been broken.
The Soviets have triumphed throughout the world.
They have triumphed first and foremost because they have won
    the workers' sympathy. That is the main thing. No savagery by the
    imperialist bourgeoisie, no persecution or murder of Bolsheviks
    can deprive the people of this gain. The more the "democratic"
    bourgeoisie rage, the firmer the grip these gains will take on the
    hearts of the workers, on their moods, on their minds, and the
    more they will inspire their heroic struggle.
The ice has been broken.
That is why the work of the International Conference of
    Communists in Moscow which founded the Third International has
    proceeded so easily, so smoothly, with such calm and firm
    resolution.
We have recorded what has already been won. We have written
    down what has already taken a firm grip on the people's
    minds. Everyone knew, and what is more, everyone saw, felt,
    sensed, each from his own country's experience, that a new
    proletarian movement was in full swing. Everyone realised that
    this unprecedenledly strong arid deepgoing movement cannot be
    confined to any of the old frameworks, or held in cheek by the
    past masters at petty politics, neither by the world-schooled,
    world-skilled Lloyd Georges and Wilsons of British and American
    "democratic" capitalism, nor by the Hendersons, Renaudels,
    Brantings and all the other case-hardened heroes of
    social-chauvinism.
The new movement is heading towards the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, making headway despite all the vacillation, despite
    desperate reverses, despite the unparalleled and incredible
    "Russian" chaos (if one judges superficially as an onlooker). It
    is heading for Soviet government with the torrential
    might of millions and tens of millions of workers sweeping
    everything from their path.
This is what we have recorded. We have embodied in our
    resolutions, theses, reports and speeches what has already been
    won.
Marxism, illuminated by the bright light of the new,
    universally rich experience of the revolutionary workers, has
    helped us to understand the inevitability of the present
    development. It will help the workers of the whole world, who are
    fighting to overthrow capitalist wage-slavery, more clearly to
    appreciate the aims of their struggle, to march more firmly along
    the path already outlined, more confidently and firmly to achieve
    victory and to consolidate it.
The founding of the Third, Communist International lieralds the
    international republic of Soviets, the international victory of
    communism.
March 5, 1919


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Founding Of the
Communist International











Draft Wireless Message From People’s Commissar For Foreign Affairs



V. I. Lenin
Founding Of The Communist International
Speech At A Joint Meeting Of The All-Russia Central
      Executive Committee, The Moscow Soviet, The Moscow
      Committee Of The Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks),
      The All-Russia Central Council Of Trade Unions, Moscow
      Trade Unions And Factory Committees To Mark The Founding
      Of The Communist International
March 6, 1919


Delivered: 6 March, 1919
First Published:  Brief report published in Pravda No. 52, 
      March 7, 1919; Published in full in May 1919 Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
      Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, pages 480-484
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the 
      GNU Free
Documentation License



(Stormy ovation.) Comrades, at the First Congress of
      the Communist International we did not succeed in getting
      representatives from all countries where this organisation has
      most faithful friends and where there are workers whose
      sympathies are entirely with us. Allow me, therefore, to begin
      with a short quotation which will show you that in reality we
      have more friends than we can see, than we know and than we were
      able to assemble here, in Moscow, despite all persecution,
      despite the entire, seemingly omnipotent, union of the
      bourgeoisie of the whole world. This persecution has gone to
      such lengths as to attempt to surround us with a sort of Great
      Wall of China, and to deport Bolsheviks in dozens from the
      freest republics of the world. They seem to be scared stiff that
      ten or a dozen Bolsheviks will infect the whole world. But we,
      of course, know that this fear is ridiculous—because they
      have already infected the whole world, because the Russian
      workers’ struggle has already convinced working people
      everywhere that the destiny of the world revolution is being
      decided here,. in Russia.
Comrades, I have here a copy of L’Humanité,
    a French newspaper whose policy corresponds more to that of our
    Mensheviks or Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. During the war,
    this paper was utterly ruthless in its attacks on those who
    supported our viewpoint. Today it is defending those who during
    the war went along with their own bourgeoisie. This very newspaper
    reports in its issue of January 13, 1919, that a mammoth meeting
    (as the newspaper itself admits) took place in Paris of active
    party and trade union members of the Seine Federation, i.e., the
    district nearest to Paris, the centre of the proletarian movement,
    the centre of all political life in France. The first speaker was
    Bracke, a socialist who throughout the war took the same line as
    our Mensheviks and Right-wing defence advocates. He was meek and
    mild now. Not a word about a single burning issue! He ended by
    saying that he was against his government’s interference in
    the struggle of the proletariat of other countries. His words were
    drowned in applause. The next speaker was a supporter of his, a
    certain Pierre Laval. He spoke of demobilisation, the burning
    issue in France today—a country which has probably borne
    greater sacrifices than any other country in this criminal
    war. And this country now sees that demobilisation is being
    dragged out, held up, that there is no desire to carry it through,
    that preparations are being made for a new war that will obviously
    demand new sacrifices from the French workers for the sake of
    settling how much more of the spoils the French or British
    capitalists will get. The newspaper goes on to say that the crowd
    listened to the speaker, Pierre Laval, but when he started running
    down Bolshevism, the protests and excitement stopped the
    meeting. After that, citizen Pierre Renaudel was refused a
    hearing, and the meeting ended with a brief statement by citizen
    Pdricat. He is one of the few people in the French labour movement
    who in the main is in agreement with us. And so, the newspaper has
    to admit that the speaker who began to attack the Bolsheviks was
    immediately pulled up.
Comrades, we have not been able to get even one delegate here
    directly from France, and only one Frenchman, Comrade Guilbeaux,
    arrived here, and he with great difficulty. (Stormy
    applause.) He will speak here today. He spent months in the
    prisons of that free republic, Switzerland, being accused of
    having contact with Lenin and preparing a revolution in
    Switzerland. He was escorted through Germany by gendarmes and
    officers, for fear, evidently, that he might drop a match that
    would set Germany on fire. But Germany is ablaze without this
    match. In France, too, as we can see, there are sympathisers with
    the Bolshevik movement. The French people are probably among the
    most experienced, most politically conscious, most active and
    responsive. They will not allow a speaker at a public meeting to
    strike a false note: he is stopped. Considering the French
    temperament, he was lucky not to have been dragged down from the
    rostrum! Therefore, when a newspaper hostile to us admits what
    took place at this big meeting we can safely say the French
    proletariat is on our side.
I am going to read another short quotation, from an Italian
    newspaper. The attempts to isolate us from the rest of the world
    are so great that we very rarely receive socialist newspapers from
    abroad. It is a rare thing to receive a copy of the Italian
    newspaper Avanti!,
    the organ of the Italian Socialist Party, a party which
    participated in Zimmerwald, fought against the war and has now
    resolved not to attend the yellow congress in Berne, the congress
    of the old International, which was to be attended by people who
    had helped their governments to prolong this criminal war. To this
    day, Avanti! is under strict censorship. But in this issue, which
    arrived here by chance, I read an item on party life in a small
    locality called Cavriago (probably a remote spot because it cannot
    be located on the map). It appears that the workers there adopted
    a resolution supporting their newspaper for its uncompromising
    stand and declared their approval of the German Spartacists. Then
    follow the words “Sovietisti russi” which, even though
    they are in Italian, can be understood all over the world. They
    sent greetings to the Russian “Sovietisti” and
    expressed the wish that the programme of the Russian and German
    revolutionaries should be adopted throughout the world and serve
    to carry the fight against the bourgeoisie and military domination
    to a conclusion. When you read a resolution like that, adopted in
    some Italian Poshekhonye,’82 you have every right to say to
    yourself that the Italian people are on our side, the Italian
    people understand what the Russian “Sovietisti” are,
    what the programme of the Russian “Sovietisti” and the
    German Spartacists is. Yet at that time we had no such programme!
    We had no common programme with the German Spartacists, but the
    Italian workers rejected all they had seen in their bourgeois
    press, which, bribed as it is by the millionaires and
    multimillionaires, spreads slander about us in millions of
    copies. It
    failed to deceive the Italian workers, who grasped what the
    Spartacists and the “Sovietisti” were and declared
    that they sympathised with their programme, at a time when this
    programme did not exist. That is why we found our task so easy at
    this Congress. All we had to do was to record as a programme what
    had already been implanted in the minds and hearts of the workers,
    even those cast away in some remote spot and cut off from us by
    police and military cordons. That is why we have been able to
    reach concerted decisions on all the main issues with such ease
    and complete unanimity. And we are fully convinced that these
    decisions will meet with a powerful response among workers
    elsewhere.
The Soviet movement, comrades, is the form which has been won
    in Russia, which is now spreading throughout the world and the
    very name of which gives the workers a complete programme. I hope
    that we, having had the good fortune to develop the Soviet form to
    victory, will not become swelled-headed about it.
We know very well that the reason we were the first to take
    part in a Soviet proletarian revolution was not because we were as
    well or better prepared than other workers, but because we were
    worse prepared. This is why we were faced with the most savage and
    decrepit enemy, and it is this that accounted for the outward
    scale of the revolution. But we also know that the Soviets exist
    here to this day, that they are grappling with gigantic
    difficulties which originate from an inadequate cultural level and
    from the burden that has weighed down on us for more than a year,
    on us who stand alone at our posts, at a time when we are
    surrounded on all sides by enemies, and when, as you know
    perfectly well, harrowing ordeals, the hardships of famine and
    terrible suffering have befallen us.
Those who directly or indirectly side with the bourgeoisie
    often try to appeal to the workers and provoke indignation among
    them by pointing to the severe sufferings of the workers
    today. And we tell them: yes, these sufferings are severe and we do
    not conceal them from you. We tell the workers that, and they know
    it well from their own experience. You can see we are fighting not
    only to win socialism for ourselves, not only to ensure that our
    children shall only recollect capitalists and landowners as
    prehistoric monsters; we are fighting to ensure that the workers
    of the whole world triumph together with us.
And this First Congress of the Communist International, which
    has made the point that throughout the world the Soviets are
    winning the sympathy of the workers, shows us that the victory of
    the world communist revolution is assured. (Applause.) The
    bourgeoisie will continue to vent their fury in a number of
    countries; the bourgeoisie there are just beginning to prepare the
    destruction of the best people, the best representatives of
    socialism, as is evident from the brutal murder of Rosa Luxemburg
    and Karl Liebknecht by the whiteguards. These sacrifices are
    inevitable. We seek no agreement with the bourgeoisie, we are
    marching to the final and decisive battle against them. But we
    know that after the ordeal, agony and distress of the war, when
    the people throughout the world are fighting for demobilisation,
    when they feel they have been betrayed and appreciate how
    incredibly heavy the burden of taxation is that has been placed
    upon them by the capitalists who killed tens of millions of people
    to decide who would receive more of the profits—we know that
    these brigands’ rule is at an end!
Now that the meaning of the word “Soviet” is
    understood by everybody, the victory of the communist revolution
    is assured. The comrades present in this hall saw the founding of
    the first Soviet republic; now they see the founding of the Third,
    Communist International (applause), and they will all see the
    founding of the World Federative Republic of
    Soviets. (Applause.)
Brief report published; in Pravda
      No. 52, March 7, 1919; Published in full in May 1919 Published
      according to the verbatim report
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Note to Stalin On Reorganisation
Of State Control











On Reorganisation Of State Control



V. I. Lenin
Note To Stalin
On Reorganisation Of State Control


Written: 8 March, 1919
First Published: 1928; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, 
      Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1972 Volume 28, page 485
Translated: Jim Riordan
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the 
      GNU Free Documentation
License



      I think the following should be added to the decree on control:

    

      1) formation of central (and local) bodies with workers'
         participation;

    

      2) introduction by law of the systematic participation of
         witnesses from among the workers, with compulsory
         participation of up to two-thirds women;

    

      3) giving immediate priority to the following as our urgent tasks:

    

      (a) lightning inquiries into citizens' complaints

    

      (b) combating red tape

    

      (c) revolutionary measures to combat abuses and red tape

    

      (d) special attention to boosting labour productivity, and

    

      (e) to increasing the quantity of products, etc.
    


Collected Works Volume 28
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive





