# Volume 18

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 18







Lenin Collected Works: Volume
      18
    



 
Lenin Collected Works:  Volume 18
1912--1913



Preface




1912



The Fourth Duma Election Campaign and the Tasks of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats

32k


The Liquidators Against the Party

20k


In Memory of Herzen

36k


Landownership in European Russia

14k


The Trudoviks and the Worker Democrats

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III

29k


Political Parties in Russia

50k


A Questionnaire on the Organisations of Big Capital

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV
   

  ¶ V
   

  ¶ VI

61k


The Essence of “The Agrarian Problem in Russia”

20k


Some Conclusions to be Drawn from the Pre-Election Mobilisation

22k


Economic and Political Strikes

28k


The Problem of Resettlement

39k


The Revolutionary Upswing

33k


The Slogans of the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912 and the May Day Movement

20k


The Liquidators Oppose Revolutionary Mass Strikes

8k


“Uniters”

24k



The Nature and Significance of Our Polemics Against the Liberals

23k


Capitalism and “Parliament”

11k


The Elections and the Opposition

15k


The Significance of the St. Petersburg Elections

18k


A Comparison of the Stolypin and the Narodnik Agrarian Programmes

22k


The Situation in the R.S.D.L.P. and the Immediate Tasks of the Party

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III

29k


A Reply to the Liquidators

10k


In Switzerland (July 12, 1912)

10k


Democracy and Narodism in China

21k


The Italian Socialist Congress

11k


“Freedom of Speech” in Russia

6k


How P. B. Axelrod Exposes the Liquidators

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II

42k


The Results of Six Months’ Work

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV

48k


The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.

To the Executive Committee of the German
      Social-Democratic Party

      
The Situation in the R.S.D.L.P. since January 1912
What Is the Relation of the Hitherto Neutral Russian
  Social-Democrats to the So-called Organising
  Committee?
The Social-Democratic Group in the Third Duma.
Officially Verifiable Data on the Influence of the
  Liquidators Compared with That of the Party Open and
  Verifiable Data on the Links of the Liquidators and the
  Party with the Mass of the Workers in Russia
Conclusion


Postscript


64k


Original Postscript to the Pamphlet The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.

13k


Capitalism and Popular Consumption

10k


Liberals and Clericals

7k


Cadets and Democrats

8k


The Liberal Campaign

8k


Revolts in the Army and Navy

14k


On the Eve of the Elections to the Fourth Duma

21k


Can the Slogan “Freedom of Association” Serve as a Basis for the Working-Class Movement Today?

11k


Letter to the Swiss Workers

8k


Questions of Principle

8k


The Last Valve

20k


A Little Explanation

8k


Workers’ Earnings and Capitalist Profits in Russia

9k


The Strike Movement and Wages

9k


The Working Day in the Factories of Moscow Gubernia

8k


The Working Day and Working Year in Moscow Gubernia

27k


In Britain

9k


Concentration of Production in Russia

8k


A Career

8k


To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau

8k


The Cadets and the Agrarian Question

35k


A Poor Defence

8k


The Liquidators and “Unity”

8k


A Talk on “Cadet-Eating”

26k


The Workers and Pravda

10k


Before and Now

9k


The International Congress of Judges

11k


In Switzerland (August 31, 1912)

10k


The Priesthood and Politics

9k



Yet Another Anti-Democratic Campaign

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV
   

  ¶ V

44k


The Unity of the Cadets and Novoye Vremya

9k


Concerning N. S. Polyansky's Letter

8k


The Political Line

24k


The Successes of the American Workers

6k


The End of the Italo-Turkish War

6k


A Game of Chance

7k


The Priesthood in the Elections, and Elections with the Priesthood

14k


Mr. Milyukov's “Position”

10k


Deputy of the St. Petersburg Workers

8k


The Balkan Peoples and European Diplomacy

6k


The Fox and the Hen-Coop

10k


A Disgraceful Resolution

7k


Two Utopias

17k


Debates in Britain on Liberal Labour Policy

22k


A Cadet Professor

7k


A New Chapter of World History

7k


Cadets and Nationalists

7k


The Horrors of War

6k


The Cadets and the Big Bourgeoisie

6k


Truly Russian Morals

7k


The Platform of the Reformists and the Platform of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats

30k


The Illegal Party and Legal Work

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV

34k


The Social Significance of the Serbo-Bulgarian Victories

9k


Regenerated China

9k


The Results and Significance of the U.S. Presidential Elections

11k


The “Vexed Questions” of Our Party
The “Liquidationist” and
  “National” Questions

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV

31k


Concerning Certain Speeches by Workers’ Deputies

24k


Concerning the Workers' Deputies to the Duma and Their Declaration

14k


Concerning the Event of November 15
An Undelivered Speech

14k


A Letter to J. V. Stalin (December 11, 1912)

17k


A Letter to J. V. Stalin (December 6, 1912)

8k


The Disease of Reformism

10k


Impoverishment in Capitalist Society

8k


The Working Class and its “Parliamentary” Representatives

9k


The “Reconciliation” of the Nationalists and Cadets

9k


The National-Liberals

11k


On the Attitude to Liquidationism and on Unity
Theses

7k


1913


Notification and Resolutions of the Cracow Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Functionaries

Notification
Resolutions

      
The Revolutionary Upswing, the Strikes, and the
  Tasks of the Party
Building the Illegal Organisation
The Social-Democratic Group in the Duma
Illegal Literature
The Insurance Campaign
The Attitude to Liquidationism, and Unity
Non-Russian Social-Democratic Organisations




53k


The British Labour Movement in 1912

8k



Better Late Than Never

10k


The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations

27k


Original Postscript to the Article “The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations”

6k


The Split Among the Polish Social-Democrats

19k


On Bolshevism

14k


The Significance of Poincare’s Election

9k


Frankly

6k


The Briand Cabinet

8k


Results of the Elections

Manipulating the Elections
The New Duma
Changes within the June Third System
What Was the Issue in the Elections?
The Election Slogans Tested by Experience
“End” of the Illusions about the Cadet Party
      VII. Concerning an “Enormous Danger to the Land
      ownership of the Nobility”
Covering Up the Defeat


6k


Experience Teaches

9k


New Democrats

7k


On Narodism

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II

16k


To the Social-Democrats

The Mass of the Workers and the
      Underground.


14k


In the World of the Azefs

7k


The Bourgeoisie and Reformism

9k


Apropos of the Open Party

10k


Mobilisation of Peasant Lands

6k


A Word About Strikes

7k


Russians and Negroes

7k


A Discovery

7k


The British Labour Party Conference

8k


Constitutional Illusions Shattered

6k


Thank You for Your Frankness

8k


The Question of Unity

8k


What Goes On Among the Narodniks and What Goes On in the Countryside

22k


An Increasing Discrepancy
Notes of a Publicist

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV
   

  ¶ V
   

  ¶ VI
   

  ¶ VII
   

  ¶ VIII
   

  ¶ IX
   

  ¶ X

61k


Some Results of the “Land Distribution” Policy

7k



The Historical Destiny of the Doctrine of Karl Marx

   

¶ I
   

¶ II
   

¶ III

9k


Big Landlord and Small Peasant Landownership in Russia

6k


False Notes

8k


“The Crux of the Matter”

9k


Liberal Embellishment of Serfdom

8k


A “Scientific” System of Sweating

8k


Our “Achievements”

8k


Agreement or Split?
Concerning
the Differences Within the Social-Democratic Duma Group

12k


“Spare Cash”

10k


 


Volume 18
      Transcription/Mark-up: Brian Baggins, David
    Walters, and Zodiac ("The Historical Destiny of The
      Doctrine of Karl Marx"),  2000.


          • 
    R. Cymbala,

    July 25-Aug. 5, 2004 (all documents except the one above).
  








 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## The Fourth Duma Election Campaign and the Tasks of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats









Lenin: The Fourth Duma Election Campaign and the Tasks of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Fourth Duma Election Campaign and the Tasks of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 26, May 8 (April 25), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 17-21.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The political strikes and the first demonstrations over the
Lena

shootings[2] show that the revolutionary movement among the masses of
workers in Russia is growing. This thickening of the revolutionary
atmosphere casts a vivid light on the tasks of the Party and its role in
the election campaign.  

The crisis is growing in a new situation. The reactionary

Duma,[3] which provides the landlords with power, the bourgeoisie with an
arena for making deals, and the proletariat with a small platform, is a
necessary factor in this situation. We need this platform, we need the
election campaign, for our revolutionary work among the masses. We
need the illegal Party to direct all this work as a whole—in the
Taurida Palace, as well as in Kazanskaya

Square,[4] at workers’ mass meetings, during strikes, at district
meetings of worker Social-Democrats, and at open trade union meetings. Only
the hopelessly blind can fail even now to see the utter absurdity and
perniciousness for the working class of otzovism and

liquidationism,[5] those products of decay and disintegration during the
period of the triumph of counter-revolution. The example of the Narodniks
has shown us clearly the scandalous zero one gets as the result of
adding the liquidationism of the “Trudoviks”, as well as of the
legally functioning writers of Russkoye

Bogatstvo[6] and

Sovremennik,[7] to the otzovism of the
Socialist-Revolutionary “party”.  

Let us now sum up the facts brought to light during the pre-election
mobilisation of political forces. Three camps

    

stand out clearly:

(1) The Rights—from Purishkevich to Guchkov—are
pro-government. The

Black-Hundred[8] landlord and the conservative merchant are heart and
soul for the government.

(2) The liberal bourgeois—the “Progressists” and the Cadets,
along with groups of various non-Russians—are against the government
and against the revolution. The counter-revolutionary nature of
the liberals is one of the main features of the present historical
juncture. Whoever does not see this counter-revolutionary nature of the
“cultured” bourgeoisie has forgotten everything and learned nothing, and
takes the name of democrat, to say nothing of socialist, in vain. As it
happens, the Trudoviks and “our” liquidators see poorly, and understand
things poorly!

(3) The democratic camp, in which only the revolutionary Social-Democrats,
the anti-liquidationists, united and organised, have firmly and dearly
unfurled their own banner, the banner of revolution. The Trudoviks
and our liquidators are vacillating between the liberals and the
democrats, between legal opposition and revolution.  

The class roots which brought about the division between the first two
camps are clear. But the liberals have succeeded in leading astray many
people, from Vodovozov to Dan, as to the class roots which divided the
second camp from the third. The liberal “strategy”, naively blurted out
by Blank in Zaprosy

Zhizni,[9] is very simple: the Cadets are the centre of the
opposition, the thill-horse; the outrunners (the “flanks”) are the
Progressists on the right, and the Trudoviks and the liquidators on the
left. It is on this “troika” that the Milyukovs, in their role of
“responsible opposition”, hope to “ride” to triumph.  

The hegemony of the liberals in the Russian emancipation movement has
always meant, and will always mean, defeat for this movement. The
liberals manoeuvre between the monarchy of the Purishkeviches and the
revolution of the workers and peasants, betraying the latter at
every serious juncture. The task of the revolution is to
use the liberals’ fight against the government and to
neutralise their vacillations and treachery.  

The policy of the liberals is to scare Purishkevich and Romanov a
little with the prospect of revolution, in order to share power with them
and jointly suppress the revolution.

    

And it is the class position of the bourgeoisie that deter mines this
policy. Hence the Cadets’ cheap “democracy” and their actual
fusion with the most moderate “Progressists” of the type of Yefremov,
Lvov, Ryabushinsky and Co.  

The tactics of the proletarian Party should be to use the fight between
the liberals and the Purishkeviches over the division of power—without
in any way allowing “faith” in the liberals to take hold among
the people—in order to develop, intensify and reinforce the revolutionary
onslaught of the masses, which overthrows the monarchy and entirely wipes
out the Purishkeviches and Romanovs. At the elections, its tactics should
be to unite the democrats against the Rights and against
the Cadets by “using” the liberals’ fight against the Rights in cases of
a second ballot, in the press and at meetings. Hence the necessity for a
revolutionary platform that even now goes beyond the bounds of
“legality”. Hence the slogan of a republic—as against the liberals’
“constitutional” slogans, slogans of a “Rasputin-Treshchenkov

constitution”.[10] Our task is to train an army of champions of the
revolution everywhere, always, in all forms of work, in every field of
activity, at every turn of events which may be forced on us by a victory of
reaction, the treachery of the liberals, the protraction of the crisis,
etc.  

Look at the Trudoviks. They are Narodnik liquidators sans
phrases. “We are revolutionaries,” Mr. Vodovozov “hints”,
“but—we can’t go against

Article 129,[11]” he adds. A hundred years after Herzen’s birth, the
“party” of the peasant millions is unable to publish even a sheet—even
a hectographed one!—in defiance of Article 129!! While gravitating
towards a bloc “first of all” with the Social-Democrats, the Trudoviks
are unable to say clearly that the Cadets are counter-revolutionary, to lay
the foundations for a republican peasant party. Yet that is
exactly how the question stands after the lessons of 1905–07 and 1908–11:
either fight for a republic, or lick the boots of Purishkevich and grovel
under the whips of Markov and Romanov. There is no other choice for the
peasants.  

Look at the liquidators. No matter how much the Martynovs, Martovs and
Co. shift and shuffle, any conscientious and sensible reader will recognise
that

R—kov[12] summed up

    

their views when he said: “Let there be no illusion. What is in
the making is the triumph of a very moderate bourgeois progressism.”  The
objective meaning of this winged phrase is the following:
revolution is an illusion, the real thing is to support the
“Progressists”. Surely anyone who does not deliberately close his eyes
must see now that it is precisely this that the Dans and Martovs
are saying, in slightly different words, when they issue the slogan:
“Wrest the Duma [the Fourth Duma, a landlord-ridden

Duma!][1]

from the hands of the reactionaries”? Or when they make, again and again,
the slip of referring to two camps? Or when they shout, “Do not
frustrate” the progressive work of the liberal bourgeois? Or when they
fight against a “Left bloc”? Or when, writing in Zhivoye

Dyelo,[13] they smugly snap their fingers at “the literature
published abroad which nobody reads”? Or when they actually
content themselves with a legal platform and legal attempts at
organisation? Or when they form “initiating

groups”[14] of liquidators, thus breaking with the revolutionary
R.S.D.L.P.? Is it not clear that this is also the tune sung by the
Levitskys, who are lending philosophical depth to the liberal ideas about
the struggle for right, by the Nevedomskys, who have lately “revised”

Dobrolyubov’s[15] ideas backwards—from democracy to
liberalism—and by the Smirnovs, who are making eyes at “progressism”,
and by all the other knights of Nasha

Zarya[16] and Zhivoye Dyelo?  

Actually the democrats and the Social-Democrats, even if they had
wanted to, would never have been able to “frustrate” a victory of the
“Progressists” among the landlords and bourgeois! All this is nothing but
idle talk. This is not where the serious differences lie. Nor is this what
constitutes the distinction between a liberal and a
Social-Democratic labour policy. To “support” the Progressists
on the ground that their “victories” “bring the cultured bourgeois
nearer to power” is a liberal labour policy.  

We Social-Democrats regard a “victory” of the Progressists as an
indirect expression of a democratic upswing. It is necessary to
use the skirmishes between the Progressists and

    

the Rights—the mere slogan of support for the Progressists is no
good. Our job is to promote the democratic upswing, to foster the new
revolutionary democracy that is growing in a new way in the new
Russia. Unless it succeeds in gathering strength and winning in spite of
the liberals, no “triumph” of the Progressists and the Cadets in
the elections will bring about any serious change in the actual situation
in Russia.  

The democratic upswing is an indisputable fact now. It is progressing
with greater difficulty, at a slower pace and along a more arduous path
than we should like, but it is progressing nonetheless. It is this
that we must “support” and promote by our election work and every other
kind of activity. Our task is to organise the revolutionary democrats—by
ruthless criticism of Narodnik liquidationism and Narodnik otzovism to
forge a republican peasant party—but first of all and above all else to
clean “our own house” of liquidationism and otzovism, intensify our
revolutionary Social-Democratic work among the proletariat and strength en
the illegal Social-Democratic Labour Party. The out come of the growing
revolutionary crisis does not depend on us; it depends on a thousand
different causes, on the revolution in Asia and on socialism in Europe. But
it does depend on us to conduct consistent and steady work among the masses
in the spirit of Marxism, and only this kind of work is never done
in vain.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Interpolations in square brackets (within passages quoted by Lenin)
have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated.—Ed.

 



[2]
This refers to the shooting of unarmed workers in the Lena gold-fields,
Siberia, on April 4 (17), 1912.  

The gold-fields were owned by British Capitalists, and their partners were
Russian capitalists, members of the tsar’s family, and tsarist
dignitaries. The owners made a profit of about 7,000,000 rubles annual
y. The gold-fields being situated in a region of taiga forests, almost
2,000 kilometres from the Siberian Railway, the Capitalists and their
helpers committed the worst excesses: they paid the workers niggardly wages
for their back-breaking toil, supplied them with rotten food, and outraged
the workers’ wives and children. Unable to bear the oppression and outrages
any longer, the workers went on strike early in March 1912. The strike was
led by the Bolshevik group formed in the gold-fields in the autumn of
1911. On March 4 (17), 1912, a central strike committee was elected with
the Bolsheviks occupying a leading position on it. The demands to be
presented to the management included: an eight-hour working day, a 10 to 30
per cent wage increase, abolition of fines, organisation of medical aid,
improvement of food and living quarters, etc. The Board of Lenzoto (Lena
Gold-Mining Company) rejected these demands and decided to dismiss the
strikers, stop supplying them with food on credit and evict them from the
gold-fields barracks, which meant dooming the workers and their families to
death by starvation The workers did not allow the police to carry out the
evictions. The strikers held their ground and risisted all attempts at provocation and
intimidation. The strike was peaceful and organised.  

At the instance of influential British and Russian shareholders of the
company, the tsarist authorities decided to use arms against the strikers
in order to intimidate workers in Russia. During the night of April 3-4
(16-17) some of the members of the Central Strike Committee were
arrested. In reply, on April 4 (17) about 3,000 workers marched to the
Nadezhda Mine to lodge a complaint against the unlawful actions of the
authorities and hand the Procurator a petition for the release of those
arrested. Captain Treshchenkov of the gendarmerie ordered his men to open
fire, with the result that 270 workers were killed and 250 injured.  

The news of the bloody drama on the Lena aroused the furious indignation of
the workers throughout Russia. Protest demonstrations, meetings and strikes
took place all over the country. The Social-Democratic Duma group
interpellated the government on

   

the Lena shootings. The insolent reply of the tsar’s Minister
Makarov—“So it was and so it will be!”—added to the workers’
indignation. Strikes protesting against the Lena shootings involved about
300,000 workers. They merged with the May Day strikes in which about
400,000 workers took part. “The Lena shootings,” Lenin pointed out, “led
to the revolutionary temper of the masses developing into a revolutionary
upswing of the masses.”





[3]
The Duma was a representative assembly which the tsarist
government was forced to convene as a result of the revolutionary events of
1905. Nominally it was a legislative body but it had no real
authority. Elections to the Duma were neither direct, nor equal, nor
universal. In the case of the working classes, as well as of the
non-Russian nationalities of the country, the suffrage was greatly
curtailed, a considerable section of the workers and peasants lacking any
voting rights. Under the electoral law of December 11 (24), 1905, one
landlord vote was made equivalent to three votes cast by representatives of
the urban bourgeoisie, 15 peasant votes and 45 votes cast by workers.  

The First and Second Dumas (April–July 1906 and February–June 1907,
respectively) were dissolved by the tsarist government. On June 3, 1907,
the government carried out a coup d’état and issued a new electoral
law which still further curtailed the rights of the workers, peasants and
urban petty bourgeoisie and guaranteed the complete supremacy of the
reactionary bloc of the land lords and big capitalists in the Third and
Fourth Dumas (1907-12 and 1912-17).





[4]
The Taurida (Tavrichesky) Palace was the building in
which the Duma held its sessions from 1906 to 1917.  

Kazanskaya Square—in front of the Kazan Cathedral in
St. Petersburg—was the scene of frequent revolutionary demonstrations.





[5]
See pp. 151–52 of this volume.





[6]
Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth)—a monthly
published in St. Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. In the early
1890s it became a liberal Narodnik organ. In 1906 it virtually became the
mouthpiece of the semi-Cadet Popular Socialist Party.





[7]
Sovremennik (The Contemporary)—a literary and
political monthly published in St. Petersburg from 1911 to 1915, around
which ware grouped Menshevik liquidators, Socialist-Revolutionaries,
Popular Socialists and Left liberals. It had no links with the masses of
the workers. In 1914 Lenin described its trend as a hybrid of Narodism and
Marxism.





[8]
Black Hundreds—monarchist bands which the tsarist police
formed to combat the revolutionary movement. They murdered revolutionaries,

   

attacked progressive intellectuals and organised anti-Jewish pogroms.





[9]
Zaprosy Zhizni (Demands of Life)—a weekly published
in St. Petersburg from 1909 to 1912. Contributors to it were Cadets,
Popular Socialists and Menshevik liquidators. Lenin called it a
“liquidationist-Trudovik-Vekhi” periodical.





[10]
Rasputin, G. Y. (1872-1916)—an adventurer who enjoyed great
influence at the Court of Nicholas II. “Rasputinism” most strikingly
expressed the obscurantism, fanaticism and moral decay typical of the
ruling upper stratum of tsarist Russia.  

Treshchenkov, N. V. (1875-1915)—Captain of Gendarmerie, one
of those who led the shooting of the Lena gold-miners in April 1912.





[11]
This refers to Article 129 of the Criminal Code of the Russian Empire,
which envisaged severe punishment, including penal servitude, for public
actions and dissemination of writings against the tsarist system.





[12]
R–kov, N. A. Rozhkov—historian, Social-Democrat, one of the
Menshevik liquidators.





[13]
Zhivoye Dyelo (Vital Cause)—a legal daily newspaper
published by the Menshevik liquidators in St. Petersburg in 1912. Sixteen
issues appeared.





[14]
Lenin is referring to the “initiating groups of Social-Democratic
functionaries of the open working-class movement” which the Menshevik
liquidators formed from the end of 1910 onwards as a counter to the illegal
Party organisations. The liquidators regarded those groups as nuclei of the
new, broad legal party they were advocating a party within the framework of
the June Third, Stolypin regime. They succeeded in forming “initiating
groups” in St. Petersburg, Moscow, Yekaterinoslav and Konstantinovka
(Donets coal-field) in the shape of small groups of intellectuals
dissociated from the working class. These groups opposed the strike
movement and revolutionary demonstrations of the workers, and fought
against the Bolsheviks in the Fourth Duma elections. The guiding centres of
the “initiating groups” were Golos Sotsial-Demokrata, which the
liquidators published abroad, and Nasha Zarya and Dyelo
Zhizni, legal liquidationist organs published in Russia.





[15]
Dobrolyubov, N. A. (1836-1861)—outstanding Russian
revolutionary democrat, literary critic and materialist philosopher, one of
the forerunners of Russian Social-Democracy.





[16]
Nasha Zarya (Our Dawn)—a legal monthly published by
the Menshevik liquidators in St. Petersburg from 1910 to 1914. It was the
centre for the liquidationist movement in Russia.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liquidators Against the Party









Lenin: The Liquidators Against the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liquidators Against the Party




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 26, May 8 (April 25), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 22-24.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The  liquidators of all shades, writing in the legal Russian
press, are conducting a campaign of slander against the Party

Conference[2] with an easy shamelessness which might well be envied by
the Bulgarins and

Burenins.[3] The articles in Zhivoye Dyelo, which openly
question the delegates as to who sent them and, under the
protection of the censor ship, attack what cannot be defended in the legal
press, exemplify such disregard for the elementary rules of literary
decency that they are bound not only to evoke protests from the adherents
of the Conference, but also to disgust any fair-minded political leader. As
for the articles of the anonymous informer of

Vorwärts,[4] they reek of shameless braggadocio and florid
lying so overpoweringly as not to permit of any doubt that the liquidators’
order for them found itself in experienced

hands.[1]


Driven into a corner, the groups and circles of liquidators do not
confine themselves, however, to a campaign of slander against the
Party. They are trying to convene a conference of their own. Every measure
has been taken, of course, to lend the Organising

Committee,[5] which is to convene this conference, the semblance of a
“pro-Party”, “non-factional”, “unity” body. After all, these are such
convenient words—when the liquidators want to hook all those who for some
reason are dissatisfied with the Party Conference. Trotsky

    

was entrusted with singing all the virtues of the Organising Committee and
of the forthcoming liquidationist conference; nor could they have assigned
the job to anyone fitter than the “professional uniter”. And he did sing
them—in every variety of type his Vienna printer could find: “The
supporters of Vperyod and Golos, pro-Party Bolsheviks,
pro-Party

Mensheviks,[6] so-called liquidators and non-factionalists—in Russia
and abroad—are firmly supporting the work...” of the Organising
Committee.

(Pravda[7] No. 24.)  

The poor fellow—again he told a lie, and again he miscalculated. The
bloc under the hegemony of the liquidators, which was being prepared in
opposition to the Conference of 1912 with so much fuss, is now bursting at
the seams and the reason is that the liquidators have shown their hand too
openly. The Poles refused to take part in the Organising
Committee. Plekhanov, through correspondence with a representative of the
Committee, established several interesting details, to wit:

(1) that what is planned is a “constituent” conference, i.e., not a
conference of the R.S.D.L.P., but of some new party;

(2) that it is being convened on “anarchical” lines;

(3) that the “conference is being convened by the liquidators”. After
these circumstances had been revealed by Comrade Plekhanov, there was
nothing surprising to us in the fact that the so-called Bolshevik (?!)
conciliators plucked up courage and resolved to convict Trotsky of—having
told a lie by listing them among the supporters of the Organising
Committee. “This Organising Committee, as it is now constituted, with its
obvious tendency to impose upon the whole Party its own attitude to the
liquidators, and with the principles of organisational anarchy which it has
made the basis for increasing its membership, does not provide the least
guarantee that a really general Party conference will be convened.”  That
is how our emboldened “pro-Party” people comment on the Organising
Committee today. We do not know where the most Leftist of our Left—the
Vperyod group, who at one time hastened to signify its sympathy
with the Organising Committee—stand today. Nor is this of any
importance. The important thing is that the liquidationist character of the
conference to be held by the Organising Committee has been established by
Plekhanov with irrefutable clarity, and that the statesmanlike

    

minds of the “conciliators” had to bow to this fact. Who remains, then?
The open liquidators and Trotsky.  

The basis of this bloc is obvious: the liquidators enjoy full freedom
to pursue their line in Zhivoye Dyelo and Nasha Zarya
“as before”, while Trotsky, operating abroad, screens them with
r-r-revolutionary phrases, which cost him nothing and do not bind them in
any way.  

There is one little lesson to be drawn from this affair by those abroad
who are sighing for unity, and who recently hatched the sheet

Za Partiyu[8] in Paris. To build up a party, it is not enough
to be able to shout “unity”; it is also necessary to have a
political programme, a programme of political action. The bloc
comprising the liquidators, Trotsky, the Vperyod group, the Poles,
the pro-Party Bolsheviks (?), the Paris Mensheviks, and so on and so forth,
was foredoomed to ignominious failure, because it was based on an
unprincipled approach, on hypocrisy and hollow phrases. As for those who
sigh, it would not be amiss if they finally made up their minds on that
extremely complicated and difficult question: With whom do they want to
have unity? If it is with the liquidators, why not say so without mincing?
But if they are against unity with the liquidators, then what sort of unity
are they sighing for?  

The January Conference and the bodies it elected are the only thing
that actually unites all the R.S.D.L.P. functionaries in Russia
today. Apart from the Conference there is only the promise of the

Bundists[9] and Trotsky to convene the liquidationist conference of the
Organising Committee, and the “conciliators” who are experiencing their
liquidationist hang-over.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
To acquaint the German comrades with the actual state of affairs in the
R.S.D.L.P., the editorial board of the Central Organ published a special
pamphlet in German, exposing, among other things, the methods of the
anonymous writer in Vorwärts.

—Lenin
 



[2]
This refers to the Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P., held January 5–17 (18-30), 1912.





[3]
Bulgarin, F. V.—a reactionary journalist and publisher of
the first half of the nineteenth century who engaged in denouncing and
slandering progressive magazines and writers of his day. He was notorious
for his denunciations of Alexander Pushkin.  

Burenin, V. P.—a journalist who contributed to the
reactionary newspaper Novoye Vremya. He engaged in vicious attacks
against representatives of all progressive social and political trends.


Lenin uses these two names as synonyms for individuals who resort to
dishonest methods of conducting polemics.





[4]
Vorwärts (Forward)—central organ of the German
Social-Democratic Party, published from 1891 to 1933. The slanderous
articles against the Prague Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. which appeared in
Vorwärts were written by Trotsky.





[5]
This refers to the Organising Committee set up by the January 1912
meeting of liquidators representing the Bund, the Caucasian Regional
Committee and the Central Committee of the Social-Democrats of the Lettish
Territory. Among those who took an active part in the work of the
Organising Committee in addition to the non-Russian Social-Democratic
organisations were the editorial boards of the Vienna Pravda and
of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata, the Vperyod group and
representatives of the liquidators’ St. Petersburg “initiating
group”. Trotsky was the virtual head of the Organising Committee, which
was officially entrusted with convening the August 1912 anti-Party
conference.





[6]
The Vperyod group was an anti-Party group of otzovists,
ultimatumists, god-builders and empirio-monists (adherents of the
reactionary, idealist philosophy of Mach and Avenarius). The group was
formed in December 1909 on the initiative of A. A. Bogdanov and
0. A. Alexinsky. It published a printed organ called Vperyod. In
1912 it united with the Menshevik liquidators to form a general anti-Party
bloc (the August bloc) against the Bolsheviks. This bloc was organised by
Trotsky. Failing to gain support among the workers, the group virtually
fell to pieces in 1913–14. Its final disintegration occurred in 1917 after
the February Revolution.  

The Golos supporters were Menshevik liquidators grouped around
Golos Sotsial-Demokrata (P. B. Axelrod, F. I. Dan, L. Martov,
A. S. Martynov, A. N. Potresov and others), which was published from
February 1908 to December 1911 first in Geneva and then in Paris.  

The pro-Party Bolsheviks were a group of Bolsheviks who took a
conciliatory view of liquidationism and otzovism. Most of the conciliators
opposed the Lenin bloc of Bolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks. They urged
unprincipled unification of the Bolsheviks with various groups that had no
support among the masses but sought to exert influence in the Party.  


The pro-Party Mensheviks were a small group of Mensheviks led
by Plekhanov. They had broken away from the Menshevik liquidators, and
opposed liquidationism in 1908-12.





[7]
Pravda (Vienna)—a factional newspaper published by the
Trotskyists from 1908 to 1912. Its first three issues were published in
Lvov, the rest in Vienna. Twenty-five issues appeared in all.  

With the exception of its first two issues, which appeared as the organ
of the Ukrainian Spilka (Union), the newspaper represented no Party
organisation in Russia and was described by Lenin as “a private
undertaking”. Its editor was Trotsky. Under cover of “non factionalism”,
the newspaper opposed Bolshevism from the outset, and upheld liquidationism
and otzovism. It advocated the centrist theory of “co-operation” between
revolutionaries and opportunists within one and the same party. Following
the January 1910 Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee it took a frankly
liquidationist stand. It also backed the anti-Party Vperyod group
of the otzovists and ultimatumists.  

In 1912 Trotsky and his newspaper were the initiators and chief
organisers of the anti-Party August bloc.





[8]
Za Partiyu (For the Party)—a sheet which the
pro-Party Mensheviks and conciliators published at irregular intervals in
Paris from April 16 (29), 1912, to February 1914. Five issues were brought
out. Among those who wrote for it were G. V. Plekhanov, S. A. Lozovsky and
A. I. Lyubimov. It was disseminated chiefly abroad and expressed mainly the
views of the Paris group of Plekhanov’s supporters.





[9]
The Bund (The General Jewish Workers’ Union of Lithuania,
Poland and Russia) came into being in 1897, at the founding congress of the
Jewish Social-Democratic groups in Vilna. In the main, it comprised
semi-proletarian Jewish artisans in the west of Russia. It represented
nationalism and separatism in Russia’s working-class movement.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Memory of Herzen









Lenin: In Memory of Herzen







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Memory of Herzen




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 26, May 8 (April 25), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 25-31.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

One hundred years have elapsed since Herzen’s birth. The
whole of liberal Russia is paying homage to him, studiously evading,
however, the serious questions of socialism, and taking pains to conceal
that which distinguished Herzen the revolutionary from a
liberal. The Right-wing press, too, is commemorating the Herzen centenary,
falsely asserting that in his last years Herzen renounced revolution. And
in the orations on Herzen that are made by the liberals and Narodniks
abroad, phrase-mongering reigns supreme.  

The working-class party should commemorate the Herzen centenary, not
for the sake of philistine glorification, but for the purpose of making
clear its own tasks and ascertaining the place actually held in history by
this writer who played a great part in paving the way for the Russian
revolution.  

Herzen belonged to the generation of revolutionaries among the nobility
and landlords of the first half of the last century. The nobility gave
Russia the Birons and

Arakcheyevs,[1] innumerable “drunken officers, bullies, gamblers,
heroes of fairs, masters of hounds, roisterers, floggers, pimps”, as well
as amiable

Manilovs.[2] “But,” wrote Herzen, “among them developed the men of

December 14,[3] a phalanx of heroes reared, like Romulus and Remus, on
the milk of a wild beast.... They were veritable titans, hammered out of
pure steel from head to foot, comrades-in-arms who deliberately went to
certain death in order to awaken the young generation to a new life and to
purify the children born in an environment of tyranny and

servility.”[4] 

Herzen was one of those children. The uprising of the Decembrists
awakened and “purified” him. In the feudal Russia of the forties of the
nineteenth century, he rose to a

    

height which placed him on a level with the greatest thinkers of his
time. He assimilated Hegel’s dialectics. He realised that it was “the
algebra of revolution”. He went further than Hegel, following Feuerbach to
materialism. The first of his Letters on the Study of Nature,
“Empiricism and Idealism”, written in 1844, reveals to us a thinker who
even now stands head and shoulders above the multitude of modern empiricist
natural scientists and the host of present-day idealist and semi-idealist
philosophers. Herzen came right up to dialectical materialism, and
halted—before historical materialism.  

It was this “halt” that caused Herzen’s spiritual ship wreck after
the defeat of the revolution of 1848. Herzen had left Russia, and observed
this revolution at close range. He was at that time a democrat, a
revolutionary, a socialist. But his “socialism” was one of the countless
forms and varieties of bourgeois and petty-bourgeois socialism of the
period of 1848, which were dealt their death-blow in the June days of that
year. In point of fact, it was not socialism at all, but so many
sentimental phrases, benevolent visions, which were the expression at
that time of the revolutionary character of the bourgeois
democrats, as well as of the proletariat, which had not yet freed itself
from the influence of those democrats.  

Herzen’s spiritual shipwreck, his deep scepticism and pessimism after
1848, was a shipwreck of the bourgeois illusions of
socialism. Herzen’s spiritual drama was a pro duct and reflection of that
epoch in world history when the revolutionary character of the bourgeois
democrats was already passing away (in Europe), while the
revolutionary character of the socialist proletariat had not yet
matured. This is something the Russian knights of liberal verbiage, who are
now covering up their counter-revolutionary nature by florid phrases about
Herzen’s scepticism, did not and could not understand. With these knights,
who betrayed the Russian revolution of 1905, and have even forgotten to
think of the great name of revolutionary, scepticism is a form of
transition from democracy to liberalism, to that toadying, vile, foul and
brutal liberalism which shot down the workers in 1848, restored the
shattered thrones and applauded Napoleon III, and which Herzen
cursed, unable to understand its class nature.  
 

With Herzen, scepticism was a form of transition from the illusion of a
bourgeois democracy that is “above classes” to the grim, inexorable and
invincible class struggle of the proletariat. The proof: the Letters to
an Old Comrade—to Bakunin—written by Herzen in 1869, a year before
his death. In them Herzen breaks with the anarchist Bakunin. True, Herzen
still sees this break as a mere disagreement on tactics and not as a gulf
between the world outlook of the proletarian who is confident of the
victory of his class and that of the petty bourgeois who has despaired of
his salvation. True enough, in these letters as well, Herzen repeats the
old bourgeois-democratic phrases to the effect that socialism must preach
“a sermon addressed equally to workman and master, to farmer and
townsman”. Nevertheless, in breaking with Bakunin, Herzen turned his gaze,
not to liberalism, but to the International—to the international
led by Marx, to the International which had begun to “rally the
legions” of the proletariat, to unite “the world of
labour”, which is “abandoning the world of those who enjoy without

working”.[5] 


Failing as he did to understand the bourgeois-democratic character of
the entire movement of 1848 and of all the forms of pre-Marxian socialism,
Herzen was still less able to understand the bourgeois nature of the
Russian revolution. Herzen is the founder of “Russian” socialism, of
“Narodism”. He saw “socialism” in the emancipation of the peasants
with land, in community land

tenure[6] and in the peasant idea of “the right to land”. He set forth
his pet ideas on this subject an untold number of times.  

Actually, there is not a grain of socialism in this doctrine
of Herzen’s, as, indeed, in the whole of Russian. Narodism, including the
faded Narodism of the present-day Socialist-Revolutionaries. Like the
various forms of “the socialism of 1848” in the West, this is the same
sort of sentimental phrases, of benevolent visions, in which is expressed
the revolutionism of the bourgeois peasant democracy in
Russia. The more land the peasants would have received in

1861[7] and the less they would have had to pay for it, the more would
the power of the feudal landlords have been

    

undermined and the more rapidly, freely and widely would capitalism have
developed in Russia. The idea of the “right to land” and of “equalised
division of the land” is nothing but a formulation of the revolutionary
aspiration for equality cherished by the peasants who are fighting for the
complete overthrow of the power of the landlords, for the complete
abolition of landlordism.  

This was fully proved by the revolution of 1905: on the one hand, the
proletariat came out quite independently at the head of the revolutionary
struggle, having founded the Social-Democratic Labour Party; on the other
band, the revolutionary peasants (the Trudoviks and the Peasant

Union[8]), who fought for every form of the abolition of landlordism
even to “the abolition of private landownership”, fought precisely as
proprietors, as small entrepreneurs.  

Today, the controversy over the “socialist nature” of the right to
land, and so on, serves only to obscure and cover up the really
important and serious historical question concerning the difference of
interests of the liberal bourgeoisie and the revolutionary
peasantry in the Russian bourgeois revolution;, in other words,
the question of the liberal and the democratic, the “compromising”
(monarchist) and the republican trends manifested in that revolution. This
is exactly the question posed by Herzen’s

Kolokol,[9] if we turn our attention to the essence of the
matter and not to the words, if we investigate the class struggle as the
basis of “theories” and doctrines and not vice versa.  

Herzen founded a free Russian press abroad, and that is the great
service rendered by him. Polyarnaya

Zvezda[10] took up the tradition of the
Decembrists. Kolokol (1857–67) championed the emancipation of the
peasants with might and main. The slavish silence was broken.  

But Herzen came from a landlord, aristocratic milieu. He left Russia in
1847; he had not seen the revolutionary people and could have no faith in
it. Hence his liberal appeal to the “upper ranks”. Hence his innumerable
sugary letters in Kolokol addressed to Alexander II the Hangman,
which today one cannot read without revulsion. Chernyshevsky, Dobrolyubov
and Serno-Solovyevich, who represented the new generation of revolutionary

raznochintsi,[11] were a thousand times right when they reproached Herzen
for these

    

departures from democracy to liberalism. However, it must be said
in fairness to Herzen that, much as he vacillated between democracy and
liberalism, the democrat in him gained the upper hand nonetheless.  

When Kavelin, one of the most repulsive exponents of liberal
servility—who at one time was enthusiastic about Kolokol
precisely because of its liberal tendencies—rose in arms against
a constitution, attacked revolutionary agitation, rose against “violence”
and appeals for it, and began to preach tolerance, Herzen broke
with that liberal sage. Herzen turned upon Kavelin’s “meagre, absurd,
harmful pamphlet” written “for the private guidance of a government
pretending to be liberal”; he denounced Kavelin’s “sentimental political
maxims” which represented “the Russian people as brutes and the
government as an embodiment of intelligence”. Kolokol printed an
article entitled “Epitaph”, which lashed out against “professors weaving
the rot ten cobweb of their superciliously paltry ideas, ex-professors,
once open-hearted and subsequently embittered because they saw that the
healthy youth could not sympathise with their scrofulous
thinking”. Kavelin at once recognised himself in this portrait.  

When Chernyshevsky was arrested, the vile liberal Kavelin wrote:

“I see nothing shocking in the arrests ... the revolutionary party
considers all means fair to overthrow the government, and the latter
defends itself by its own means.” As if in retort to this Cadet, Herzen
wrote concerning Chernyshevsky’s trial:

“And here are wretches, weed-like people, jellyfish, who say that we must
not reprove the gang of robbers and scoundrels that is governing us.”


When the liberal

Turgenev[12] wrote a private letter to Alexander II assuring him of his
loyalty, and donated two goldpieces for the soldiers wounded during the
suppression of the Polish insurrection, Kolokol wrote of “the
grey-haired Magdalen (of the masculine gender) who wrote to the tsar to
tell him that she knew no sleep because she was tormented by the thought
that the tsar was not aware of the repentance that had overcome her”. And
Turgenev at once recognised himself.  

When the whole band of Russian liberals scurried away from Herzen for
his defence of Poland, when the whole of

    

“educated society” turned its back on Kolokol, Herzen was not
dismayed. He went on championing the freedom of Po land and lashing the
suppressors, the butchers, the hangmen in the service of
Alexander II. Herzen saved the honour of Russian democracy. “We have saved
the honour of the Russian name,” he wrote to Turgenev, “and for doing so
we have suffered at the hands of the slavish majority.”  

When it was reported that a serf peasant had killed a landlord for an
attempt to dishonour the serf’s betrothed, Herzen commented in
Kolokol: “Well done!” When it was reported that army officers
would be appointed to supervise the “peaceable” progress of
“emancipation”, Herzen wrote:

“The first wise colonel who with his unit joins the peasants instead of
crushing them, will ascend the throne of the Romanovs.” When Colonel
Reitern shot himself in Warsaw (1860) because he did not want to be a
helper of hangmen, Herzen wrote: “If there is to be any shooting, the ones
to be shot should be the generals who give orders to fire upon unarmed
people.”  When fifty peasants were massacred in Bezdna, and their leader,
Anton Petrov, was executed (April 12, 1861), Herzen wrote in
Kolokol: 


   “If only my words could reach you, toiler and sufferer
   of the land of Russia!... How well I would teach you to despise your
   spiritual shepherds, placed over you by the St. Petersburg Synod and a
   German tsar.... You hate the landlord, you hate the official, you fear
   them, and rightly so; but you still believe in the tsar and the bishop
   ... do not believe them. The tsar is with them, and they are his men. It is
   him you now see—you, the father of a youth murdered in Bezdna, and you,
   the son of a father murdered in Penza.... Your shepherds are as ignorant as
   you, and as poor.... Such was another Anthony (not Bishop Anthony, but
   Anton of Bezdna) who suffered for you in Kazan.... The dead bodies of your
   martyrs will not per form forty-eight miracles, and praying to them will
   not cure a tooth ache; but their living memory may produce one
   miracle—your emancipation.”  


This shows how infamously and vilely Herzen is being slandered by our
liberals entrenched in the slavish “legal” press, who magnify Herzen’s
weak points and say nothing about his strong points. It was not Herzen’s
fault but his misfortune that he could not see the revolutionary people in
Russia itself in the 1840s. When in the sixties he came to see the
revolutionary people, he sided fearlessly with the revolutionary democracy
against liberalism. He fought for a

    

victory of the people over tsarism, not for a deal between the liberal
bourgeoisie and the landlords’ tsar. He raised aloft the banner of
revolution.  

In commemorating Herzen, we clearly see the three generations, the
three classes, that were active in the Russian revolution. At first it was
nobles and landlords, the Decembrists and Herzen. These revolutionaries
formed but a narrow group. They were very far removed from the people. But
their effort was not in vain. The Decembrists awakened Herzen. Herzen began
the work of revolutionary agitation.  

This work was taken up, extended, strengthened, and tempered by the
revolutionary raznochintsi—from Chernyshevsky to the heroes of Narodnaya

Volya.[13] The range of fighters widened, their contact with the people
became closer. “The young helmsmen of the gathering storm” is what Herzen
called them. But it was not yet the storm itself.  

The storm is the movement of the masses themselves. The proletariat,
the only class that is thoroughly revolutionary, rose at the head of the
masses and for the first time aroused millions of peasants to open
revolutionary struggle. The first onslaught in this storm took place in
1905. The next is beginning to develop under our very eyes.  

In commemorating Herzen, the proletariat is learning from his example
to appreciate the great importance of revolutionary theory. It is learning
that selfless devotion to the revolution and revolutionary propaganda among
the people are not wasted even if long decades divide the sowing from the
harvest. It is learning to ascertain the role of the various classes in the
Russian and in the international revolution. Enriched by these lessons, the
proletariat will fight its way to a free alliance with the socialist
workers of all lands, having crushed that loathsome monster, the tsarist
monarchy, against which Herzen was the first to raise the great banner of
struggle by addressing his free Russian word to the masses.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Biron, E. I. (1690–1772)—all-powerful favourite of the
Empress Anna Ivanovna. He came from the petty nobility of Courland and was
not a Russian subject. But while holding no official position, he exerted
great influence on the domestic and partly the foreign policy of Russia. He
established a terroristic regime and followed a policy of Germanising the
state apparatus. He took advantage of his position to rob the Treasury,
take bribes and engage in speculative deals. After the death of the Empress
he became Regent for a while. He was overthrown in November 1740 as the
result of a coup d’état.  

Arakcheyev, A. A. (1769-1834)—One of the most reactionary
representatives of the tsarist autocracy, Minister of War in the reign of
Alexander I. A man distinguished by brutality and cruelty, he exerted
tremendous influence on Russia’s home and foreign

   

policies. His name is associated with a long period of reaction and police
tyranny, brutal militarism, spying, bribery, corruption and soulless, petty
formalism, comprising what became known as the “Arakcheyev regime”.





[2]
Manilov—a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls. A
sentimental, amiable landowner, Manilov personifies pipe-dreaming and empty
talk.





[3]
The men of December 14 were Russian revolutionary noblemen who
fought against serfdom and the autocracy. They revolted on December 14,
1825.





[4]
Lenin is quoting from Alexander Herzen’s Ends and Beginnings.




[5]
The passage is taken from Herzen’s letters “To an Old Comrade” (the
fourth and second letters).





[6]
The village commune in Russia was the communal form of peasant
use of the land, characterised by compulsory crop rotation, and undivided
woods and pastures. Its principal features were collective liability
(compulsory collective responsibility of the peasants for timely and full
payments, and the fulfilment of all kinds of services for the benefit of
the state and the landlords), the periodical redistribution of the land,
with no right to refuse the allotment given, and prohibition of its
purchase and sale.  

The land fords and the tsarist government used the village commune to
intensify feudal oppression and to squeeze land redemption payments and
exactions from the people.





[7]
The “peasant Reform” of 1861 abolished serfdom in
Russia. As a result, the landlords were able to cut off for themselves over
one-fifth, or even two-fifths, of the peasants’ land. They retained
possession of the best parts of the peasants’ allotments (the “cut-off
lands”, woods, meadows, watering places, grazing grounds, and so on),
without which the peasants could not engage in independent farming. The
redemption payments imposed on the peasants for their allotments were
nothing short of plunder by the landlords and the tsarist government. To
pay off their debts by instalments to the tsarist government, the peasants
were granted credit for forty-nine years at 6 per cent interest. Arrears on
redemption payments grew from year to year. The former landlord peasants
alone paid the government 1,900 million rubles by way of compensation,
while the market price of the land transferred to the peasants did not
exceed 544 million rubles. The peasants had in effect to pay hundreds of
millions of rubles for their land, which led to the ruin of the peasant
households.  

Lenin described the “peasant Reform” of 1861 as the first act of mass
violence against the peasantry for the benefit of rising capitalism in
agriculture, as a “clearing of estates” for capitalism by the landlords.





[8]
All-Russia Peasant Union—a revolutionary-democratic
organisation founded in 1905. Its first and second congresses, herd in
Moscow in August and November 1905, drew up its programme and tactics. The
Union demanded political freedom and the immediate convening of a
constituent assembly. It favoured the tactic of boycotting the First
Duma. Its agrarian programme included the demand for abolishing private
landownership and transferring the monastery, church, crown and state lands
to the peasants without compensation. Its policy was half-hearted and
vacillating. While insisting on the abolition of the landed estates, the
Union was agreeable to partial compensation for the landlords.  

The Peasant Union was persecuted by the police ever since it came into
being. It fell to pieces early in 1907.





[9]
Kolokol (The Bell)—a political periodical,
published under the motto of Vivos voco! (I call on the living!)
by A. I. Herzen and N. P. Ogaryov at the Free Russian Printing Works
established by Herzen. The periodical was published in London from July 1,
1857 to April 1865 and in Geneva from May 1865 to July 1867. It was a
monthly, but occasionally it was brought out twice a month. In all 245
issues appeared.  

In 1868 Kolokol was published in French (15 issues appeared),
with an occasional supplement in Russian. It had a circulation of 2,500
copies and it was disseminated throughout Russia. It exposed the tyranny of
the autocracy, the plunder and embezzlement practised by the civil
servants, and the ruthless exploitation of the peasants by the
landlords. It issued revolutionary appeals and helped to rouse the people
to the struggle against the tsarist government and the ruling classes.


Kolokol was the leading organ of the revolutionary uncensored
press and the forerunner of the working-class press in Russia. It played an
important role in the development of the general-democratic and
revolutionary movement, in the struggle against the autocracy and against
serfdom.





[10]
Polyarnaya Zvezda (The Pole Star)—a
literary-political symposium. Its first three issues were published by
A. I. Herzen, and the subsequent ones by Herzen and Ogaryov, at the Free
Russian Printing Works in London from 1855 to 1862. The last issue appeared
in Geneva in 1868. Altogether eight issues appeared.





[11]
The raznochintsy (literally, men of various social-estates)
were educated members of Russian society drawn from the small towns folk,
the clergy, the merchants and the peasantry, as distinct from those drawn
from the nobility.





[12]
Turgenev, I. S. (1818-1883)—a famous Russian writer who did
much for the development of the Russian literary language. His writings
reflected the typical contradictions of Russian society. While protesting
ardently against serfdom, he put forward mode rate liberal demands. Lenin
said that “Turgenev ... was drawn towards

   

a moderate monarchist and nobleman’s constitution, ... was repelled by the
muzhik democracy of Dobrolyubov and Chernyshevsky”





[13]
Narodnaya Volya (People’s Will)—an illegal
organisation of the revolutionary-minded intelligentsia, the Narodniks,
founded In 1879 to combat the tsarist regime. It was active until the
second half of the 1880s.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Landownership in European Russia









Lenin: Landownership in European Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Landownership in European Russia




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 3, May 6, 1912.

      Signed: R. Silin.

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 32-35.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The famine that has effected thirty million peasants has
again revived the question of the condition of the peasantry in Russia. In
discussing this question people usually over look the main point, namely,
the interrelation between the existence of large landed estates, primarily
in the hands of the nobility, and the condition of the peasantry. It is to
this main point that we wish to draw the attention of the reader.  

In 1907, the Ministry of the Interior published a volume of
Statistics of Landownership in 1905. From these official data,
which can under no circumstances be suspected of partiality for the
peasants, we can obtain a fairly accurate idea of one of the main causes of
the famines.  

The government statistics put the amount of land in the fifty gubernias
of European Russia at 395 million dessiatines. But this figure does not
represent the real state of affairs, since it includes more than 100
million dessiatines of state land in the far north, in the Archangel,
Olonets and Vologda gubernias. Most of this land is unsuitable for farming,
being the tundra and forests of the far north. Reference to this land is
usually made for the sole purpose of obscuring the actual
distribution of the cultivable land.  

If we deduct this land, we obtain a total of 280 million dessiatines
(in round figures) of usable land. Out of this total 101 million
dessiatines are listed as privately owned, and 139 million dessiatines as
allotment land. It is necessary to distinguish between the land in the
possession of the big landlords and that owned by small peasants.  

As regards the large estates, government statistics provide the
following data: 
    

    

Privately-Owned Land in European Russia


Size of estates
Number of estates
Total land  (dessiatines)
Average per estate (dessia- tines)




Over 500 to 2,000 dessiatines . . .    
21,748
20,590,708
947


Over 2,000 to 10,000 dessiatines . . . 
5,386
20,602,109
3,825


Over 10,000 dessiatines . . .          
699
20,798,504
29,754


Total 
27,833
61,991,321
2,227




These figures are incomplete, because they do not include the lands
belonging to the crown, to big commercial companies, etc. Nevertheless,
these figures give us an idea of the main feature of Russian
landlordism. Seven hundred landlords own 21 million
dessiatines, i.e., nearly thirty thousand dessiatines each.  

Less than 28 thousand landlords own 62 million dessiatines of land,
i.e., an average of 2,200 dessiatines per estate. To this should
be added the crown lands—their total is estimated to exceed five
million dessiatines—and more than three and a half million
dessiatines belonging to 272 “commercial, industrial, factory and other”
companies. The latter are undoubtedly big estates, most of them in Perm
Gubernia, where nine such companies own nearly one and a half
million dessiatines of land (the exact figure is 1,448,902).  

Consequently, the total land area in the hands of the biggest owners is
certainly not less, and most likely more, than 70 million
dessiatines. The number of such big landlords is less than 30
thousand.  

Now take the land owned by the peasants. According to government
statistics, the peasants with the smallest allotments had the following
amounts of land: 


Allotment Land


Size of allotments
Number of households
Total land (dessiatines) 
Average per household (dessiatines)




Less than 5 dessiatines . . . 
2,857,650
9,030,333
3.1


5 to 8 dessiatines . . .      
3,317,601
21,706,550
6.5


8 to 15 ” . . .              
3,932,485
42,182,923
10.7


Total . . . .        
10,107,736
72,919,806
7.0



 

Consequently, ten million peasant families, out of a total of
about 13 million, own 73 million dessiatines of land. The average
per household is seven dessiatines. To this should be added the
small privately-owned estates. The number of owners of farms of less than
10 dessiatines each is placed at 409,864, and they own a total of 1,625,226
dessiatines of land, i.e., less than four dessiatines per house
hold. Consequently, we have a total of approximately ten and a half
million peasant families with 75 million dessiatines of land.


Now we can place side by side these principal figures, which are very
often forgotten or misrepresented in arguments about the peasant problem:


Large landed estates—30 thousand owners, 70 million
dessiatines of land.  

Small peasant farms—ten and a half million owners, 75
million dessiatines of land.  

To be sure, these are the gross figures. For a more detailed study of
the condition of the peasants and the role of the big estates, it is
necessary to take the figures for the various regions or districts,
sometimes even for the individual gubernias. But the economists of the
government, the liberal and even, to a certain extent, the Narodnik camps
very often obscure the essence of the land problem by referring to
individual regions or to particular aspects of the problem. To get at the
root of the land problem and of the condition of the peasants, we
must not lose sight of the main figures cited above; we must not allow the
main point to be obscured by particulars.  

In our next

       article,[1]

we shall cite instances of this kind of obscuring. For the present, we will
make the first fundamental summary.  

The land in European Russia is so distributed that the big landlords,
those owning more than 500 dessiatines each, hold 70 million dessiatines,
and the number of such landlords is less than 30 thousand.  

On the other hand, the vast majority of the peasants, namely, ten and a
half million families out of 13 million peasant families, own 75 million
dessiatines of land.  
 

The average large landed estate is 2,200 dessiatines. The
average size of a small peasant farm is seven dessiatines.  

If the land of the thirty thousand big landlords were transferred to
ten million peasant households, the land held by these households would be
nearly doubled.  

In our next article, we shall discuss the economic relations between
the landlords and the peasants resulting from this distribution of the
land.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 73–77 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Trudoviks and the Worker Democrats









Lenin: The Trudoviks and the Worker Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Trudoviks and the Worker Democrats




Published:
Pravda Nos. 13 and 14, May 8 and 9, 1912.

      Signed: P.P..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 36-43.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Fourth Duma election campaign has brought about some
little revival of activity and has increased the interest in political
issues. The broad movement stirred up by the events in the Lena gold-fields
has lent importance to this revival and made this interest particularly
urgent. More than ever, it is now appropriate to discuss the question of
the attitude of the Trudoviks, i.e., of the peasant democrats, to the
worker democrats.  

In an article entitled “The Trudovik Group and the Workers’ Party”
(Zaprosy Zhizni No. 17), Mr. V. Vodovozov, answering my
articles—“Liberalism and

     Democracy”[1]

—in

Zvezda,[2] sets forth the Trudovik view on this question. The
controversy bears on the very essence of two political trends which express
the interests of nine-tenths of Russia’s population. It is
therefore the duty of every democrat to pay the closest attention to the
subject of the controversy.  
I

The standpoint of the working-class democracy is the class
struggle. The wage-workers constitute a definite class in modern
society. The position of this class is radically different from that of the
class of small proprietors, the peasants. That is why their association in
one party is out of the question.  

The aim of the workers is to abolish wage slavery by eliminating the
rule of the bourgeoisie. The peasants’ aim lies in democratic demands that
could abolish serfdom, with all

    

its social roots and in all its manifestations, but which could not even
slightly affect the rule of the bourgeoisie.  

In Russia today, the tasks which the workers and the peasants have in
common are drawing the working-class democracy and the peasant democracy
closer together. While necessarily following different paths, the two
democracies can, and for the purpose of achieving success should, act
jointly against all that is contrary to democracy. Unless there is such
joint or common action, unless the peasant democrats get rid of the
tutelage of the liberals (Cadets), any serious democratic reforms in Russia
will be out of the question.  

Those are the views of the working-class democrats, the Marxists, which
I have developed in the two articles entitled “Liberalism and Democracy”.


The Trudoviks, whose views are expounded by Mr. Vodovozov, want to be a
party standing “above classes”. They are convinced that one party “could
fully take care of the interests of three classes of society”: the
peasantry, the working class and the “working intelligentsia”.  

I said that this “conviction” contradicted

(1) all the facts of economic science,

(2) the entire experience of countries which went through epochs similar to
the present epoch in Russia, and

(3) Russia’s experience during a particularly important and crucial period
of her history, the year 1905. I derided the truly Cadet claim to
“embrace” different classes, and recalled the fact that the Cadets
describe the Maklakovs as “working intelligentsia”.  

Mr. Vodovozov, without citing these arguments of mine fully and
coherently, seeks to disprove them by disjointed statements. In reply to
the first argument, for instance, he says: “The peasantry is a mass of
people living by their own labour; its interests are the interests of
labour, and therefore it represents one contingent of the great army of
labour, Just as the workers represent another contingent of that army.


This is not Marxist, but bourgeois economic science: the phrase about
the interests of labour here obscures the fundamental difference between
the position of the small proprietor and that of the wage-worker. The
worker owns no means of production and sells himself, his hands, his
labour-
    

power. The peasant does own means of production—implements,
livestock, and his own or rented land—and sells the products of
his farming, being a small proprietor, a small entrepreneur, a petty
bourgeois.  

Even today in Russia peasants hire no less than two million
agricultural wage-labourers to work on their farms. And if all the landed
estates were transferred, without compensation, to the peasants, the latter
would employ a much greater number of labourers.  

Such a transfer of the land to the peasants is a common interest of the
entire peasantry, of all wage-workers, of all democrats, because
landlordism is the foundation of the landlords’ political power of the type
with which Purishkevich, followed by Markov the Second and other “men of
the Third Duma”—nationalists, Octobrists, etc.—have made Russia so
very familiar.  

This shows that the common aim now before the peasants and the workers
has absolutely nothing of socialism, despite the opinion of ignorant
reactionaries, and sometimes of liberals. That aim is purely
democratic. Its achievement would mean the achievement of freedom for
Russia, but it would not at all mean the abolition of wage slavery.  

If we want to put the joint action of different classes on a sound
basis, and if we want to ensure the real and durable success of such
action, we must be clear as to the points on which the interests of these
classes converge and those on which they diverge. All delusions and
“misconceptions” on this score, and any obscuring of the matter with
meaningless phrases are bound to have the most ruinous effect, are bound to
undermine success.  
II


   “Agricultural work is different from work in a
   factory; but then the work of a factory worker is different from that of
   a shop-assistant, yet Zvezda assiduously tries to prove to the
   shop-assistants that they belong to the same class as the workers, and
   that therefore they must regard Social-Democrats as their
   representatives....”  


That is how Mr. Vodovozov tries to disprove the arguments regarding the
profound class distinction between small proprietors and wage-workers! In
this case too, Mr. Vodovozov’s

    

arguments are permeated with the usual spirit of bourgeois political
economy. The small proprietor who is a farmer belongs to the same
class as the manufacturer, or the small proprietor who is an
artisan, and as the small proprietor who is a shopkeeper; there is no class
distinction between them, they are distinguished only by their
occupations. The wage-worker in agriculture belongs to the same
class as the wage-worker in a factory or in a commercial establishment.


These are all elementary truths in terms of Marxism. And Mr. Vodovozov
is mistaken if he thinks that by describing “my” Marxism as “extremely
oversimplified” he can conceal the essence of the matter, namely,
that the Trudoviks are constantly slipping from Marxist to bourgeois
political economy.  

Mr. Vodovozov slips into the same error, and along the same lines,
when, in dealing with my reference to the pro found class distinction
between small proprietors and wage-workers as proved by the experience of
all countries and by that of Russia, he tries to refute me by pointing out
that sometimes one class is represented by several parties, and vice
versa. In Europe the workers sometimes follow the liberals, the anarchists,
the clericals, etc. The landlords are sometimes divided among several
parties.  

What do these facts prove? Only that, in addition to class
distinctions, there are other distinctions, such as religious, national,
etc., that affect the formation of parties.  

That is true, but what has it got to do with our controversy?
Does Mr. Vodovozov point to the existence in Russia of specific historical
conditions—religious, national and other wise—that add
themselves in the present instance to the class distinctions?


Mr. Vodovozov did not, and could not, point to any such conditions at
all. Our controversy turned entirely on whether it is possible to have in
Russia a party “standing above classes”, one “serving the interests of
three classes”. (Incidentally, it is ridiculous to call the “working
intelligentsia” a class.)  

Theory gives a clear answer to this question: it is impossible! An
equally clear answer is provided by the experience of 1905, when
all the class, group, national, and other distinctions

    

stood out in hold relief in the most open and most massive actions at a
highly important turning-point in Russian history. The Marxist theory was
confirmed by the experience of 1905, which showed that a single
party of peasants and workers is impossible in Russia.  

All three Dumas have shown the same thing.  

Why refer, then, to the fact that in various countries of Europe there
have been instances of one class divided into several parties or of several
classes united under the leader ship of a single party? This reference is
quite beside the point. By this reference Mr. Vodovozov is merely
deviating—and trying to divert the reader—from the point at issue.


If the Russian democracy is to attain success, it is very important for
it to know its own strength, to take a sober view of the state of affairs,
and to realise clearly which classes it can count upon. It would
be exceedingly harmful for it to cherish illusions, to cover up class
distinctions with empty phrases, or to dismiss them with good wishes.  

We must plainly recognise the profound class distinction between the
peasants and the workers of Russia, a distinction which cannot be
eliminated within the framework of capitalist society, within the framework
of domination by the market. We must plainly recognise the points on which
their interests coincide at present. We must unite each of these
classes, cement its forces, develop its political consciousness and define
the common task of both.  

A “radical” (to use Mr. Vodovozov’s term, although I do not think it
a fortunate one) peasant party is useful and indispensable.  

All attempts to found a party standing “above classes”, to unite the
peasants and the workers in one party, to represent a non-existent
“working intelligentsia” as a class by itself, are extremely harmful and
ruinous to the cause of Russian freedom, since such attempts can bring
nothing but disillusionment, a waste of strength, and confusion in
people’s minds.  

While fully sympathising with the formation of a consistently
democratic peasant party, we are obliged to combat the above-mentioned
attempts. The workers must also combat the influence of the
liberals upon the democratic peasantry.  
    

III

Concerning the attitude of the liberals towards the
bourgeois democracy, and of the Cadets towards the Trudoviks, the
conference of the latter said nothing clear and

definite.[3] The Trudoviks do not seem to realise that it was the
dependence of the democratic peasantry upon the liberals that was one of
the principal causes of the failure of the emancipation movement in
1905–06, and that this movement cannot be successful so long as
wide and leading sections of the peasantry are unaware of the difference
between democracy and liberalism, and do not free themselves from the
tutelage and domination of the liberals.  

Mr. Vodovozov touched upon this question of cardinal importance in an
extremely cursory and unsatisfactory manner. He says that “the Cadet Party
serves primarily the interests of the urban population”. This is not
true. This definition of the class roots and political role of the Cadet
Party is utterly worthless.  

The Cadet Party is the party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. The
social basis of this party (as well as of the “Progressists”) is the
economically more progressive (as compared with the Octobrists) sections of
the bourgeoisie, but above all the bourgeois intelligentsia. However, a
section of the urban and rural petty bourgeoisie still follows the Cadets
only by tradition (i.e., by mere habit, blind repetition of what was done
yesterday), and because they are simply deceived by the liberals.  

By calling themselves democrats, the Cadets are deceiving themselves
and the people. Actually the Cadets are counter-revolutionary liberals.


This has been fully proved by the entire history of Russia,
particularly in the twentieth century, and above all in 1905–06. And the
publication

Vekhi[4] demonstrated it, exposed it, particularly
clearly and completely. Nor can any “reservations” of the Cadet diplomats
in regard to Vekhi alter this fact.  

The first phase of the liberation movement in Russia, the first decade
of the twentieth century, revealed that the mass of the population, while
gravitating towards democracy, is not sufficiently class-conscious,
cannot distinguish
    

between liberalism and democracy, and submits to the leadership of the
liberals. So long and insofar as there is no change in this respect, all
talk of democratic reform in Russia is pointless. It would be just idle
talk.  

How does Mr. Vodovozov counter these premises, on which I based my
article?  “In the present conditions,” he writes, “the Trudoviks
consider it extremely tactless [!!] to say too much about the
counter-revolutionary nature of the Cadets....”  

Well, well! What has “tact” got to do with it? And why “too much”?
If it is true that the Cadets are counter-revolutionary liberals, this
truth must be told. Whether we should say a lot or only a little about the
counter-revolutionary Rights and the counter-revolutionary liberals is not
a serious question at all. Whenever a publicist speaks of the
Rights, and whenever he speaks of the liberals, he must tell the truth. The
Trudoviks told the truth about the Rights. We praise them for this. As
regards the liberals, the Trudoviks themselves began to speak of
them, but they did not speak the whole truth!  

That is the only thing for which we reproach the Trudoviks.  

“Too much” or too little—that is quite beside the point. Let the
Trudoviks devote a thousand lines to the Rights and five lines to the
liberals—We shall have no objections to that. That is not the reason for
our objections to the Trudoviks. What we objected to is that in those
“five lines” (you must blame yourself, Mr. Vodovozov, for bringing into
the controversy your unfortunate expression “too much”!) the truth about
the liberals was not told.  

Mr. Vodovozov avoided answering the real question: are the Cadets
counter-revolutionary or not?  

It is a big mistake on the part of the Trudoviks to evade this
question, for that implies in fact that a section of the democrats
and a section of the former Marxists are dependent on the
liberals.  

This question is inexorably posed by the entire history of the first
decade of the twentieth century.  

In Russia today, new democratic elements are growing up
everywhere, among the most diverse sections of the population. That is a
fact. As they grow these democratic elements

    

must be educated in the spirit of consistent democracy. Such
education will be impossible unless we explain the true nature of the
liberals, who have at their disposal hundreds of press organs and a hundred
seats in the Duma, thus constantly exerting an influence along
falsely democratic lines upon an incomparably greater number of
people than we can reach with our propaganda.  

The democrats must rally their forces. We shall always praise the
Trudoviks for their democratic speeches about the Rights. But theirs will
be an inconsistent democracy if, when they speak of the liberals,
they do so in liberal fashion, instead of using a language worthy
of democrats.  

It is not two, but three camps that are contending in the elections. Do
not lump the second camp (the liberals) with the third camp (the
democrats), Trudovik gentlemen. Do not obscure the distinction between
them—the liberals are doing “too much” as it is towards that
objectionable end, 

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 569–77.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Zvezda (The Star)—a Bolshevik legal newspaper
published in St. Petersburg from December 16 (29), 1910, to April 22
(May 5), 1912, at first once a week, from January 1912 twice weekly, and
from March onwards three times a week. Among its contributors were
N. N. Baturin, K. S. Yeremeyev, M. S. Olminsky and N. G. Poletayev, as well
as Maxim Gorky. The pro-Party Mensheviks (Plekhanovites) were associated
with Zvezda until the autumn of 1911. Ideologically the newspaper
was led (from abroad) by Lenin, who contributed about 30 articles to
it. Thanks to his guidance, it was a militant Bolshevik organ upholding the
programme and tactics of the illegal Party. It had an extensive section for
workers’ correspondence, and kept in constant close touch with the
workers. The circulation of some issues was between 50,000 and 60,000
copies.  

The authorities were constantly taking repressive measures against
Zvezda; they confiscated 30 and fined 8 out of a total of 69
issues. Zvezda prepared the way for the publication of the
Bolshevik daily, Pravda; it was closed down by the government on
the day the first issue of Pravda appeared.





[3]
The Trudovik conference met in St. Petersburg in
March 1912. It dealt chiefly with the Fourth Duma election campaign. Lenin
assessed its decisions in his article “Liberalism and Democracy”





[4]
Vekhi (Landmarks)—a Cadet symposium published in
Moscow in the spring of 1909. It contained articles by N. Berdayev,
S. Bulgakov, P. Struve, M. Herschensohn and other spokesmen of the
counter-revolutionary liberal bourgeoisie. In their articles on the Russian
intelligentsia the Vekhi writers calumniated the
revolutionary-democratic traditions of the foremost representatives of the
Russian people, including V. G. Belinsky and N. G. Chernyshevsky. They
smeared the revolutionary movement of 1905 and thanked the tasrist
government for having with “its bayonets and jails” saved the bourgeoisie
“from the fury of the people”. Vekhi called on the
intelligentsia to serve the autocracy. Lenin compared its programme both in
philosophy and in political writing with the programme of the Black-Hundred
newspaper, Moskovskiye Vedomosti. He called the collection
“an encyclopaedia of Liberal renegacy” and “a sheer torrent of
reactionary mud turned upon the democratic movement”










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Political Parties in Russia









Lenin: Political Parties in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Political Parties in Russia




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 5, May 10, 1912.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 44-55.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Duma elections are compelling all the parties to
intensify their agitation and rally their forces, so that they may return
the greatest possible number of deputies of “their own” party.  

In Russia, as in all other countries, the election campaign is attended
by the most brazen self-advertisement. All the bourgeois parties, that is,
those which uphold the economic privileges of the capitalists, are
advertising themselves in the same way as individual capitalists advertise
their goods. Look at the commercial advertisements in any news paper—you
will see that the capitalists think up the most “striking”, bombastic and
fashionable names for their merchandise, which they praise in the most
unrestrained manner, stopping at no lie or invention whatever.  

The general public—at any rate in the big cities and trade
centres—has long since become used to commercial advertisement and knows
its worth. Unfortunately, political advertisement misleads an incomparably
greater number of people; it is much harder to expose and its deception
much more lasting. The names of some parties, both in Europe and in Russia,
are chosen with a direct eye to advertisement, and their “programmes” are
quite often written for the sole purpose of hoodwinking the public. The
greater the degree of political liberty in a capitalist country and the
more democracy there is, i.e., the greater the power of the people and of
their representatives, the more shameless, in many cases, is the
self-advertisement of parties.  

That being so, how is one to see what is what in the fight between the
various parties? Does not this fight, with its fraud and advertising,
indicate that representative institutions, parliaments, assemblies of
people’s representatives,

    

are in general useless and even harmful, as rabid reactionaries, the
enemies of parliamentarism make out? No. In the absence of representative
institutions there is much more deception, political lying and
fraudulent trickery of all kinds, and the people have much fewer means of
exposing the deception and finding out the truth.  

To see what is what in the fight between the parties, one must not take
words at their face value but must study the actual history of the parties,
must study not so much what they say about themselves as their
deeds, the way in which they go about solving various political
problems, and their behaviour in matters affecting the vital
interests of the various classes of society—landlords, capitalists,
peasants, workers, etc.  

The greater the degree of political liberty in a country and the more
stable and democratic its representative institutions, the easier it is for
the mass of the people to find its bearings in the fight between the
parties and to learn politics, i.e., to expose the deception and
find out the truth.  

The division of any society into different political parties is
revealed most clearly of all in times of profound crises shaking the whole
country. For at such times governments are compelled to seek support among
the various classes of society; all phrase-mongering, all that is petty and
extraneous, is brushed aside by the gravity of the struggle; the parties
strain every nerve and appeal to the masses, and the masses,
guided by their unerring instinct and enlightened by the experience of an
open struggle, follow the parties that represent the interests of a
particular class.  

The epochs of such crises always determine the party alignment of the
social forces of the country concerned for many years or even decades
ahead. In Germany, for instance, such crises were the wars of 1866 and

1870[1]; in Russia, the events of 1905. We cannot understand the essence
of our political parties, nor gain a clear idea as to which
classes a particular party in Russia represents, unless we go back
to the events of that year.  

Let us begin our brief survey of the political parties in Russia with
the parties of the extreme Right.  

On the extreme right flank, we find the Union of the Russian People.

 

The programme of this party is set forth as follows in Russkoye
Znamya, the Union’s newspaper published by A. I. Dubrovin: 


   “The Union of the Russian People, which on June 3, 19O7,
   was accorded the honour of being called upon from the height of the Tsar’s
   throne to be its reliable bulwark, and to serve as an example of law and
   order to all and in everything, proclaims that the will of the Tsar can
   only be exercised:

   (1) if the Tsar’s autocratic power, which is indissolubly and vitally bound
   up with the Russian Orthodox Church, canonically established, manifests
   itself in full measure;

   (5) if the Russian nationality is dominant not
   only in the inner gubernias, but also in the border regions;

   (3) if there is a Duma, composed exclusively of Russians, as the main
   assistant of the monarch in his work for building up the state;

   (4) if the principles of the Union of the Russian People with regard to the
   Jews are fully observed; and

   (5) if all officials who are opposed to the Tsar’s autocratic power are
   removed from government service.”  


We have faithfully copied this solemn declaration of the
Rights, on the one hand, so that the reader may be directly
acquainted with the original and, on the other, because the fundamental
motives stated in it are valid for all the parties of the majority in the
Third Duma, i.e., for the nationalists and the Octobrists as well. This
will be seen from what we say further on.  

The programme of the Union of the Russian People in effect repeats the
old slogan of the days of serfdom, that is, Orthodoxy, Autocracy,
Nationhood. In regard to the question on which the Union is generally set
apart from other kindred parties—namely, recognition or rejection of
“constitutional” principles in the Russian political system—it is
particularly important to note that the Union is by no means
opposed to representative institutions in general. It is evident from the
programme quoted above that the Union favours a Duma that will play the
part of “assistant 

Moreover, the specific feature of the Russian Constitution—if we may
call it that—is expressed by the Dubrovinite correctly, i.e., in keeping
with the actual state of affairs. It is this stand that is taken by both
the nationalists and the Octobrists in their practical policies. The
controversy between these parties over the “Constitution” is largely a
fight over words. The Rights are not opposed to a Duma; they only stress
with particular zeal that it must be an

    

“assistant”, without specifying its powers in any way. The nationalists
and the Octobrists, for their part, do not insist on any clearly specified
powers of the Duma, let alone on real guarantees of its powers. The
Octobrist “constitutionalists” fully agree with the “opponents of
Constitution” on the basis of the June Third Constitution.  

The programme of the Black Hundreds is straightforward, clear and
outspoken on the point of persecuting non-Russians in general and the Jews
in particular. As always, they bring out more rudely, brazenly and
incitingly what the other government parties more or less “bashfully” or
diplomatically keep to themselves.  

In reality, both the nationalists and the Octobrists have a hand in the
persecution of non-Russians, as is well known to anyone who is at all
familiar with the activity of the Third Duma or with such press organs as
Novoye Vremya, Svet, Golos

Moskvy[2] and the like.  

The question is: What is the social basis of the party of the Rights?
What class does it represent? What class does it serve?  

That party’s reversion to the slogans of serfdom, its up holding of all
that is outdated, of all that is medieval in Russian life, its complete
satisfaction with the June Third Constitution—the landlords’
Constitution—and its defence of the privileges of the nobility and
officialdom all provide a clear answer to our question. The Rights are the
party of the semi-feudal landlords, of the Council of the United

Nobility.[3] Not for nothing did that Council play such a prominent,
indeed a leading, role in the dispersal of the Second Duma, the change of
the electoral law and the coup d’état of June 3.[4] 

To give an idea of the economic strength of this class in Russia, it is
sufficient to cite the following basic fact, proved by the data of the
government statistics of landownership in 1905, published by the
Ministry of the Interior.  

Less than 30,000 landlords in European Russia own 70,000,000
dessiatines of land; the same amount of land is owned by
10,000,000 peasant households with the smallest allotments. This makes an
average of about 2,300 dessiatines per big landlord, and, in the case of
the poor peasants, an average of 7 dessiatines per family, per household.

 

It is quite natural and inevitable that the peasant cannot live on such
an “allotment” but can only die a slow death. The recurrent famines which
affect millions, such as this year’s famine, continue to dislocate peasant
farming in Russia following each crop failure. The peasants are compelled
to rent land from the landlords, paying for it by various forms of
labour service. To pay for the use of the land, the peasant works
for the landlord with his horse and his implements. This is nothing short
of corvée, except that it is not officially called serfdom. With
2,300 dessiatines of land at their disposal, most of the landlords can run
their estates only by keeping the peasants in bondage, by resorting to
labour service, that is, the corvée system. They cultivate only part
of these huge estates with the help of wage-labourers.  

Further, that same class of the landed nobility supplies the state with
the overwhelming majority of all higher and middle-ranking civil
servants. The privileges of officialdom in Russia represent another side of
the privileges and agrarian power of the landed nobility. It is therefore
natural that the Council of the United Nobility and the “Right” parties
should uphold the policy of adhering to the old feudal traditions not by
accident, but because it is inevitable, and not because of the “ill will”
of individuals, but under the pressure of the interests of a
tremendously powerful class. The old ruling class, the survivals
of landlordism, who remain the ruling class as in the past, has created for
itself an appropriate party—the Union of the Russian People or the
“Rights” in the Duma and in the Council of

State.[5] 

But, since there exist representative institutions, and since the
masses have already come out openly in the political arena, as
they did in our country in 1905, each party must necessarily appeal to the
people, within certain limits. Now what can the Right parties appeal to the
people about?  

Of course, they cannot speak plainly in defence of the interests of the
landlords. What they do speak of is preserving the old traditions in
general, and they spare no efforts to foment distrust towards non-Russians,
particularly towards the Jews, to incite the utterly ignorant, the utterly
benighted, to pogroms, to “Yid”-baiting. They seek to conceal the
privileges of the nobility, the bureaucrats and the landlords with talk
about the “oppression” of Russians by non-Russians.  
 

Such is the party of the “Rights”. One of its members, Purishkevich,
the most prominent spokesman of the Rights in the Third Duma, has worked a
good deal, and successfully, to show the people what the
Rights want, how they act, and whom they
serve. Purishkevich is a gifted agitator.  

Next to the “Rights”, who have forty-six seats in the Third Duma, are
the “nationalists” with ninety-one seats. There is hardly a
shade of difference between them and the Rights. In fact, these are not two
parties, but one party which has effected a division of “labour” in
persecuting non-Russians, “Cadets” (liberals), democrats, etc. One lot
acts more crudely, the other more subtly, but both are doing the
same thing. Indeed, it is to the government’s advantage to have
the “extreme” Rights—who are capable of any sort of scandal, riot, the
murder of people like Herzenstein, Yollos, Karavayev—standing somewhat
apart, as if they were “criticising” the government from the
right.... The distinction between the Rights and the nationalists cannot be
of any serious importance.  

The Octobrists in the Third Duma are 131 strong, including, of
course, the “Right Octobrists”. Essentially there is nothing in the
present policy of the Octobrists to distinguish them from the Rights,
except that the Octobrist Party serves not only the landlords, but also the
big capitalists, the conservative merchants, and the bourgeoisie, which was
so terrified by the awakening of the workers, and then also of the
peasants, to independent political life, that it made a volte-face
towards defence of the old order. There are capitalists in Russia—quite a
few, indeed—who treat the workers not a bit better than the landlords
treated the serfs of old; they look on workers and clerks as their menials,
as servants. Nobody is better fitted to defend this old order than the
Right parties, the nationalists and the Octobrists. There are also
capitalists who at the

Zemstvo[6] and municipal congresses in 1904 and 1905 demanded a
“constitution”, but are quite willing to make peace on the basis of the
June Third Constitution to oppose the workers.  

The Octobrist Party is the chief counter-revolutionary party of the
landlords and the capitalists. It is the leading party in the Third Duma:
the 131 Octobrists with the 137 Rights and nationalists constitute a solid
majority in the Third Duma.  
 

The electoral law of June 3, 1907, guaranteed the landlords
and the big capitalists a majority: the landlords and electors of the first
urban curia (i.e., the big capitalist curia) have a majority in
all the gubernia assemblies electing deputies to the Duma. In
twenty-eight gubernias the land owners even by themselves have a majority
in the election assemblies. The entire policy of the June Third Government
has been carried out with the aid of the Octobrist Party, and this party
bears the responsibility for all the sins and crimes committed by the Third
Duma.  

In words, in their programme, the Octobrists uphold a “constitution”,
and even liberties! In reality, this party supported all the measures taken
against the workers (the Insurance Bill, for example—recall the conduct
of the Chairman of the Duma Committee on Labour, Baron
Tiesenhausen!), against the peasants, and against any mitigation of tyranny
and lack of rights. The Octobrists are just as much a government party as
the nationalists. This situation is not in the least altered by the fact
that from time to time—particularly on the eve of elections!—the
Octobrists deliver “opposition” speeches. In all countries that have
parliaments, the bourgeois parties have long been known to indulge in this
playing at opposition—a harmless game as far as they are
concerned, because no government takes it seriously, and a game which
occasionally proves useful as a means of “soothing” the voter by a show
of opposition.  

However, the greatest expert, the virtuoso, at the game of opposition
is the chief opposition party in the Third Duma—the Cadets,
Constitutional-“Democrats”, the party of “people’s
freedom”.  

The very name of this party is part of the game, for in fact it is
not at all a democratic party, and by no means a people’s
party; it is a party, not of freedom, but of half-freedom, if not of
quarter-freedom.  

In fact, it is the party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, which
dreads the popular movement far more than reaction.  

The democrat has faith in the people, in the movement of the masses,
and he helps this movement in every way, although he fairly often has (as
have the bourgeois democrats, the Trudoviks) a wrong notion about the
significance

    

of this movement within the framework of the capitalist system. The
democrat sincerely strives to put an end to all medievalism.  

The liberal is afraid of the movement of the masses; he tries to check
it, and deliberately defends certain institutions of
medievalism—in fact, the most important of them—as a bulwark against
the masses, particularly the workers. What the liberals want is by no means
to destroy all the foundations of the power of the Purishkeviches, but to
share power with them. The democratic petty bourgeois (hence also the
peasant and the Trudovik) says: everything for the people and through the
people. He sincerely strives to uproot all the foundations of
Purishkevichism, though he does not understand the significance of the
wage-workers’ struggle against capital. The real aim of the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, on the other hand, is to share power with
Purishkevich and rule with him over the workers and over
the small proprietors.  

In the First and the Second Dumas, the Cadets had a majority or
occupied a leading position. They used it for a sense less and inglorious
game: when facing the Right, they played at loyalty and ability to
serve as ministers (as if to say that they could solve all the
contradictions by peaceful means, without spoiling the muzhik or offending
Purishkevich); when facing the Left, they played at democracy. The result
of this game was that in the end the Cadets got a kick from the right. And
on the left they earned the just title of betrayers of people’s freedom. In
both the First and the Second Dumas, they fought all the time not only
against the working-class democrats, but against the Trudoviks as well. We
need only recall the fact that the Cadets defeated the plan for
local land committees proposed by the Trudoviks (in the First Duma), a plan
based on the elementary requirements of democracy, on the ABC of
democracy. The Cadets thus upheld the supremacy of the landlords
and the bureaucrats over the peasants in the land committees!


In the Third Duma the Cadets have been playing at a “responsible
opposition”, an opposition in the possessive

case.[7] As such, they voted time and again for the government budgets
(“democrats”!), explained to the Octobrists that there was nothing
dangerous or harmful in their plan of

    

“compulsory” redemption payments (compulsory for the peasants)—remember
Berezovsky the First; they sent Karaulov to deliver “pious” speeches from
the rostrum, renounced the movement of the masses, appealed to the “upper
strata”, and silenced the lower strata (the Cadets’ fight
against the workers’ deputies over workers’ insurance), and so on
and so forth.  

The Cadets are the party of counter-revolutionary liberalism. By their
claim to the role of a “responsible opposition”, i.e., a recognised,
lawful opposition permitted to compete with the Octobrists, an
opposition not to, but of the June Third regime—the Cadets have committed
suicide as “democrats”. The shameless Vekhi propaganda of the
Cadet ideologists—Struve, Izgoyev and Co., smothered with kisses by
Rozanov and Anthony of Volhynia—and the role of a “responsible
opposition” in the Third Duma, are two sides of the same medal. The
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, tolerated by the Purishkeviches, wants to
seat itself by the side of Purishkevich.  

The bloc of the Cadets and the “Progressists” at the present time,
for the elections to the Fourth Duma, has provided additional proof of the
profoundly counter-revolutionary nature of the Cadets. The Progressists do
not at all claim to be democrats, they do not say a word about fighting the
entire June Third regime, and are far from so much as dreaming of
“universal suffrage”. They are moderate liberals who do not make a secret
of their kinship with the Octobrists. The alliance of the Cadets and the
Progressists should open the eyes of even the blindest “yes-men of the
Cadets” to the true nature of that party.  

The democratic bourgeoisie of Russia is represented by the
Narodniks of all shades, from the most Left Socialist-Revolutionaries to
the Popular Socialists and Trudoviks. They all readily mouth “socialist”
phrases, but it would be impermissible for a class-conscious worker to be
deceived as to the real meaning of those phrases. Actually there is not
a grain of socialism in the “right to land”, “equalised division”
of the land, or “socialisation of the land”. This should be clear to
anyone who knows that the abolition of private landownership, and a new,
even the “fairest” possible, division of the land, far from affecting
commodity production and the

    

power of the market, of money and capital, leads to their expansion.  

However, the phrases about “the labour principle” and “Narodnik
socialism” express the democrat’s deep faith in the possibility and
indispensability of destroying all medievalism in landownership
and, at the same time, in the political system as well (just as they
express his sincere desire to achieve this). Whereas the liberals (the
Cadets) seek to share political power and political privileges with the
Purishkeviches, the Narodniks are democrats precisely because they are
striving, and are bound to strive at present, to abolish all the
privileges of landed property and all privileges in politics.


The position of the great bulk of the Russian peasants is such that
they cannot even dream, of any compromise with the Purishkeviches
(something quite possible, attainable and near and dear to the
liberal). That is why the democracy of the petty bourgeoisie will have
roots among the masses in Russia for a fairly long time to come, whereas
Stolypin’s agrarian

reform,[8] an expression of the Purishkeviches’ bourgeois policy against
the muzhik, has so far produced nothing durable but—the starvation of
thirty million peasants!  

The millions of starving small proprietors cannot help striving for a
different kind of agrarian reform, a democratic one, which cannot
break out of the bounds of capitalism or abolish wage slavery, but
can sweep medievalism from the face of the Russian land.


The Trudoviks are an extremely weak group in the Third Duma, but they
represent the masses. The vacillation of the Trudoviks between the
Cadets and the worker democrats is an inevitable result of the class
position of the small proprietors, and the fact that it is particularly
difficult to rally, organise and enlighten them accounts for the extremely
indeterminate and amorphous character of the Trudoviks as a party. That is
why the Trudoviks, with the aid of the stupid “otzovism” of the Left
Narodniks, present the sad picture of a liquidated party.  

The difference between the Trudoviks and our own near Marxist
liquidators is that the former are liquidators out of weakness, while the
latter are liquidators out of malice.

    

The task of the working-class democracy is to help the weak petty-bourgeois
democrats, wrest them from the liberals, and rally the democratic camp
against the counter-revolutionary Cadets and not merely against the Rights.


Concerning the working-class democracy, which had its group in the
Third Duma, we can say but little here.  

Everywhere in Europe, the parties of the working class took shape by
casting off the influence of general democratic ideology and learning to
distinguish between the struggle of the wage-workers against capital and
the struggle against feudalism, which they did, incidentally, in order to
strength en the latter struggle, to rid it of all wavering and timidity. In
Russia, the working-class democracy completely dissociated itself both from
liberalism and from bourgeois democracy (Trudovikism), to the great
advantage of the democratic cause in general.  

The liquidationist trend among the working-class democrats (Nasha
Zarya and Zhivoye Dyelo) shares the weakness of Trudoviks,
glorifies amorphousness, longs for the status of a “tolerated”
opposition, rejects the hegemony of the workers, confines itself to
words about an “open” organisation (while inveighing against the
organisation that is not open), and advocates a liberal labour policy. The
connection between this trend and the disintegration and decadence of the
period of counter-revolution is evident, and its falling-away from the
working-class democracy is becoming obvious.  

The class-conscious workers, who are not liquidating any thing and are
rallying their ranks in opposition to liberal influences, organising as a
class and developing all forms of trade union and other unity, are coming
forward both as representatives of wage-labour against capital and
as representatives of consistent democracy against the entire old regime in
Russia and against any concessions to it.  


By way of illustration, we give below the figures relating to the
strength of the various parties in the Third Duma, which we borrow from the
official Duma Handbook for 1912.  
    

    

Parties In the Third Duma


Landlords


Rights . . .                      
46


Nationalists . . .                
74


Independent nationalists . . .    
17


Right Octobrists . . .            
11


Octobrists . . .                  
120


Total government parties . . . 
268


The Bourgeoisie


Progressists . . . 
36


Cadets . . . 
52


Polish Kolo[9] . . . 
11


Polish-Lithuanian-Byelorussian group . . . 
7


Moslem group . . .  
9


Total liberals  . . . 
115


Bourgeois Democrats


Trudovik group . . .  
14


Working-Class Democrats


Social-Democrats . . .  
13


Total democrats . . .  
27


[unaffiliated]


Unaffiliated . . . 
27


Grand total . . . 
437




Thus there have been two possible majorities in the Third Duma:

(1) the Rights and the Octobrists=268 out of 437;

(2) the Octobrists and the liberals=120+115=235 out of 437. Both majorities
are counter-revolutionary.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the unification of Germany which the German ruling
classes undertook “from above” by means of the policy of “blood and
iron”, and through diplomatic intrigue and wars. The Prusso-Austrian war
of 1866 resulted in the formation of the North-German Union, and the
Franco-Prussian war of 1870–71 led to the formation of the German Reich.





[2]
Svet (Light)—a bourgeois nationalist daily
published in St. Petersburg from 1882 to 1917.  

Golos Moskvy (Voice of Moscow)—a daily newspaper
published by the Octobrist Party, a counter-revolutionary party of the big
industrial bourgeoisie and big landlords. It was published in Moscow from
1906 to 1915.





[3]
Council of the United Nobility—a counter-revolutionary
organisation of the feudal landlords founded in May 1906 at the first
congress of the delegates of the gubernia societies of the nobility. It
functioned till October 1917. Its main objective was to defend the
autocratic system, the big landed estates and the privileges of the
nobility. The Council was headed by Count A. A. Bobrinsky. Prince
N. F. Kasatkin-Rostovsky, Count D. A. Olsufyev, V. M. Purishkevich and
others. Lenin called it the “council of united serf-owners”.  

The Council virtually became a semi-governmental agency which dictated
to the government legislation designed to uphold the interests of the
feudal landlords. A considerable number of its members were also members of
the Council of State and the leading centres of Black-Hundred
organisations.





[4]
This refers to the tsar’s Manifesto of June 3 (16), 1907, dissolving
the Second Duma and amending the electoral law. The new law greatly
increased the proportion of members of the Duma representing the landlords
and the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie, while reducing several times
over the proportion of peasant and workers’ deputies, already small. It was
a gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17 (30), 1905, and the
Fundamental Law of 1906, under which all legislation introduced by the
government was subject to approval by the Duma.  

The new Regulations entitled the landowner curia to elect one elector
for every 230 persons, the first urban curia one for every 1,000 and the
second urban curia for 15,000, the peasant curia for every 60,000 and the
worker curia for 125,000. The landlords and the bourgeoisie elected 65
per cent of the electors, the peasants 22 per cent (instead of the former
42) and the workers 2 per cent (as against 4 per cent in the past). The law
disfranchised the indigenous population of Asian Russia and the Turkic
peoples of the Astrakhan and Stavropol gubernias, and cut by half the
proportion of representatives of the population of Poland and the
Caucasus. All those who did not speak Russian were disfranchised throughout
Russia. The Third Duma elected under this law was

   

convened on November 1 (14), 1907. It was Black-Hundred and Octobrist in
composition.  

The June Third coup d’état ushered in the period of Stolypin
reaction.





[5]
The Council of State—one of the supreme organs of state
government in pre-revolutionary Russia, established in 1810—according to
a draft submitted by M. M. Speransky—as an advisory legislative body
whose members were appointed by the tsar. Under the law of February 20
(March 5), 1906, it was reorganised and authorised to approve or reject
Bills after they had been discussed in the Duma. Nevertheless, the tsar
retained the right to amend fundamental legislation and issue certain laws
of special importance.  

From 1906, one half of the Council members were elected representatives
of the nobility, clergy and big bourgeoisie and the other half were
dignitaries appointed by the tsar. Hence it was an extremely reactionary
assembly which rejected even moderate Bills passed by the Duma.





[6]
Zemstvos—so-called local self-government bodies dominated by
the nobility. They were set up in the central gubernias of tsarist Russia
in 1864. Their jurisdiction was restricted to purely local economic and
welfare matters—hospital and road building, statistics, insurance,
etc. They functioned under the control of the provincial governors and the
Minister of the Interior, who could suspend decisions that did not suit the
government.





[7]
Lenin is referring to the speech which P. N. Milyukov made at the
luncheon given by the Lord Mayor of the City of London in June 1909, during
the visit of a delegation from the Third Duma and the Council of
State. Milyukov reaffirmed the Cadets’ allegiance to the tsarist autocracy
and stressed that as long as Russia had a Duma “the Russian opposition
would remain an opposition of, not to, His Majesty”.





[8]
Lenin is referring to the decree of November 9 (22), 1906, on
“Additions to Certain Regulations of the Existing Law on Peasant Land
Ownership and Land Tenure”, drafted by Stolypin and named the law of
June 14, 1910, upon its enactment by the Duma and the Council of State. On
November 15 (28), 1906, another decree was issued—“On the Granting of
Loans by the Peasant Land Bank on the Security of Allotment Lands”. The
two decrees granted the peasants the right to take over their allotments as
personal property and the right to withdraw from the village commune and
settle on otrubs or khutors. Khutor and
otrub peasants could obtain subsidies through the Peasant Bank to
buy land. The Stolypin agrarian legislation aimed at making the kulaks the
new social mainstay of the autocracy in the countryside while preserving
the landed estates and forcibly destroying the village communes.  

The Stolypin agrarian policy speeded up the capitalist evolution of
agriculture in the extremely painful “Prussian” way, with the feudal
landlords retaining their power, property and privileges.

   

It intensified the forcible expropriation of the bulk of the peasantry and
accelerated the development of the peasant bourgeoisie, whom it enabled to
buy up the allotments of the peasant poor at a nominal price.  

Lenin described the Stolypin agrarian legislation of 1906 (and the law
enacted on June 14 [27], 1910) as the second step, after the 1861 Reform,
towards transforming the feudal autocracy into a bourgeois monarchy.  

Although the government vigorously advocated the withdrawal of peasants
from the village communes, only some 2,500,000 peas ant households withdrew
from them in European Russia over nine years (1907–15). The right to
secede from the village commune was used above all by the rural
bourgeoisie, which was thus enabled to strengthen its farms. Some of the
poor peasants who wanted to sell their allotments and end their connection
with the countryside seceded too. The small peasants, crushed by want,
remained poverty-stricken and backward.  

The Stolypin agrarian policy did not remove the main contradiction
between the peasantry as a whole and the landlord class. Moreover, it
brought further ruin to the mass of the peasantry and aggravated the class
antagonisms between the kulaks and the peasant poor.


a



[9]
The Polish Kolo (Circle) was an association of Polish deputies
to the Duma. In the First and Second Dumas, its leading core was composed
of National-Democrats, members of the reactionary, nationalist party of the
Polish landlords and bourgeoisie. The Kolo backed the Octobrists
on all major tactical issues.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Questionnaire on the Organisations of Big Capital









Lenin: A Questionnaire on the Organisations of Big Capital







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Questionnaire on the Organisations of Big Capital[1]




Published:
Prosveshcheniye No. 5–7, April-June 1912.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in Prosveshcheniye.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 56-72.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Industry and Economics Department of the Imperial Russian Technical
Society sent out a questionnaire on “public organisations of the
commercial and industrial class in Russian”, or rather on the
organisations of big capital. The results of the questionnaire are now set forth
in

Mr. Gushka’s[2] book Representative Organisations of the
Commercial and Industrial Class in Russia (St. Petersburg, 1912). Both the
material contained in the book and the conclusions, which the author indicates
in fairly definite terms, deserve serious attention.

I

As a matter of fact, the questionnaire of the Technical Society dealt with the
“representative” organisations of capitalists, which make up
approximately 80 per cent of all the organisations. About 15 per cent of the
organisations are cartels, trusts and syndicates, nearly 5 per cent are
associations of employers, and the rest are stock-exchange committees, boards of
congresses, etc. These latter organisations are very fond of calling themselves
“representative” Their job is to influence government bodies.


The employers’ associations, in Mr. Gushka’s opinion, conduct a
“direct” class struggle against the wage-workers, whereas the
representative organisations conduct an “indirect” class
struggle—a “struggle against other classes by exerting pressure on
the state power and on public opinion”.


That terminology is wrong, of course. It at once betrays one of the principal
defects which Mr. Gushka has in common with most representatives of
“professorial”, bourgeois political

    

economy. On the face of it, he accepts the concept of the class struggle; on
the face of it, the class struggle serves as the basis of his
investigation. Actually, however, that concept is narrowed down
and distorted. Indeed, from what Mr. Gushka says, the struggle of the
capitalists against the wage-workers within the framework of a given political
system is a “direct” class struggle, while the struggle far the
political system itself is an “indirect” class
struggle! What about the struggle for “state power”
itself—where does that belong?


But we shall have occasion to deal with this fundamental fault of Mr. Gushka’s
“world outlook” in the proper place. The value of his work is not in
its theory, but in the summary of facts it offers. The data on organisations of
the preponderant type are at any rate of considerable interest.


The total number of “representative” organisations of big capital in
Russia in 1910 is given as 143. Seventy-one of them were stock-exchange
societies with their committees. Then came 14 committees of commerce and
manufacture, three merchants’ boards, 51 organisations in the “combined”
group (congresses and their boards, advisory bureaus, etc.), and four
organisations of an indefinite type. The questionnaire was answered by only
62 organisations, or less than half the total. Out of the 51 organisations
in the “combined” group, which is the most interesting, 22 answered the
questionnaire.  

The data on the time the organisations were founded are
characteristic. Of the 32 stock-exchange committees which answered the
questionnaire, 9 were founded in the last century, from 1800 to 1900, 5 in
the four years 1901-04, 9 in the two years of
revolution—1905-06—and 9 in the period 1907 to 1910.  


   “Here,” writes Mr. Gushka, “we clearly see the effect of the impetus
   which the social movement of the stormy year 1905 lent the process of the
   self-organisation of the representatives of capital.”  


Of the 22 organisations in the combined group, only 7 came into being
during the period 1870 to 1900, 2 from 1901 to 1904, 8 in the two years
of revolution—1905-06—and 5 from 1907 to 1910. All those
“congress boards” of representatives of industry in general—mine
owners, oil industrialists, and so on and so forth—are a product chiefly
of the period of revolution and counter-revolution.  
 

The organisations are divided according to industries as follows. The
group of stock-exchange committees is predominantly mixed: these committees
usually unite all the branches of industry and commerce of the area
concerned. In the group of committees of commerce and manufacture, the
textile industry is in the forefront. In the main, combined, group, almost
half the organisations represent not commerce, but industry—mining and
metallurgy, to be specific.  

“It is this group of industries (mining and metallurgy) that
constitutes the economic basis of the organisations of Russia’s modern
industrial ‘guard’,” writes Mr. Gushka, who has a slight weakness for
using a “lofty style” in speaking of the subject of his investigation.


Only in the case of a part of the organisations was it possible to
establish the total turnover or output for the entire branch of commerce or
industry to which the organisation in question belongs. The total thus
obtained is 1,570 million rubles, of which 1,319 million rubles belongs to
members of the organisations. Consequently, the organised represent 84
per cent of the total. The turnover of 3,134 members of organisations
amounted to 1,121 million rubles, or an average of 358,000 rubles per
member. The number of workers employed by 685 members of organisations is
approximately 219,000 (on p. 111, the author mistakenly puts it at
319,000), or an average of more than 300 workers per member.  

It is clear that we are dealing here with organisations of big
capital, or even the biggest capital, to be exact. Mr. Gushka is
fully aware of this, for he points out, for instance, that only the really
big and biggest merchants and industrialists are admitted as members into
the stock-exchange committees and the committees of commerce and
manufacture, and that the congresses of representatives of industry and
commerce are made up of the “biggest” capitalist undertakings.  

That is why the author is wrong when he refers, in the title of his
book, to organisations “of the commercial and industrial class in
Russia” That is incorrect. Here again the author narrows down the concept
of class. Actually, Mr. Gushka is dealing with a stratum, not with
a class. Sure enough, the stratum of the biggest capitalists economically
dominates all the other strata, which it unquestionably

    

overwhelms by the size of its turnover. This is beyond doubt. Nevertheless,
it is a stratum, and not a class. Thus, for instance, there is a vast
distance between the political role of the representative organisations of
this stratum and its political domination, as well as between its political
domination and that of the commercial and industrial class.  

In this connection, we must point out the following argument of
Mr. Gushka’s: “We in Russia,” he writes, “are accustomed to applying a
very large scale to define what is called a big or a small undertaking, in
view of the well known extraordinary concentration of capital in our
country, surpassing the concentration of capital even in Germany....”


The comparison with Germany is wrong. For instance, in the Urals there
are very few small undertakings, if any, in the mining and metallurgical
industries for reasons of an entirely distinctive nature—due to the
absence of full freedom for industry and to the survivals of
medievalism. And our official (or, what is the same thing, our Narodnik)
distinction between factory and “handicraft” industries—does it not
make our industrial statistics incomparable with the German statistics?
Does it not very often mislead the observer by speaking of “extraordinary
concentration” in Russia and obscuring the “extraordinarily”
scattered character of the countless small peasant undertakings?

II

It is interesting to note some of the data provided by the
questionnaire on the activity of the representative organisations of the
biggest capital. For instance, the author gives a summary of the
information about their budgets. The budgets of the 22 organisations in
the combined group show a total income of 3,950,000 rubles, and the total
income of all the organisations is 7.25 million rubles. “This annual
budget of our 56 organisations,” writes Mr. Gushka, “amounting to 7.25
million rubles, would probably be 50 or 100 per cent higher if the
financial reports of the other organisations, those not covered by our
questionnaire, were included.”  

However, more than a half of this budget, namely, 4.5 million rubles,
is spent on business and on charity. On

    

purely representational functions, the 56 organisations spend 2.7 million
rubles. “Most of the answers or financial reports put at the head of this
expenditure on representation the salaries of the personnel, then the
renting of premises. In 64.4 per cent of the organisations, the greatest
part of the expenditure goes for maintenance of personnel, and in 26.7
per cent of them it goes for premises.”  

These figures, in view of the turnover of 1,319 million rubles in the
capitalist associations covered by the investigation, show that the
expenditure is very modest, so that Mr. Gushka’s pompous conclusion that
the budget of expenditure is an “index of the financial might
[author’s italics] of the representative organisations of the commercial
and industrial bourgeoisie in Russia” again betrays his inordinate
fondness for big words.  

The author devotes Chapter IX of his hook to the “third element”,
i.e., the intelligentsia in the service of the capitalist associations. It
appears that 29 stock-exchange committees listed 77 representatives of the
third element as their employees; the 22 organisations in the combined
group listed 180 such employees. Most of the answers speak of 2 to 4
representatives of the third element per organisation. Since capitalist
associations often understate this kind of data, the author thinks it
probable that “the representative organisations of capital have in their
service, holding key posts, a host [!!] of intellectuals numbering at
least a thousand persons”—secretaries, accountants, statisticians,
legal advisers, etc.  

Really, it does not take much to set Mr. Gushka talking about a
“host”.  

The publishing activity of the capitalist associations is characterised
by the following figures. In addition to the answers to the questionnaire,
there accumulated a small library of 288 volumes—the proceedings of
congresses, reports, statutes and memoranda—which have never been on
sale.  

Nine organisations publish periodicals: Mining and Smelting, Oil,
Industry and Commerce, Bulletin of the Russian Association of Distillery
Owners, etc. The author gives the total number of issues of these
publications as 2,624 “volumes”, to which he adds 452 volumes of
“proceedings”,

    

annual reports, etc., as well as 333 volumes of non-periodical
publications. Mr. Gushka puts the total at 3,409 “volumes”, which he
describes as “impressive”. The total number of publications probably
amounts to 4,000–5,000 volumes.  


   “It may be said without exaggeration that a veritable treasure lies
   buried in that library, exclaims Mr. Gushka, “a wealth of material for the
   study of the anatomy and physiology, if we may say so, of the big
   bourgeoisie in Russia.... Unless we study this valuable material, we cannot
   form a proper idea of the balance of the dominant social forces in Russia,
   and more particularly of the social nature and role of Russian state power
   both before and after 1905.”  


Mr. Gushka makes very frequent excursions of this kind into the sphere
of the social nature and role of Russian state power. They merit special
consideration because of the importance of the question, and because it is
misrepresented by the author, who exaggerates things beyond measure and for
that very reason vows in passing that he speaks “without exaggeration”.

III


   “The centre of gravity of the activity of the
   organisations under survey,” writes Mr. Gushka, “as representative
   organisations, i.e., organisations devoted to representing the interests of
   the industrial and commercial class, is naturally in the sphere of
   formulating the position of the representatives of this class on
   various questions concerning its interests, and of defending this
   position by various means.”  


Undoubtedly, that is exactly where the “centre of gravity” lies. The
questionnaire allots much space to questions about the items discussed by
the organisations of the capitalists and to the petitions they filed. In
summarising the information obtained, the author singles out a long list of
what, in his opinion, are “questions of a general nature”. The
most important questions are grouped as follows:

(a) workers’ insurance, public holidays, etc.;

(b) income tax, taxes on enterprises, etc.;

(c) tariff policy;

(d) transport;

(e) joint-stock companies, credit, etc.;

(f) consulates abroad, statistics, the organisation of a mining department;

(g) participation of the merchant class in the Zemstvo institutions, in the
Council of State, in the preliminary discussion of government Bills, etc.

 

In this connection, Mr. Gushka draws the following conclusion:

“In any event, as may be gathered from the enumerated groups of questions
and petitions, our organisations have a very wide sphere of activity....”
On reading such a conclusion, one cannot help stopping to see whether by
any chance the word, not has been omitted. For it is obvious that
the sphere of activity indicated by the author is not wide at
all. But it is certainly not a slip of the pen we have here; the trouble
comes from the essential “pattern” of the author’s mentality. “It would
be difficult to name any more or less important field of the social and
political life of the country that is outside the sphere of activity of the
representative organisations of capital,” he maintains.  

Incredible, but true: Mr. Gushka in all seriousness presents us with
this flagrant untruth, which he repeats in a dozen different ways!  

“It would be difficult to name....” What about the electoral law? Or
the agrarian question? Is it possible that these are not “important fields
of the social and political life of the, country”?  

Mr. Gushka looks at “social and political life” from the narrow
peep-hole of a merchant’s standpoint. He cannot for the life of
him understand that his absolute statements testify to narrowness, and
certainly not to breadth. The questions raised by the merchants are narrow
because they concern only the merchants. The capitalists do
not rise to questions of general political
importance. “Admission of representatives of industry and commerce” into
local or central institutions of one sort or another is the limit of the
“courage” they show in their petitions. As to how these institutions are
to be organised in general, that is something they are
unable to think of. They accept the institutions which have taken
shape at someone else’s bidding, and beg for a place in them. They
slavishly accept the political basis created by some other class, and on
this basis “petition” for the interests of their social-estate,
their group,their stratum, unable even in this sphere to rise to a
broad under standing of the interests of the whole of their class.


Mr. Gushka, who glaringly distorts the facts, slips into a tone of
sheer praise. “The energetic and insistent pressure brought to bear upon
government bodies,” he writes. “Our

    

organisations” “perfectly [!!] understand this themselves,” ...  “The
organisations of big capital have developed into a regular lobby
which actually exerts perhaps a greater influence upon legislation than the
Duma, the more so”—the author tries to be witty—“as

Article 87[3] does not apply to the capitalist parliament, and the
organisations of capital have never been purposely dissolved for three
days.”...  

This witticism is an obvious indication of the boundless conceited
narrow-mindedness of the big-wigs of industry and of their eulogist,
Gushka. A minor detail, a mere trifle, has been overlooked: the Duma raises
questions concerning the entire state administration and all classes, being
an institution of the whole state, while the organisations of the merchant
big-wigs consider it courageous to raise questions concerning only
the merchants, only the rights of the merchants.  

Mr. Gushka goes to the length of quoting the statement, made by the Ufa
Stock-Exchange Committee in its report for 1905–06, that “the government
itself, by a series of fundamental measures to reform the stock-exchange
institutions, is selecting ... worthy assistants for itself”, and
he calls this statement “correct”, puts the last phrase in italics, and
speaks of “real and active co-operation with the government”.  

On reading such stuff one cannot help thinking of the German word
Lobhudelei—grovelling adulation, or adulatory grovelling. To
speak with a smug countenance—in 1905–06—of “fundamental measures to
reform—the stock-exchange institutions”! Why, this is the viewpoint of a
flunkey whom the master has permitted to “consult” with the cook about
arrangements for dinner, etc., calling the two of them his “worthy
assistants”.  

How close Mr. Gushka is to this point of view can be seen from that
subsection of Chapter XV dealing with the results of the petitions of the
organisations, which he has entitled “Losing Positions”. “It cannot be
denied,” we read there, “that there are several fields in which
the petitions and demands of the representatives of capital do come up
against government resistance.” Then follow examples in this sequence:

(1) state-owned forests—the state is itself engaged in the timber
industry;

(2) railway tariffs—the railways are run by the state itself;

(3) the question of representation in the Zemstvos; and

(4) the question of representation in the

    

Duma and in the Council of State. “In both cases,” says the author,
referring to the last two questions, “the effect of the close ties between
the bureaucracy and the other ruling class—the big landowners—makes
itself felt, of course.”  


   “But if we leave out the few above-mentioned
   questions,” continues the happy Mr. Gushka, “then it must be admitted
   that in all the other fields ... the data furnished by our questionnaire
   show the position of the commercial and industrial class to be a winning
   one.”  


Is this not a real gem? The losing position is the timber business,
railways, the Zemstvos and parliament. But “if we leave out the few
above-mentioned questions”, we shall have a winning position!  

And in the “conclusion” of his book, where he takes up the cudgels
against the “traditional prejudice” about the lowliness and lack of
rights of the commercial and industrial class, Mr. Gushka rises to what may
be called pathetic Lobhudelei: 


   “It is not as a lowly class lacking rights that the
   commercial and industrial bourgeoisie sits at the table of a Russian
   statehood, but as a welcome guest and collaborator, as a ‘worthy
   assistant’ of the state power, occupying a prominent place both by
   established custom and by law, by recorded right. Nor is it since
   yesterday that it has occupied this place.”  


This would fit perfectly into an official. speech delivered by a
Krestovnikov, an Avdakov, a Tiesenhausen or their like at a dinner given
by a Minister. It is this kind of speeches, written exactly in this kind of
language, that are familiar to every Russian. The only question that arises
is: how are we to describe a “scientist” who, while laying claim to a
“scientific” analysis of a serious questionnaire, introduces into his
writings the after-dinner speeches of servile merchants as “the conclusion
to be drawn from the questionnaire”?  


   “We have inherited from the ‘good old times’,”
   continues Mr. Gushka, “a view which has acquired the stability of a
   prejudice, namely, that capitalist Russia is characterised by the
   contradiction that the big bourgeoisie, while dominating
   economically, remains enslaved politically. The whole
   of the evidence supplied by our questionnaire deals a telling blow at
   this traditional notion.”  


It requires unbounded vulgarisation of Marxism, whose terminology
Mr. Gushka makes a show of using, to regard a questionnaire on the
organisations of capitalists as capable of supplying “material” about the
political enslavement of

    

the bourgeoisie by the autocracy and the landlords. The author hardly
touches on the material which supplies the real answer to this question,
nor could lie have touched on it so long as he kept within the limits of
the questionnaire.  

The questionnaire, which touches on one aspect of the life of our
bourgeoisie, confirms, in fact, that the latter is politically
enslaved. It shows that the bourgeoisie is making economic progress, that
certain particular rights of the bourgeoisie are being extended, that it is
becoming ever more organised as a class and is playing an increasing role
in political life. But the very fact that these changes are taking place
makes still more profound the contradiction between the retention
of 0.99 of the political power by the autocracy and the landlords, on the
one hand, and the growing economic might of the bourgeoisie, on the other.


Mr. Gushka, who makes a show of using Marxist terminology, actually
shares the standpoint of an ordinary social-liberal. It is one of Russia’s
specific features, or maladies if you will, that this liberalism is
embellished with Marxist phrases. Adopting the standpoint of liberalism,
Mr. Gushka came up against the question of the social nature of the state
power in Russia. But he did not appreciate, even approximately, the vast
scope and significance of this question.  

The class nature of the state power in Russia has under gone a serious
change since 1905. That change has been in a bourgeois direction. The Third
Duma, Vekhi liberalism, and a number of other signs are evidence
of a new “step in the transformation” of our old state power “into a
bourgeois monarchy”. But while taking one more step along this new path,
it remains the old power, and this only goes to increase the sum
total of political contradictions. Mr. Gushka, who came up against a
serious question, revealed his inability to deal with it.  
IV

In analysing the material of a rather special
questionnaire, Mr. Gushka touched on another highly important question of
principle, which is worth dwelling on specially. It is the question of
“The Role of 1905”, as the title of a subsection of Chapter XIII in
Mr. Gushka’s book reads.  
 

Question 41 of the questionnaire, referring to the number of meetings
of the executive body of each organisation during each of the past five
years, was intended to ascertain the extent to which the activities of the
organisations increased in 1905. The material provided by the answers to
the questionnaire “has, not”—to quote Mr. Gushka—“revealed any such
phenomenon in the life of our organisations”, that is, any appreciable
increase in activity.  

“And that is understandable,” Mr. Gushka comments.  

Well, how does he explain this phenomenon?  

The “employers’” associations, he argues, were bound to
have increased their activity in 1905, in view of the increased strike
movement.  


   “The organisations of a purely representative type,
   however,” continues Mr. Gushka, “were, to a certain extent, in an
   entirely different position: their chief contractor, the government, was on
   the defensive throughout 1905; it had very little faith in itself and in
   spired hardly any confidence in others. In that ‘crazy’ year, ‘when the
   authorities withdrew’, it seemed to all, including the industrialists
   (particularly at the end of the year), that the old ‘authorities’ would
   never come back.  

   “That is why the representative organisations of capital
   had no reason in those days for intensifying their activity as
   representative bodies in dealing with the government authorities.”  


This explanation won’t hold water. If the “authorities” had really
“withdrawn”, the withdrawal of the old political authorities would
inevitably have resulted in the new economic authorities increasing their
activity and becoming new political authorities. If the government was
mainly on the defensive, how could the “collaborator and worthy
assistant” of that government (as Mr. Gushka describes the commercial and
industrial bourgeoisie) help increasing its activity to defend
that government and itself? Our author has not at all thought out what he
was saying. He confines himself to a mere collection of words—the most
current and customary ones. Perhaps he feels that the question at issue is
an extremely important one on the answer to which depends, or with the
answer to which is closely linked, the answer to the more general question
of the political role of the bourgeoisie, and he shrank from tackling an
important question in earnest—fled from it, as it were.  
 

Reflect on the following statement of the author on the same
point—about the role of 1905: 


   “Neither did the organisations of capital feel inclined
   to meet often in order to formulate their attitude towards the social and
   political problems that preoccupied the whole country at the time. Pushed
   into the background by the sweeping tide of the popular movement, they
   preferred to bide their time, to wait for the results of the struggle
   seething around them. Towards the end, when the ‘authorities’ unmistakably
   revealed their inclination to ‘come back’, the organisations of the
   commercial and industrial class likewise began gradually to resume their
   representative activity in its usual form and degree of intensity.”  


“The organisations of capital” were “pushed into the back ground by
the sweeping tide of the popular movement”. Very well! Only, Mr. Gushka is
again giving no thought to what he is saying. Against whom was the sweeping
tide of the popular movement directed? Against the old regime. How then was
it possible for the “collaborator and worthy assistant” of that regime to
be pushed into the background? If it really were a collaborator
and worthy assistant, then the greater its economic strength, which was
independent of the old organisation of political power, the more vigorously
it should have pushed into the foreground.  

How was it possible for the “collaborator and worthy assistant” of
the old regime to find itself in a position where it “preferred to bide
its time”?  

Mr. Gushka set out to battle against the theory of the political
enslavement of the economically dominating bourgeoisie, and got into a
muddle the moment he tackled the job! Contrary to his view, the “theory”
which he promised to demolish is reinforced by the course of events in
1905.  

Both big commercial and industrial capital and the Russian bourgeois
liberals, far from “biding their time” in 1905, took up a very definite
counter-revolutionary position. The facts testifying to this are too well
known. But there is no doubt that, compared with the forces of absolutism
and the landlord class, the very big capital was to a certain extent
“pushed into the background”.  

But how could it happen that in a bourgeois revolution the peak of
“the sweeping tide of the popular movement” pushed the bourgeoisie into
the background more than any other class?  
 

It happened because only by completely distorting the concept of
“bourgeois revolution” can one arrive at the view that the latter
declines when the bourgeoisie recoils from it. It was bound to happen,
because the chief driving force of the bourgeois revolution in Russia is
the proletariat and the peasantry, with the bourgeoisie vacillating. Being
politically enslaved by the landlords and absolutism, the bourgeoisie, on
the other hand, takes a counter-revolutionary stand when the working-class
movement grows in intensity. Hence its vacillations and its retreat into
the “background”. It is both against and for the old order. It is willing
to help the old regime against the workers, but it is perfectly capable of
“establishing” itself, and even of strengthening and expanding its
domination without any landlords and without any remnants of the old
political regime. This is clearly shown by the experience of America and
other countries.  

It is easy to understand, therefore, why the peak of “the sweeping
tide of the popular movement” and the greatest weakening of the old regime
can cause the commercial and industrial bourgeoisie to retreat hurriedly
into the “background”. This bourgeoisie is precisely the class which can
be neutralised in the struggle between the new and the old, between
democracy and medievalism; for, while it feels more at home, at ease and
comfortable by the side of the old, this class can also exercise its rule
in the event of the most complete victory of the new.  
V

In speaking of the questionnaire of the Imperial Russian
Technical Society, we cannot pass over in silence an article by
Mr. A. Yermansky in Nos. 1–2 and 3 of the liquidationist Nasha
Zarya. Mr. Yermansky gives a most detailed account of Mr. Gushka’s
book, but not once does he indicate that he disagrees with him! As if a man
who considers himself a Marxist could identify himself with the wishy-washy
liberalism of a praiser of the commercial and industrial big-wigs!  

Mr. Yermansky goes even further than Mr. Gushka in the direction of
social-liberalism à la Brentano and

Sombart,[4] slightly touched up to look like Marxism.  
 

“The organisations of the representative type,” writes Mr. Yermansky,
“are organisations of class struggle in its full scope and on a national
(partly even international) scale. The material provided by the
questionnaire produces a picture of a practically boundless range of
questions discussed by the organisations. The activity of our organisations
extends to almost all problems of state importance, as was justly stated by
the Yekaterinoslav Stock-Exchange Committee.” That is how Mr. Yermansky
talks in a magazine that claims to be Marxist! This talk is blatantly false
from beginning to end. It substitutes the liberal concept of class
struggle for that of the class struggle in the Marxian sense. It proclaims
as being of national and state importance the very thing which lacks the
main feature of what concerns the whole nation and the
whole state: the organisation of state power and the entire sphere
of “state” administration, state policy, etc.  

See the lengths to which Mr. Yermansky goes in his misguided zeal. In
disputing the view that “the capitalist bourgeoisie in Russia” (he means
the big commercial and industrial bourgeoisie) is flabby, underdeveloped,
and so on, he seeks a “contemporary formula” that would express “the
actual position of the big bourgeoisie in Russia 

And what happens? It turns out that Mr. Yermansky sees this formula in
the words uttered by Avdakov in the Board of Mining during a debate (mark
this!) on the adoption of a new organisation 01 mining congresses with
an elected chairman. The practice (in Russia) has been such, said
Avdakov, “that so far no one has ever hampered us in anything”.  


   “That,” writes Mr. Yermansky, “is a formula which fits
   contemporary conditions to a T.”  


We should think so! As far as the organisation of mining congresses is
concerned, no one has hampered the dull-witted merchants who are
submissively bearing the yoke of the political privileges of the landlords!
Instead of ridiculing the bombastic

Kit Kitych[5] Avdakov, Mr. Yermansky strains every nerve in his zeal to
assure people that Avdakov is not a Kit Kitych, that he has given a
“contemporary formula” which expresses “the actual position of the big

    

bourgeoisie in Russia”! As for Kit Kitych Avdakov, he is the perfect
image of a portly butler who never dared even to think of becoming full
master in place of his lord and who is touched by the fact that
his lord permits him to confer in the servants’ hall with the chambermaid,
the cook, etc.  

The following tirade in Mr. Yermansky’s article shows that it is this
difference between the status of the butler and the master that he refuses
to understand: 


   “Here again,” he writes, “it will not be superfluous
   to make one comparison. Everybody remembers how emphatically and with how
   much publicity, so to speak, the aspirations of the Zemstvo members ‘to
   take part in the affairs of internal administration’ were described as
   ‘absurd dreams’. On the other hand, the St. Petersburg Stock-Exchange
   Committee, which declared, as early as the pre-constitution period, that it
   was necessary

   ‘to extend as far as possible the right of the stock-exchange societies
   [note this!] to take part in administrative affairs’, was fully justified
   in adding:

   ‘Such a right of the stock-exchange societies would not constitute any
   innovation, for the stock-exchange societies already enjoy it in part.’
   What was ‘an absurd dream’ in the case of others, was no dream, but
   reality, an element of a real constitution, in the case of the
   representatives of big capital.”  


“Was”, but not quite, Mr. Yermansky! Your “comparison” betrays your
inability or unwillingness to distinguish between the aspiration (of the
landlord class) to become full master itself and the aspiration
(of the village elder who has grown rich) to consult with the master’s
other servants. There is a world of difference between the two.


It is only natural that Mr. Yermansky should arrive at conclusions
entirely in the spirit of Larin. The representatives of big capital in
Russia, says Mr. Yermansky, “long ago won the position of a ruling class
in the full sense of the term”.  

This is false from beginning to end. Mr. Yermansky has forgotten
both the autocracy and the fact that power and revenues
are still in the hands of the feudal landlords. He is wrong in thinking
that “only in the late nineteenth and the early twentieth
century” did our autocracy “cease to be exclusively
feudal”. This “exclusiveness” no longer existed as far back as the epoch
of Alexander II, compared with the epoch of Nicholas I. But it is
absolutely impermissible to confuse a feudal regime which is shedding the
qualities

    

that make it exclusively feudal, and which is taking steps towards
a bourgeois monarchy, with “the complete domination of the representatives
of big capital” 
VI

The editors of Nasha Zarya, as usual, added a
little “reservation” to Mr. Yermansky’s article, saying that the author
“underestimates the importance which direct participation in the exercise
of political power has for it” (the big bourgeoisie).  

The method of making little reservations has firmly established itself
among the liquidators. In a series of articles, Yermansky expounds in great
detail views on the class struggle that are inspired by liberalism. What
the magazine preaches is liberalism. As for the “reminiscences of the
glorious days” of Marxism, they are squeezed into two lines of a footnote!
The readers of Nasha Zarya are being brought up in the spirit of
liberalism, which is substituted for Marxism, and the editors wash their
hands of it—by a little reservation, in just the same way as in the Cadet
Rech.[6] 

The point is not only that Mr. Yermansky “underestimates” a certain
aspect of the issue. The point is that his view on the class struggle is
wrong from beginning to end. The point is that he makes a fundamental
mistake in appraising the social organisation of the autocracy. We pointed
out long ago, and shall not cease to point out, that this question
cannot be evaded by ridiculing “the answers of 1908” (or 1912),
etc. This question cannot be evaded in any political writing that
is at all serious.  

The difference of opinion between Yermansky and Larin, on the one hand,
and the editors of Nasha Zarya, on the other, is a difference
between frank and, in their own way, honest liquidators and the diplomats
of liquidationism. We should have no illusions on this score.  

Larin wrote that the state power in our country has already become
bourgeois. Therefore the workers must organise, not in expectation of a
revolution (and not “for revolution”, he added), but for taking part in
the constitutional renovation of the country. Yermansky, who approaches the
question

    

from a different angle, repeats in substance Larin’s
first premise; but he only hints at the conclusions, without
stating them plainly.  

Martov “corrected” Larin in the same way as the editors of Nasha
Zarya are correcting Yermansky, saying that the state power is not
bourgeois as yet, and it will be “enough” for the workers to seize on the
contradiction between constitutionalism and absolutism.  

Thus the result is agreement between Martov (plus the editors of
Nasha Zarya) and Larin-Yermansky as regards the conclusions, which
is quite natural considering their agreement on the fundamental premises of
the liberal view on labour policy.  

We, however, still believe this view to be fundamentally wrong. The
point is not whether Yermansky “underestimates” or Martov
“overestimates” the “leftward trend” of the Guchkovs, Ryabushinskys and
Co. It is not whether Yermansky “underestimates” or Martov
“overestimates” the “importance which direct participation in the
exercise of political power has for the bourgeoisie”. The point
is that both of them not only “underestimate”, but simply do not
appreciate the importance which “direct participation in the
exercise of political power” has for the working class, and for
the bourgeois democracy that is following its lead and is free from the
present-day waverings of the liberals! Both of them have in mind only
one “political power” and forget about the other.  

Both of them are looking up to the top and do not see the lower
ranks. But if a dozen Ryabushinskys and a hundred Milyukovs are grumbling
and giving vent to liberal indignation, that means that tens of
millions of petty bourgeois and of “small folk” in all walks of life feel
that their condition is unbearable. And these millions, too, are a
potential source of “political power”. Only the rallying of such
democratic elements against the Rights and regardless of the vacillation of
the liberals can “solve” the problems with which history has confronted
Russia since the beginning of the twentieth century.  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The article “A Questionnaire on the Organisations of Big Capital”
appeared in Prosveshcheniye Nos. 5–7.  

Prosveshcheniye (Enlightenment) was a socio-political
and literary monthly published by the Bolsheviks legally in St. Petersburg
from December 1911 to June 1914. It was founded on directions from Lenin to
replace the Bolshevik periodical, Mysl (Moscow), closed down by
the authorities. Lenin, who was abroad, guided Prosveshcheniye by
editing articles for it and maintaining a regular correspondence with the
members of its Editorial Board. The periodical published “The Three
Sources and Three Component Paris of Marxism”, “Critical Remarks on the
National Question”, “The Right of Nations to Self-Determination”, and
other works by Lenin.  

The Editorial Board of Prosveshcheniye included
M. A. Savelyev, M. S. Olminsky and A. I. Yelizarova. The art and literature
section was edited by Maxim Gorky. The circulation reached 5,000 copies.


Prosveshcheniye was closed down by the authorities on the eve
of the First World War. In the autumn of 1917, however, it, resumed
publication, but only one (double) issue was brought out; it contained
Lenin’s works “Can the Bolsheviks Retain State Power?” and “Revision of
the Party Programme”.





[2]
Gushka, A. 0., and A. Yermansky, mentioned further on
in the article, were pen-names of 0. A. Kogan, a Menshevik liquidator.





[3]
Article 87 of the Fundamental State Laws authorised the
Council of Ministers during the Duma recesses to submit Bills directly to
the tsar for approval.





[4]
Brentano, Lujo (1844–1931)—a German bourgeois economist,
one of the main exponents of “professorial socialism”, who advocated
renunciation of the class struggle and held it possible to resolve the
social contradictions of capitalist society and reconcile the interests of
the workers and capitalists by organising reformist trade unions and
introducing factory legislation. On the agrarian question he upheld the
reactionary theory of the “stability” of small-scale agriculture and the
pseudo-scientific bourgeois “law of diminishing returns”. In the closing
years of his life he was an outspoken apologist of imperialism.  

Sombart, Werner (1863–1941)—a German vulgar bourgeois
economist, a prominent ideologist of German imperialism. One of the
theoreticians of “social-liberalism” in the early period of his activity,
he later became an open enemy of Marxism and described capitalism as a
harmonious economic system.





[5]
Kit Kitych, or Tit Titych, a character in Alexander
Ostrovsky’s play, Shouldering Another’s Troubles. He typifies an
uneducated, stupid and barbaric petty tyrant.





[6]
Rech (Speech)—a daily newspaper, the central organ
of the Cadet Party, published in St. Petersburg from February 1906. It was
closed down by the Military Revolutionary Committee under the Petrograd
Soviet on October 26 (November 8), 1917.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Essence of “The Agrarian Problem in Russia”









Lenin: The Essence of 'The Agrarian Problem in Russia'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Essence of “The Agrarian Problem in Russia”




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 6, May 22, 1912.

      Signed: R.S..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 73-77.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

An “agrarian problem”—to use this common and accepted
term—exists in-all capitalist countries. In Russia, however, there
exists, alongside the general capitalist agrarian problem,
another, “truly Russian” agrarian problem. As a brief indication
of the difference between the two agrarian problems, we may point out that
no civilised capitalist country has any widespread democratic movement of
small landowners for the transfer of big landed estates into their hands.


In Russia there is such a movement. Accordingly, in no
European country, except Russia, do the Marxists put forward or support the
demand for the transfer of the land to the small landowners. An inevitable
effect of tile agrarian problem in Russia is that all Marxists
recognise this demand, despite disagreements over the manner in
which tenure and disposal of the transferred land should be organised
(division, municipalisation, nationalisation).  

Why the difference between “Europe” and Russia? Is it due to the
distinctive character of Russia’s development, to the absence of capitalism
in Russia, or to the special hopelessness and irremediability of our
capitalism? That is what the Narodniks of various shades think. But this
view is radically wrong, and events disproved it long ago.  

The difference between “Europe” and Russia stems from Russia’s
extreme backwardness. In the West, the bourgeois agrarian system is fully
established, feudalism was swept away long ago, and its survivals are
negligible and play no serious role. The predominant type of social
relationship in Western agriculture is that between the
wage-labourer and the employer, the farmer or landowner. The small
cultivators occupy an intermediary position, some of them

    

passing into the class of those who hire themselves out, who sell their
labour-power (the numerous forms of the peasant’s so-called auxiliary work
or subsidiary earnings), while others pass into the class of those who hire
(the number of labourers hired by small cultivators is much greater than is
generally believed).  

Undoubtedly, a system of agriculture just as capitalist has already
become firmly established and is steadily developing in Russia. It is in
this direction that both landlord and peasant farming is developing. But
purely capitalist relations in our country are still overshadowed to a
tremendous extent by feudal relations. The distinctive
character of the Russian agrarian problem lies in the struggle which the
mass of the population, above all of the peasantry as a whole, are waging
against these relations. In the West this kind of “problem”
existed everywhere in olden days, but it was solved there long ago. In
Russia, its solution has been delayed—the problem was not solved by the
agrarian “Reform” of 1861, nor can it be solved under present
conditions by the Stolypin agrarian policy.  

In the article “Landownership in European Russia” (Nevskaya
Zvezda[3]

       No. 3),[1]

we cited the main data revealing the nature of the agrarian problem in
present-day Russia.  

About 70 million dessiatines of land owned by 30,000 of the biggest
landlords, and about as much owned by 10 million peasant households—such
is the main background of the picture. What are the economic relations to
which this picture testifies?  

The 30,000 big landlords represent chiefly the old landed nobility and
the old feudal economy. Of the 27,833 owners of estates exceeding 500
dessiatines each, 18,102, or nearly two-thirds, are members of the
nobility. The huge latifundia in their possession—each of these big
landlords owns an average of more then 2,000 dessiatines!—cannot be
cultivated with the implements, livestock and hired labour at the disposal
of the owners. That being so, the old corvée system is largely
inevitable, and this means small-scale cultivation, small-scale farming, on
the big latifundia, the cultivation

    

of the landlords’ land with the implements and livestock of the small
peasants.  

This corvée system is especially widespread, as we know, in the
central, traditionally Russian, gubernias of European Russia, in the
heart of our agriculture. So-called labour rent is nothing but a
direct continuation and survival of the corvée system. The farming
methods based on impossible terms of bondage, such as winter

hiring,[4] work for the cut-off

land,[5] “composite labour

service”,[6] and so on and so forth, are also part of the corvée
system. Under this system of farming, the peasant “allotment” is a means
of supplying the landlord with farm hands, and not only with farm
hands but also with implements and livestock, which, wretched though they
are, serve to cultivate the landlords’ land.  

Dire poverty of the mass of the peasantry, who are tied to their
allotments but cannot subsist on them, extremely primitive agricultural
techniques, and the extreme inadequacy of the home market for
industry—such are the results of this state of affairs. And the present
famine affecting 30 million peasants is the most striking proof that at
bottom, in substance, this state of affairs has remained unchanged to this
day. Only the serf-like downtroddenness, distress and helplessness of the
mass of small proprietors in bondage can lead to such frightful
mass starvation in an epoch of rapidly developing agricultural techniques,
which have already achieved a relatively high standard (on the best
capitalist farms).  

The fundamental contradiction leading to such terrible calamities,
which have been unknown to the peasants of Western Europe since the Middle
Ages, is the contradiction between capitalism, which is highly developed in
our industry and considerably developed in our agriculture, and the
system of landownership, which remains medieval, feudal. There is no
way out of this situation unless the old System of landownership is
radically broken up.  

Not only the landed property of the landlords, but that of the peasants
as well is based on feudal relations. In the case of the former, this is so
obvious as to arouse no doubts. We need only note that the abolition of the
feudal latifundia, say, of those exceeding 500 dessiatines, will not
undermine large-scale production in agriculture but will,

    

indeed, increase and develop it. For the feudal latifundia are bulwarks of
small-scale farming based on bondage, and not of large-scale
production. In most regions of Russia it is practically impossible or, at
all events, exceedingly difficult to run large farms taking up as
much as 500 or more dessiatines of land with the implements and livestock
of the owner and with wage-labour. A reduction in the size of such
estates is one of the conditions for small-scale farming on terms of
bondage going out of existence and for agriculture passing to large-scale
capitalist production.  

On the other hand, the allotment form of peasant land tenure in Russia
also retains medieval, feudal features. And it is not only a question of
the juridical form, which is now being changed, in sergeant-major fashion,
through the destruction of the village commune and the introduction of
private land ownership; it is also a question of the actual nature
of this ownership, which is unaffected by any break up of the commune.


The actual condition of the vast mass of peasants holding small and
dwarf “parcels” (=tiny plots of land), consisting mostly of several
narrow strips far removed from each other and distinguished by soil of the
poorest quality (due to the delimitation of the peasant land in 1861 under
the supervision of the feudal landlords, and due to the exhaustion of the
land), inevitably places them in a relation of bondage to the hereditary
owner of the latifundium, the old “master”.  

Just keep clearly in mind the following picture: as against 30,000
owners of latifundia of 2,000 dessiatines each, there are 10,000,000
peasant households with 7 dessiatines of land per “average” household. It
is obvious that no matter what destruction of the village commune and
creation of private landownership takes place, this will still not
be able to change the bondage, labour rent, corvée, feudal poverty,
and feudal forms of dependence, stemming from this state of affairs.  

The “agrarian problem” resulting from such a situation is the problem
of doing away with the survivals of serfdom, which have become an
intolerable obstacle to Russia’s capitalist development. The agrarian
problem in Russia is one of radically breaking up the old, medieval forms
of landownership,

    

both that of the landlords and that of the allotment peasants—a break-up
which has become absolutely indispensable in view of the extreme
backwardness of this landownership, in view of the extreme disharmony
between it and the whole system of the national economy, which has become
capitalist.  

It must be a radical break-up, because the disharmony is too great, the
old is too old, and “the disease too neglected”. In any event and in all
its forms, this break-up is bound to be bourgeois in content, since
Russia’s entire economic life is already bourgeois, and the system of
landownership is certain to become subordinate to it, to adapt itself to
the dictates of the market, to the pressure of capital, which is omnipotent
in our society today.  

But while the break-up cannot fail to be radical and bourgeois, there
is still this question to be answered: which of the two classes
directly concerned, the landlords or the peasants, will carry out this
change or direct it, determine its forms? Our next article, “A Comparison
of the Stolypin and the Narodnik Agrarian

    Programmes”,[2]

will deal with this “unsolved problem”.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 32–35 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 143–49 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[3]
Nevskaya Zvezda (The Neva Star)—a legal Bolshevik
newspaper published in St. Petersburg from February 26 (March 10) to
October 5 (18), 1912. Twenty-seven issues appeared. At first the newspaper
appeared simultaneously with Zvezda, which it was intended to
replace in the event of the latter’s closure or confiscation. After
April 22 (May 5), 1912, it was published instead of Zvezda, which
was closed down by the authorities. It published twenty articles by Lenin.





[4]
Winter hiring—the hiring of peasants for summer work,
practised by the landlords and kulaks during the winter, when the peasants
were badly in need of cash and compelled to accept shackling terms.





[5]
See Note 30.





[6]

“Composite labour service”—a form of labour service and of
peasant renting of landlord land on onerous terms in post-Reform
Russia. Under this system the peasants committed themselves—for money,

   

a loan for the winter, or for the land rented to them—to till with their
own implements and horses one dessiatine of the landlord’s spring crop, one
dessiatine of his winter crop, and sometimes also one dessiatine of
meadowland.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Some Conclusions to be Drawn from the Pre-Election Mobilisation









Lenin: Some Conclusions to be Drawn from the Pre-Election Mobilisation







V. I.  

      Lenin
Some Conclusions to be Drawn from the Pre-Election Mobilisation




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 8, May 22, 1912.

      Signed: B. G..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 78-82.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Almost all the political forces taking part in the
elections to the Duma are by now finally organised. At any rate, the main
party alignments have taken such definite shape that there can be no
question of any serious and material changes.  

The government began the election campaign long ago. The Rights, the
nationalists, and the Octobrists are “at work” with the obvious
assistance of the authorities. Rech recently published, and many
newspapers have reprinted, the circular sent by the governors, to the
police chiefs about the adoption of “measures” to prevent “Left”
candidates from being elected as delegates (particularly from the peasants)
or electors. This circular lifts the veil somewhat from the “election”
machinery of the Ministry of the Interior. Everything possible—and
impossible—will undoubtedly be done in this quarter against the
opposition. Not for nothing did Premier Kokovtsov, in his speech to the
Moscow merchants, lay so much stress on the perniciousness of “opposition
for the sake of opposition”.  

But while there can be no doubt about the zeal of the government and
the police in the elections, it is just as undoubted that a widespread
“leftward” swing has taken, or is taking, place in the sentiments of the
voters. No stratagems of the government can alter this fact. On the
contrary, all that stratagems and “measures” can accomplish is to
increase discontent. And it is easy to understand that while this
discontent among the big bourgeoisie is expressed by Shubinsky’s
“opposition” speech, by Ryabushinsky’s “cautious” allusion to the
desirability of “cultured methods of administration”, or by caustic digs
at the Ministry on the part of the Cadet

    

Rech, there is much keener and more serious discontent in the
large circle of the “small people” who are dependent on the
Ryabushinskys, Golovins and others.  

What are the political alignments that have taken definite shape in the
camp of the opposition, which gives political expression to this
discontent? One group that has taken shape is the “responsible”,
liberal-monarchist opposition of the Cadets and the Progressists. The bloc
of these two parties clearly denotes that the Cadets are much more “to the
right” than they seem to be.  

Another group that has taken shape is that of the working-class
democracy, which has undertaken the task, not of “supporting” the
Cadet-Progressist opposition, but of utilising the latter’s
conflicts with the Rights (including the nationalists and the Octobrists)
to enlighten and organise the democratic forces. Lastly, the group of the
bourgeois democracy has also taken shape: at the conference of the
Trudoviks it declared in favour of agreements “in the first place, with
the Social-Democrats”, but it did not put forward any definite slogan
calling for a fight against the counter revolutionary liberalism of the
Cadets, which means that in practice it is wavering between the two.  

What are the conclusions to be drawn from this pre-election “political
mobilisation” of the parties? The first and principal conclusion, which
the working-class democrats drew long ago, is that there are
three, not two, camps engaged in the contest. The liberals are
eager to make it appear that the contest is really between two camps; and
the liquidators, as has been shown on many occasions, are constantly
slipping into an acceptance of the same view. “For or against a
constitution?” is how the Cadets formulate the difference between the two
camps. Actually, however, this formulation defines nothing at all, because
the Octobrists, too, avow that they are constitutionalists, and indeed,
generally speaking, it should be a question not of what can or cannot be
called a constitution, but of the exact content of certain liberal or
democratic demands.  

It is the content of the demands, the real distinctions between the
class tendencies, that differentiates the three camps: the Right, or
government, camp; the camp of the liberal, or liberal-monarchist,
bourgeoisie, which takes a

    

counter-revolutionary stand; and the democratic camp. Furthermore, it is
not so much a question of “chances” under the existing electoral system,
for the issue goes much deeper—it concerns the whole character of
political propaganda during the elections, the whole ideological and
political content of the election campaign.  

In view of this state of affairs, the “strategy” of the liberals is
daily directed towards taking the leadership of the “whole”
opposition movement into their hands. The liberal Zaprosy Zhizni
blurted out the “secret” of this strategy, so carefully kept by
Rech. “The Progressists,” writes Mr.

R. B.[1] in Zaprosy Zhizni No. 13, “have opened their campaign
by a promising move [!]—they formed the so-called ‘non-partisan
Progressist bloc’, which proved from the first to have a strong appeal for
the political opposition circles to the right of the Cadets.” On the other
hand, “the election platform of the Trudovik group, despite its
vagueness—in part due to it, perhaps—meets the requirements of large
sections of the democratic intelligentsia”.

“Under certain conditions, the Trudovik group to the left of the Cadets
could perform a role similar to that undertaken by the Progressist group to
the right of the Cadets. The opposition front would then be made up of
mobile and wavering, but flexible extreme flanks, and an immobile but
persistent centre, which strategically has its advantage in the political
struggle as well.”  

What is in the thoughts of the Milyukovs and Shingaryovs is on R. B.’s
tongue!  It is precisely two “flexible” flanks that the Cadets need: the
Progressists for netting the bourgeois June Third voter, and the “vague”
democrats for netting the democratic-minded public. Indeed, this
“strategy” follows from the very nature of the Cadet Party. It is the
party of the counter-revolutionary liberals, which by fraudulent means has
won the support of certain democratic strata, such as a section of the
shop-assistants, office clerks, etc. What such a party needs is exactly the
“non-partisan Progressist” as its real class bulwark, and the vague
democrat as an attractive sales ticket.  

The landlord Yefremov and the millionaire Ryabushinsky may be described
as typical Progressists. The typical vague democrat is represented by the
Trudovik in the Narodnik

    

camp and the liquidator in the Marxist camp. Take the whole history of the
Cadet Party, and you will find that its method has always been
democracy in words, and liberalism “of the Yefremov brand and acceptable
to Ryabushinsky” in deeds. From the defeat of the plan for local land
committees in 1906 to the vote for the budget in the Third Duma, or to

Milyukov’s[2] “London” slogans, etc., we see this very nature
of the Cadet Party and its sham-democratic attire.  

Mr. R. B. of Zaprosy Zhizni is so very clumsy that he
inadvertently told the truth, which had been carefully kept from the
democrats and muddled by the liberals. The programme of the Progressists,
he confesses, “puts the issue on a firm and realistic basis! And yet that
programme has nothing except general phrases in a purely Octobrist style
(as, for instance, “the complete realisation of the Manifesto of

October 17”[3]).  What is described as a firm and realistic basis is
the basis of a bourgeois liberalism so moderate, so mild and impotent, that
it would be simply ridiculous to pin any hopes on it. Those who were
“Peaceful

Renovators”[4] in 1907, those who in the Third Duma steered a middle
course between the Cadets and the Octobrists, are described as a firm and
realistic basis!  

The millionaire Ryabushinsky is a Progressist. Utro

Rossii[5] is the mouthpiece of this and similar Progressists. And
none other than Rech, the paper of the Cadets, who have formed a
bloc with the Progressists, wrote: “Utro Rossii, organ of the
Moscow industrialists, is gratified [by Kokovtsov’s speech] more than
anyone else.... It echoes Krestovnikov:

‘Commercial and industrial Moscow can feel satisfied.’” And
Rech added for its own part: “As far as Golos Moskvy and
Utro Rossii are concerned, they are willing not to pursue any
line, and feel perfectly satisfied.”  

The question arises: where is the evidence that Yefremov or other
Progressists have a “line”? There is no such evidence. For
democrats to support this sort of progressism, whether it is called
progressism or Cadetism, would mean only surrendering their position. But
using the conflicts between the bourgeoisie and the landlords, between the
liberals and the Rights, is another matter. That is the only way in which a
democrat can formulate his task.  

To fulfil this task, to politically enlighten and organise

    

the very wide masses that are economically dependent on the Yefremovs and
Ryabushinskys, one has to be well aware of the counter-revolutionary nature
of Cadet and Progressist liberalism. The lack of this awareness is the
chief defect of both the Trudoviks and the liquidators. The Trudoviks say
nothing at all about the class characteristics of liberalism. The
liquidators utter phrases about “wresting the Duma from the hands
of the reactionaries”, about the Cadets and Progressists coming closer to
power, and about the historically progressive work they are doing (see
Martov and Dan). Taken as a whole, it adds up to that very role of a Cadet
“flank” which pleases R. B. so much.  

To be sure, these are not the subjective wishes of the Trudoviks and
the liquidators and, indeed, it is not a question of their subjective
plans, but of the objective alignment of the social forces. And in spite of
all the adherents of the idea of two camps, in spite of the malicious
shouts about disorganisation in the workers’ democratic movement (see the
same article by Mr. R. B.), this alignment clearly shows us that a third
camp has formed. Its line is clearly presented and is known to all. The
anti-liquidationist workers are pursuing this line, rallying all the
democrats in the struggle both against the Rights and
against the liberals. Without entertaining any illusions about the impotent
liberalism of the Cadets, who are grovelling before the reaction in all
fundamental questions, the workers are using clashes between that
liberalism and the reaction to promote their own cause, their own class
organisation, their own democracy, which is now quietly ripening in the
broad mass of the people enslaved by the Yefremovs and Ryabushinskys.  

Thanks to the anti-liquidationist tactics of the workers, the fight
between the Rights and the “responsible” opposition must, and will, serve
to develop the political consciousness and independent organisation of an
“opposition” which lays no claim to the scarcely honourable title of
“responsible”.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
R. B.—R. M. Blank, a Cadet publicist.





[2]
See Note 46.





[3]
This refers to the tsar’s Manifesto of October 17, 1905, published at
the height of the All-Russia October political strike. The Manifesto
promised “civil liberties” and a “legislative” Duma. It was a political
stratagem of the autocracy designed to gain time, split the revolutionary
forces, foil the strike and suppress the revolution. It was a concession
wrested from the tsarist regime by the revolution, but that concession by
no means decided the fate of the revolution, as the liberals and Mensheviks
claimed. The Bolsheviks exposed the real meaning of the Manifesto. On
October 18 (31), 1905, the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. issued its
appeal “To the Russian People” revealing the spurious nature of the
Manifesto and calling for a continued struggle. “We still need the
strike,” said the appeal, “to show our enemies that they cannot appease
us with a mere slip of paper, and that we want genuine rights and genuine
strength.” (Leaflets of the Bolshevik Organisations During the First
Russian Revolution of 1905-1907.  Part I, Moscow, 1956, p. 185,
Russ. ed).





[4]
This refers to the Party of Peaceful Renovation, a
constitutional-monarchist organisation of the big bourgeoisie and the
landlords. It took final shape in 1906, following the dissolution of the
First Duma. It grouped the “Left” Octobrists and Right Cadets. Among its
leaders were P. A. Heyden, N. P. Lvov, P. P. Ryabushinsky,
M. A. Stakhovich, Y. N. and G. N. Trubetskoi, and D. N. Shipov.  

The Peaceful Renovators’ programme was close to the Octobrist
programme. It defended the interests of the commercial and industrial
bourgeoisie and the landlords who conducted their farming on capitalist
lines. Lenin called the Party of Peaceful Renovation a “party of peaceful
plunder”. In the Third Duma this party merged with the Party of Democratic
Reform into the Progressist group.





[5]
Utro Rossii (Morning of Russia)—a daily newspaper
published in Moscow from September 1907 to April 1918 (with a break in
1908). Although it called itself a “non-partisan democratic publication”,
it reflected the interests of the Russian imperialist bourgeoisie. It was a
Progressist mouthpiece subsidised by Ryabushinsky’s bank. It was closed
down early in April 1918 for slanderous statements against Soviet
rule. From the middle of April to July 1918 it was published under the
title of Zarya Rossii (Dawn of Russia).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Economic and Political Strikes









Lenin: Economic and Political Strikes







V. I.  

      Lenin
Economic and Political Strikes




Published:

      Published in Nevskaya Zvezda No. 10, May 31, 1912.

      Signed: Iv. Petrov.

      Published according to the newspaper text verified with the text in the symposium Marxism and Liquidationism, Part II, St. Petersburg, 1914.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 83-90.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Ever since 1905 the official strike statistics kept by the
Ministry of Commerce arid Industry have subdivided strikes into economic
and political. This subdivision was necessitated by reality, which has
evolved distinctive forms of the strike movement. The combination
of economic and political strike is one of the main features of these
forms. And now that there is a revival of the strike movement, it is in the
interest of a scientific analysis, of an intelligent attitude to events,
that the workers should look closely into this distinctive feature of the
strike movement in Russia.  

To begin with, we shall cite several basic figures taken from the
government strike statistics. For three years, 1905–07, the strike
movement in Russia kept at a height unprecedented in the
world. Government statistics cover only factories, so that mining,
railways, building and numerous other branches of wage-labour are left
out. But even in factories alone, the number of strikers was 2,863,000, or
a little less than 3 million, in 1905, 1,108,000 in 1906, and 740,000 in
1907. In the fifteen years from 1894 to 1908, during which strike
statistics began to be systematically studied in Europe, the greatest
number of strikers for one year—660,000—was registered in America.


Consequently, the Russian workers were the first in the world
to develop the strike struggle on the mass scale that we witnessed in
1905–07. Now it is the British workers who have lent a new great impetus
to the strike movement with regard to economic strikes. The Russian workers
owe their leading role, not to greater strength, better organisation or
higher development compared with the workers in Western Europe, but to the
fact that so far Europe has not

    

gone through great national crises with the proletarian masses taking an
independent part in them. When such crises do set in, mass strikes in
Europe will be even more powerful than they were in Russia in 1905.  

What was the ratio of economic to political strikes in that period?
Government statistics give the following answer: 


Number of strikers (thousands)


 
1905
1906
1907




Economic strikes    
1,439
458
200


Political strikes   
1,424
650
540


Total . . . . 
2,863
1,108
740




This shows the close and inseparable connection between the two kinds
of strike. When the movement was at its highest (1905), the
economic basis of the struggle was the broadest; in that year the
political strike rested on the firm and solid basis of economic
strikes. The number of economic strikers was greater than that of
political strikers.  

We see that as the movement declined, in 1906 and 1907, the economic
basis contracted: the number of economic strikers dropped to 0.4
of the total number of strikers in 1906 and to 0.3 in 1907. Consequently,
the economic and the political strike support each other, each being a
source of strength for the other. Unless these forms of strike are closely
interlinked, a really wide mass movement—more over, a movement of
national significance—is impossible. When the movement is in its
early stage, the economic strike often has the effect of awakening and
stirring up the backward, of making the movement a general one, of raising
it to a higher plane.  

In the first quarter of 1905, for instance, economic strikes noticeably
predominated over political strikes, the number of strikers being 604,000
in the former case and only 206,000 in the latter. In the last quarter of
1905, however, the ratio was reversed: 430,000 workers took part in
economic strikes, and 847,000 in political strikes. This means that in the
early stage of the movement many workers put the economic struggle first,
while at the height of the movement it was the

    

other way round. But all the time there was a connection
between the economic and the political strike. Without such a connection,
we repeat, it is impossible to have a really great movement, one that
achieves great aims.  

In a political strike, the working class comes forward as the advanced
class of the whole people. In such cases, the proletariat plays not merely
the role of one of the classes of bourgeois society, but the role of guide,
vanguard, leader. The political ideas manifested in the movement involve
the whole people, i.e., they concern the basic, most profound conditions of
the political life of the whole country. This character of the political
strike, as has been noted by all scientific investigators of the period
1905–07, brought into the movement all the classes, and particularly, of
course, the widest, most numerous and most democratic sections of the
population, the peasantry, and so forth.  

On the other hand, the mass of the working people will never agree to
conceive of a general “progress” of the country without economic demands,
without an immediate and direct improvement in their condition. The masses
are drawn into the movement, participate vigorously in it, value it highly
and display heroism, self-sacrifice, perseverance and devotion to the great
cause only if it makes for improving the economic condition of those who
work. Nor can it be otherwise, for the living conditions of the workers in
“ordinary” times are incredibly hard. As it strives to improve its living
conditions, the working class also progresses morally, intellectually and
politically, becomes more capable of achieving its great emancipatory aims.


The strike statistics published by the Ministry of Commerce and
Industry fully bear out this tremendous significance of the economic
struggle of the workers in the period of a general revival. The stronger
the onslaught of the workers, the greater their achievements in improving
their standard of living. The “sympathy of society” and better conditions
of life are both results of a high degree of development of the
struggle. Whereas the liberals (and the liquidators) tell the workers:
“You are strong when you have the sympathy of ‘society’”, the
Marxist tells the workers something different, namely: “You have the
sympathy of ‘society’ when you are strong.” What we mean by society in
this case is all

    

the various democratic sections of the population, the petty bourgeoisie,
the peasants, and the intellectuals, who are in close touch with the life
of the workers, office employees, etc.  

The strike movement was strongest in 1905. And what was the result? We
see that in that year the workers achieved the greatest improvements in
their condition. Government statistics show that in 1905 only 29
out of every 100 strikers stopped their fight without having gained
anything, i.e., were completely defeated. In the previous ten
years (1895–1904), as many as 52 strikers out of 100 stopped fighting
without having gained anything! It follows that the large scale of the
struggle contributed immensely to its success, almost doubling it.


When the movement began to decline, the success of the struggle began
to diminish accordingly. In 1906, 33 strikers out of 100 stopped fighting
without having gained anything, or having been defeated, to be exact; in
1907 the figure was 58, and in 1908, as high as 69 out of 100!!  

Thus the scientific statistical data over a number of years fully
confirm the personal experience and observations of every class-conscious
worker as regards the necessity of combining the economic and the political
strike, and the inevitability of this combination in a really broad
movement of the whole people.  

The present strike wave likewise fully confirms this conclusion. In
1911 the number of strikers was double that in 1910 (100,000 against
50,000), but even so their number was extremely small; purely economic
strikes remained a relatively “narrow” cause, they did not assume
national significance. On the other hand, today it is obvious to one and
all that the strike movement following the well-known events of last April
had precisely this

significance.[1] 

It is therefore highly important to rebuff from the outset the attempts
of the liberals and liberal labour politicians (liquidators) to
distort the character of the movement. Mr. Severyanin, a liberal,
contributed to Russkiye

Vedomosti[2] an article against “admixing” economic or
“any other [aha!] demands” to the May Day strike, and the Cadet
Rech sympathetically reprinted in the main passages of the
article.  


   “More often than not,” writes the liberal gentleman,
   “it is unreasonable to link such strikes with May Day.... Indeed, it would
   be

    

   rather strange to do so: we are celebrating the international workers’
   holiday, and we use the occasion to demand a ten per cent rise for calico
   of such-and-such grades.” (Rech No. 132.)  


What is quite clear to the workers seems “strange” to the
liberal. Only the defenders of the bourgeoisie and its excessive profits
can sneer at the demand for a “rise”. But the workers know that it is the
widespread character of the demand for a rise, it is the
comprehensive character of a strike, that has the greatest power
to attract a multitude of new participants, to ensure the strength of the
onslaught and the sympathy of society, and to guarantee both the success of
the workers and the national significance of their movement. That is why it
is necessary to fight with determination against the liberal distortion
preached by Mr. Severyanin, Russkiye Vedomosti and Rech,
and to warn the workers in every way against this kind of sorry advisers.


Mr. V. Yezhov, a liquidator, writing in the very first issue of the
liquidationist Nevsky

Golos,[3] offers a similar purely liberal distortion, although he
approaches the question from a somewhat different angle. He dwells in
particular on the strikes provoked by the May Day fines. Correctly pointing
out that the workers are not sufficiently organised, the author draws from
his correct statement conclusions that are quite wrong and most harmful to
the workers. Mr. Yezhov sees a lack of organisation in the fact that while
in one factory the workers struck merely in protest, in another they added
economic demands, etc. Actually, however, this variety of forms of
strike does not in itself indicate any lack of organisation at all; it is
ridiculous to imagine that organisation necessarily means uniformity! Lack
of organisation is not at all to be found where Mr. Yezhov looks for it.


But his conclusion is still worse: 


   “Owing to this [i.e., owing to the variety of the
   strikes and to the different forms of the combination of economics and
   politics], the principle involved in the protest (after all, it was not
   over a few kopeks that the strike was called) became obscured in a
   considerable number of cases, being complicated by economic demands....”
   


This is a truly outrageous, thoroughly false and thoroughly liberal
argument! To think that the demand “for a few kopeks” is capable
of “obscuring” the principle involved in the

    

protest means sinking to the level of a Cadet. On the contrary, Mr. Yezhov,
the demand for “a few kopeks” deserves full recognition and not a sneer!
On the contrary, Mr. Yezhov, that demand, far from “obscuring”
“the principle involved in the protest”, emphasises it! Firstly,
the question of a higher standard of living is also a question of
principle, and a most important one; secondly, whoever protests, not
against one, but against two, three, etc., manifestations of Oppression,
does not thereby weaken his protest but strengthens it.  

Every worker will indignantly reject Mr. Yezhov’s outrageous liberal
distortion of the matter.  

In the case of Mr. Yezhov, it is by no means a slip of the pen. He goes
on to say even more outrageous things: 


   “Their own experience should have suggested to the
   workers that it was inadvisable to complicate their protest by economic
   demands, just as it is inadvisable to complicate an ordinary strike by a
   demand involving a principle.”  


This is untrue, a thousand times untrue! The Nevsky Golos has
disgraced itself by printing such stuff. What Mr. Yezhov thinks inadvisable
is perfectly advisable. Both each worker’s own experience and the
experience of a very large number of Russian workers in the recent past
testify to the reverse of what Mr. Yezhov preaches.  

Only liberals can object to “complicating” even the most “ordinary”
strike by “demands involving principles”. That is the first
point. Secondly, our liquidator is sorely mistaken in measuring the present
movement with the yard stick of an “ordinary” strike.  

And Mr. Yezhov is wasting his time in trying to cover up his liberal
contraband with someone else’s flag, in confusing the question of
combining the economic and the political strike with the question
of preparations for the one or the other! Of course, it is most
desirable to make preparations and to be prepared, and to do this as
thoroughly, concertedly, unitedly, intelligently and firmly as
possible. That is beyond dispute. But, contrary to what Mr. Yezhov says, it
is necessary to make preparations precisely for a combination of
the two kinds of strike.  


   “A period of economic strikes is ahead of us,” writes
   Mr. Yezhov. “It would be an irreparable mistake to allow them to become
   intertwined

    

   with political actions of the workers. Such combination would have a
   harmful effect on both the economic and the political struggle of the
   workers.”  


One could hardly go to greater lengths! These words show in the
clearest possible way that the liquidator has sunk to the level of an
ordinary liberal. Every sentence contains an error! We must convert every
sentence into its direct opposite to get at the truth!  

It is not true that a period of economic strikes is ahead of us. Quite
the reverse. What we have ahead of us is a period of something more than
just economic strikes. We are facing a period of political strikes. The
facts, Mr. Yezhov, are stronger than your liberal distortions; and if you
could look at the statistical cards dealing with strikes, which are filed
in the Ministry of Commerce and Industry, you would see that even
these government statistics fully refute you.  

It is not true that “intertwining” would be a mistake. Quite the
reverse. It would be an irreparable mistake if the workers failed to
understand the great singularity, the great significance, the great
necessity, and the great fundamental importance of precisely such
“intertwining”. Fortunately, however, the workers understand this
perfectly, and they brush aside with contempt the preaching of liberal
labour politicians.  

Lastly, it is not true that such intertwining “would have a harmful
effect” on both forms. Quite the reverse. It benefits both. It
strengthens both.  

Mr. Yezhov lectures some “hotheads” whom he seems to have
discovered. Listen to this: 

“It is necessary to give organisational form to the sentiments of the
workers....” This is gospel truth! “It is necessary to increase
propaganda for trade unions, to recruit new members for them....”  

Quite true, but—but, Mr. Yezhov, it is impermissible to
reduce “organisational form” to the trade unions alone!
Remember this, Mr. Liquidator!  


   “This is all the more necessary since there are many
   hotheads among the workers nowadays who are carried away by the mass
   movement and speak at meetings against unions, alleging them to be
   useless and unnecessary.”  

 

This is a liberal slur on the workers. It is not “against unions”
that the workers—who have been, and always will be, a thorn in the side
of the liquidators—have been coming out. No, the Workers have been coming
out against the attempt to reduce the organisational form to
“trade unions alone, an attempt which is so evident from Mr. Yezhov’s
preceding sentence.  

The workers have been coming out, not “against unions but against the
liberal distortion of the nature of the struggle they are waging, a
distortion which pervades the whole of Mr. Yezhov’s article.  

The Russian workers have become sufficiently mature politically to
realise the great significance of their movement for the whole people. They
are sufficiently mature to see how very false and paltry liberal labour
policy is and they will always brush it aside with contempt.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
See Note 1.





[2]
Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder)—a newspaper
published in Moscow from 1863 onwards by moderately liberal
intellectuals. Between the 1880s and 1890s contributors to it included
writers of the democratic camp—V. G. Korolenko, M. Y. Saltykov-Shchedrin,
0. I. Uspensky and others—and it also published articles by liberal
Narodniks. In 1905 it became an organ of the Right wing of the Cadet
Party. Lenin pointed out that the newspaper “provided a unique combination
of Right Cadetism and Narodnik overtones” (see present edition, Vol. 19,
p. 135). In 1918 it was closed down along with other counter-revolutionary
newspapers.





[3]
Nevsky Golos (Neva Voice)—a legal newspaper of the
Menshevik liquidators, published in St. Petersburg from May to August 1912.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Problem of Resettlement









Lenin: The Problem of Resettlement







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Problem of Resettlement




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 11, June 3, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 91-101.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

As we know, the government and the counter-revolutionary
parties had placed especially great hopes in the settlement of peasants on
new land. All the counter-revolutionaries expected that if it would not
solve the agrarian problem radically, then at least it would blunt it
considerably and render it much less dangerous. That is why they advertised
resettlement with particular zeal and encouraged it in every way at the
imminent approach, and then during the development, of the peasant movement
in European Russia.  

What is in the thoughts of the government representatives and the more
far-sighted politicians of, say, the Octobrist Party, is on the tongue of
such undisguised reactionaries as Markov the Second, the

diehard[3] from Kursk. During the debate on the resettlement problem in
the Duma, this deputy declared frankly, with praiseworthy straight
forwardness: “Yes, it is by means of resettlement that the government
should solve the agrarian problem.” (First Session.)  

There is no doubt that resettlement, if properly organised, could play
a role of some importance in Russia’s economic development. To be sure,
this role must not be overrated even today, when the condition of the
Russian muzhik is so intolerable that he is willing to go anywhere, not
only to Siberia, but to the end of the world; even today, when the peasants
who own little or no land are encouraged in every way to migrate and settle
as colonists, so as to keep them from the temptation of contemplating the
landlords’ latifundia, and when the decree of

November 9[4] has greatly facilitated for the settlers the liquidation
of the remnants of their farms at home; even today, as even the apologists
of the theory of a natural population increase must

    

admit. It is only in the gubernias that provide the largest percentage of
emigrants (the South, West, and the black-earth central area of Russia),
that their number equals the natural increase of the population, or
slightly exceeds it.  

Nevertheless, there is still a substantial reserve of unoccupied land
in Siberia suitable for resettlement. True, very little has been done so
far to ascertain the extent of that reserve even approximately. In 1896
Kulomzin set the re serve of land fit for resettlement at 130,000 per
capita allotments. Since then ten times as many allotments have been
apportioned, but the reserve has not yet been exhausted. On the contrary,
according to estimates of the Resettlement Department, by 1900 the reserve
of land suitable for resettlement amounted to three million per capita
allotments, sufficient to provide for six million settlers. As we see, the
figures differ considerably, and the range of the variation between them is
very great.  

Be that as it may, even discounting a certain percentage of the
last-mentioned figures to allow for the usual bureaucratic complacency, it
is certain that there is still a reserve of land in Siberia and that,
consequently, its settlement could have a certain importance both for
Siberia and Russia, provided it was properly organised.  

It is just this conditio sine qua non that the present
government does not comply with. The present organisation of resettlement
once again demonstrates and proves that our “old order” is quite
incapable of meeting even the most elementary economic requirements of the
population. The bad organisation of resettlement is additional evidence
that the present masters of the situation are powerless to do anything at
all for the economic progress of the country.  

An explanation of the trend, character and implementation of the
resettlement policy was given by the Social-Democratic deputies to the Duma
in their speeches during each year’s discussion of budget appropriations
for the Resettlement Department.  

What is the government’s aim in resettling the peasants? That is the
main question, the answer to which determines the answer to all the others;
for the aim of the government’s resettlement policy determines its entire
character.  

Deputy Voiloshnikov, who spoke for the Social-Democratic

    

group at the Second Session of the Duma, described as follows the
government’s aims in resettling the peasants: “The resettlement policy is
an element of the government’s agrarian policy as a whole. When the
landlords needed economically weak or insecure peasants as a source of
cheap labour, the government did everything to impede resettlement and to
keep the surplus population where it was. What is more, it strongly opposed
voluntary migration, trying thereby to close that safety valve. But the
natural growth of the population went on, and times changed. Storm
clouds—the proletariat and the starving peasantry—loomed large, with
all their consequences. The government and the landlords seized upon
resettlement, which, together with the decree of November 9, they made the
basis of their agrarian policy. However, in regard to implementing the
decree, attention was centred on the economically strong and prosperous, on
taking the land from the poor and transferring it to the prosperous
peasants. But in regard to resettlement it is a matter of packing off the
poor peasants to Siberia in as large numbers as possible; and while lately
there has been evidence of a tendency to an increase in the average
proportion of prosperous settlers, the bulk still consists of weak
peasants, to use Stolypin’s terminology. The land commit tees are also
taking part, or, I should say, have been en listed to take part in this
business of packing off peasants in increased numbers.  

“The land committees have been charged with assigning the settlers
their plots and thus putting an end to the for mer agrarian disorders. It
follows, gentlemen, that the decree of November 9, the vigorous
advertisement of resettlement, the vigorous drive to pack off the weak
peasants to Siberia, and the activities of the land committees are two
closely connected aspects of the same problem and the same policy. It will
be readily seen that the implementation of the decree of November 9 helps
settlement of the prosperous and strong on the allotments at the expense of
the weak peasants, and will thereby help to squeeze out these weak
elements, who are not very suitable as settlers, into border regions that
are alien to them. Both as regards the village commune and migration, the
government’s resettlement policy has been guided solely by the interests of
a handful of semi-feudal landlords

    

and of the ruling classes in general, who are oppressing the masses of
workers and the labouring peasantry. The government shows no understanding
of the elementary requirements of the country and of the needs of the
national economy.” (Second Session, 77th sitting.)  

This aspect of the matter was disclosed most fully by Deputy Chkheidze
(in his speech during the Second Session of the Duma), who drew a detailed
picture of the resettlement policy in the Caucasus.  

To begin with, the Social-Democratic deputy proved by facts and figures
that all the official reports about vacant land in the Caucasus are in
glaring conflict with the truth. It should be specially stressed that
Deputy Chkheidze, in order to forestall any accusation of partiality or
distortion, used only official data and the reports of government
officials. According to the figures collected as long ago as the eighties
by the former Minister of State Property, “among the state peasants alone,
who have been settled on state land in the Caucasus, there were, in the
four Transcaucasian gubernias, 22,000 persons who owned no land at all,
66,000 with allotments of less than one dessiatine per capita, 254,000 with
allotments of from one to two dessiatines per capita, and 5,013 with
allotments of from two to four dessiatines, a total of about 1,000,000
persons having smaller allotments than the minimum fixed for the settlers
who have established themselves in the Caucasus. In Kutais Gubernia, 2,541
out of 29,977 household owned no land or less than one dessiatine per
household, 4,227 owned from one to two dessiatines per household, 4,016
from two to three, and 5,321 from three to five. According to the latest
data, 46 per cent of the villages in the four Transcaucasian gubernias had
no state land at all or very little, and in Kutais Gubernia the number of
unprovided households was approximately 33 per cent of the total. From the
report of the Baku Committee on the needs of the agricultural industries we
know that such villages insufficiently provided with land send the landless
peasants to take up their residence with those owning large allotments and
they remain for many years in this dependent position. And Senator
Kuzminsky, in a report submitted to the Emperor, says the following: ‘It
has been noted that

    

sometimes the settlers consist of persons who have given up farming and
lease the land received for purposes of re settlement to fellow villagers
or to native peasants in a neighbouring village.’ Thus even twenty-five
years ago there were in Transcaucasia hundreds of thousands of state peas
ants—who, one would think, should have been better provided than other
categories of peasants, and whom one could describe without exaggeration as
farm labourers. As far back as some twenty-five years ago the local
peasants were compelled to rent the land that was allotted to settlers”.


Such are the data enabling us to judge of the extent to which the state
peasants in the Caucasus are provided with land.  


   “As for the so-called temporarily

   bonded[5] peasants,” the speaker went on to say, “we see from an
   examination of the verified deeds that in Tiflis Gubernia 1,444 households
   were left without any land and 386 households received no land even for
   their dwelling-houses and gardens. They comprise 13 per cent of the total
   number of landlords’ peasants in Tiflis Gubernia. In Kutais Gubernia there
   was an even greater number of peasants left without land after the
   Reform. Even if we take the Tiflis ratio to apply to the former serfs in
   all the gubernias, we get in Kutais Gubernia 5,590 households, representing
   25,000 persons, who received not a single patch of land when the peasants
   were emancipated in the Caucasus. Twenty years after the Reform, in 4895,
   continues the author of the memorandum on the abolition of obligatory
   relations, there were in Yelisavetpol Gubernia 5,308 landless households,
   or 25,000 persons of both sexes. In Baku Gubernia there were 3,906
   households, or 11,709 landless persons of both sexes. And here are data on
   the amount of land held by the peasants who were temporarily bonded and who
   have not redeemed their allotments but have some kind of farm. In Tiflis
   Gubernia the per capita amount is 0.9 dessiatine, and in Kutais Gubernia
   0.6 dessiatine. Among those who have redeemed their allotments, the per
   capita holdings amount to 1.7 dessiatines in Tiflis Gubernia and to 0.7
   dessiatine in Kutais Gubernia. That is the extent to which peasants having
   some sort of farm are provided with land. We find a general description of
   the economic position of the peasants in the Caucasus in the report of the
   Kutais Gubernia Committee on the needs of the agricultural
   industries. According to data culled from various official investigations,
   the proportion of peasants suffering acute want in Kutais Gubernia is as
   high as 70 per cent. Furthermore, it is also pointed out that 25 per cent
   of the nobility in that gubernia are suffering acute want.  

   “Owners of such plots of land can retain their economic
   independence,” the report goes on to say, “only if they have earnings
   outside their farms, and they are in no position to spend anything at all
   on improvements, implements and fertiliser. The big demand could not but
   have an effect on the cost of renting allotments, which is as high

    

   as 60 per cent of the gross income in the case of the share-cropping
   system, and sometimes, in years of a poor crop, payment in the form of a
   definite quantity of the produce of the land exceeds the gross
   income. Cases of land being leased for money are rare, and the rent amounts
   to 30 rubles per dessiatine a year. This is the situation in Kutais
   Gubernia. And now a few figures on the amount of land held by the peasants
   in four uyezds of Yelisavetpol Gubernia. According to data concerning all
   the peasants who live on the owner’s land, the holdings in four uyezds of
   Yelisavetpol Gubernia, namely, Jibrail Zangezur, Shusha and Jevanshir, are
   up to 0.6 dessiatine per person. Senator Kuzminsky has calculated that the
   average allotment per male person among the peasants settled on the owner’s
   land in Lenkoran Uyezd of Baku Gubernia amounts to 0.5 dessiatine, and in
   Kuba Uyezd to 0.9 dessiatine. That, gentlemen,” the speaker concluded,
   “is how the peasants in Transcaucasia are provided with land.”  


Since the condition of the Caucasian peasants as regards land-hunger
differs but little from that of the peasants in Russia, where, one may ask,
does the reserve of land for resettlement in the Caucasus come from, and
why are people sent there as settlers, instead of resettlement of the local
peasants being carried out?  

The land for resettlement is obtained as a result of flag rant
violation of the land rights of the native inhabitants, and the settlement
of peasants from Russia is carried on for the glory of the old nationalist
principle of “Russification of the outlying regions”.  

Deputy Chkheidze cited a number of facts, likewise culled from official
sources, about how whole villages of natives were driven from their homes
so that a reserve of land might be created for resettlement, how court
trials were engineered to justify the expropriation of land held by
mountaineers (report on the mountain village of Kiknaveleti, Kutais Uyezd,
submitted by Prince Tsereteli, Marshal of the Nobility, to the Minister of
the Interior), etc. Nor were all these isolated or exceptional facts but
“typical cases”, as was also established by Senator Kuzminsky.  

The result is downright hostile relations between the settlers and the
natives. Thus, for instance, when the Alar community was driven from its
lands, “evicted”, to quote Senator Kuzminsky, “without being provided
with land, and left to its fate”, the settlers who seized its land were
armed at government expense: the uyezd rural

superintendents[6] were ordered to “see to it that the peasants of the
newly-established

    

villages on the Mugan, including those from Pokrovskoye, were supplied with
arms—ten Berdan rifles for each hundred households”. This is an
interesting illustration of the “nationalist course” of the present
policy.  

Nevertheless, Right-wing deputies to the Duma spoke triumphantly of the
existence of a reserve for resettlement amounting to 1,700,000 dessiatines,
citing the report of the Vice-Gerent of the Caucasus to this
effect. However, according also to the testimony of the Vice-Gerent, nearly
half of this reserve has already been taken over by settlers, while a
considerable part of it is situated in areas where—according again to the
Vice-Gerent’s evidence—it is physically impossible for cultivators
unaccustomed to the conditions to engage in farming.  

Deputy Chkheidze also spoke of the way in which the government provides
for the new settlers. “Inadequate water supply and lack of irrigation on
the land set aside for resettlement,” says the report of the Vice-Gerent,
“particularly in the eastern areas of Transcaucasia, is one of the main
reasons why many peasants already settled migrate back again. In the Black
Sea region the new settlers are deserting their farms because of the
absence of roads suitable for wheeled traffic not only between the various
settlements, but even within each of the resettlement areas. To this it
should be added that in their turn the unfavourable climatic conditions, to
which the settlers are unaccustomed and which are attended in many parts of
the Caucasus by malaria that affects not only people but livestock as well,
no less than the lack of roads, cause the less sturdy of the new settlers
to flee from the Caucasus. Due to the above-mentioned causes there is a
continuous migration in evidence from the Yelisavetpol and Baku gubernias
and from Daghestan Region, as well as from the Tiflis and Black Sea
gubernias.”  

The upshot is that the results of the resettlement in the Caucasus are
assessed by the Vice-Gerent himself as follows: “The attitude taken so far
to the Caucasian population and its land affairs can no longer be
tolerated, if only because it undoubtedly plays a rather prominent part in
fostering revolutionary sentiments among the rural population.”  

The government and the ruling classes are pursuing very similar aims in
settling peasants in Siberia; here, too, in

    

view of the political objectives involved, no consideration whatever is
given either to the interests of the settlers or to the rights of the old
residents.  

In the emigration areas, in Russia, resettlement matters have now been
entrusted to the land committees, the rural superintendents and the
governors. Vitally interested as they are in reducing the number of
peasants with little or no land and in leaving only as many of them as are
needed to provide for the requirements of the big landowners (as a source
of supply of wage-labour), the land committees have shown such zeal in
“moving” poor peasants as to shock even the Resettlement
Department. “The land committees,” complained one official of the
Department, “form parties of completely destitude
people who at the outset need an allowance for their travelling expenses,
who need a loan not for setting up a home but for food; and even if, as an
exception, a settler happens to have some little money, he spends it all on
fares and food.”  

Swarms of these “weak” foster-children of the land policy which
proclaimed as its motto “stake on the strong” are being sent off to
Siberia in unaltered cattle wagons, packed chock-full with old men,
children, pregnant women. In these cattle wagons (which bear the famous
inscription: “40 men, 8 horses”), the emigrants have to cook their food
and wash their linen; lying in them, too, are often persons afflicted with
contagious diseases, whom the emigrants usually keep out sight lest they be
removed from the train and thus fall behind the party. At terminal points
and stations the emigrants are at best provided with tents; in the worst
cases they are left in the open, with no shelter from sun or rain. Deputy
Voiloshnikov told the Duma that at Sretensk he had seen people stricken
with typhus lying in the open, with no protection from the rain. And
conditions such as those described above, under which the peasants have to
travel, two Ministers (Stolypin and Krivoshein) find to be
“tolerable”. “The sanitary conditions provided for the settlers on their
way are tolerable,” they wrote in a report to the Emperor; “many of them
even find conveniences en route to which they have not been accustomed.”
Truly, there is no limit to bureaucratic complacency!  

After going through such ordeals on their way to “the

    

promised land”, the poorest emigrants find no happiness in Siberia
either. Here, for instance, is how Deputy Voiloshnikov described their
condition in the new places of settlement by quoting from official reports.


One official (a special inspector of the Resettlement Department)
writes: “Most of the lots are scattered, among taiga forests without
water, without ploughland, and without pastures.”

Another adds: “The granting of loans has entirely lost its significance as
a means for setting up homes; the amount of the loans is in itself too
small to be of real help in this respect. The established procedure of
granting loans has turned the latter into a matter of charity pure and
simple, for it is impossible to set up a home and live for two years on the
150 rubles granted as a loan.”  

And here, by way of example, is a description of the sanitary
conditions of the new settlers, quoted from the same official reports: 


   “After the typhus,” writes one

      official,[1]

   “scurvy has been raging here on a no lesser scale; practically in all the
   settlements and in every house there are people suffering from this disease
   or liable to contract it. In many homes there are cases of both
   diseases. In the Okur-Shask settlement I came across the following picture:
   the master of the house was ill with typhus in the period of peeling; his
   pregnant wife was extremely exhausted from undernourishment; their son, a
   boy of twelve, had swollen glands and scurvy; the wife’s sister was sick
   with scurvy and could not walk; she had a breast-fed baby; her ten-year-old
   boy was sick with scurvy, was bleeding through the nose and could hardly
   move; her husband alone, of the whole family, was well.  

   “Scurvy and typhus are followed by night
   blindness. There are settlements in which literally all the settlers,
   without exception, suffer from this blindness. The groups of lots along the
   Yemna River are covered almost entirely with taiga forests, have no
   pastures or meadowland, and in the course of two or three years the new
   settlers barely managed to clear the ground to build wretched huts. There
   could be no question of the settlers having their own grain; they had to
   live entirely on the loans, and when these gave out there was a terrible
   scarcity of bread; many literally starved. The scarcity of bread was
   aggravated by the scarcity of drinking water.”  


Such reports are plentiful. Appalling as these official accounts are,
they apparently do not tell the whole truth, and

    

thus give too favourable a picture of the actual state of affairs. Here is,
for instance, how Prince Lvov, a man, as we know, of moderate views, who
visited the Far East as a representative of the Zemstvo organisation,
describes resettlement in Amur Territory: 


   “Cut off from the world as if they were on an
   uninhabited island, amid marshy hummocks in the primeval taiga, amid swampy
   valleys and swampy hills, and forced to put up with barbaric conditions of
   life, labour and subsistence, the dispirited and indigent settler naturally
   feels crushed. He lapses into a state of apathy, having exhausted his small
   store of energy at the very beginning of his struggle against harsh natural
   conditions in setting up his wretched dwelling. Scurvy and typhus attack
   the wasted organism and carry it off to the grave. In many of the
   settlements founded in 1907, the death rate is simply incredible—23 to 30
   per cent. There are as many crosses as there are households, and many
   settlements are doomed to be removed completely to new sites or to the
   grave-yard. Instead of resettlement, what rivers of bitter tears shed by
   unhappy families and what costly funerals at state expense in the remote
   borderland! It will be long before those who survived last year’s great
   wave of resettlement will stand on their feet again after their defeat in
   the taiga. Many will die, and many others will flee back to Russia, where
   they will defame the territory by stories about their misfortunes, scaring
   off new settlers and holding up further resettlement. It is not accidental
   that this year we witness an unprecedented reverse movement from the
   Maritime Region, and an influx of new settlers that is one-fifth of the
   former proportion.”  


Prince Lvov is justly appalled by the isolation of the settler from the
world and his desolation in the boundless Siberian taiga, particularly in
view of the lack of roads in Siberia. We can imagine with what brilliant
success the policy of setting up separate homestead farms and the
apportionment of otrubs is now being put into effect there, for
the very same men who direct the agrarian policy have proclaimed “the
necessity for a decisive turn [!] in the land policy in Siberia”, the
necessity of “establishing and promoting private property”, of “ensuring
that individual peasants have their plots in accordance with the decree of
November 9, 1906”, “assigning lots for resettlement, with the land
divided, as far as possible, into otrub

     holdings”,[2]

etc.  

The conditions of resettlement being what they are, it is quite natural
that, according to the Resettlement Department,

    

10 per cent of the peasants settled in 1903–05 owned not a single draught
animal, 12 per cent owned only one draught animal per household, 15
per cent owned no cow, and 25 per cent owned no plough (from the speech of
Deputy Gaidarov during the First Session, when he spoke on behalf of the
Social-Democratic group). Deputy Voiloshnikov, basing himself on the same
official reports, was therefore fully justified when he summed up the
results of the resettlement policy in 1906–08 as follows: 


   “In three years—1906, 1907 and 1908—1,552,439
   persons of both sexes, half of them paupers, lured by the government’s
   advertising, were sent across the Urals, into unknown parts, and there left
   to their fate. According to the Resettlement Department, 564,041 persons
   settled down, and 284,984 persons of both sexes went back. Thus the
   Resettlement Department provides information about 849,025 persons. But
   what has become of the rest?  Where Are the other 703,414 persons? The
   government, gentlemen, is perfectly well informed of their bitter lot, but
   it will say nothing about them. Some of them have gone to live in the
   villages of the old residents, and some others have swollen the ranks of
   the Siberian proletariat and are begging for alms.  

   “As for the vast majority, the government arranged a
   costly funeral for them, and that is why it keeps silent about them.”
   


That is how the hopes of Markov the Second to “solve the agrarian
problem” through resettlement are materialising. Faced with these facts,
even the Octobrist spokesmen of big capital had to admit that there are
“defects in the resettlement work”. During the First Session the
Octobrists called (and the Duma supported them) for “changing and
improving the travelling conditions of the emigrants”, for “creating in
the resettlement areas the conditions necessary for their cultural and
economic development”, and for “respecting the interests and rights of
the local peasantry and the non-Russian population when apportioning the
land and settling the peasants”. It goes without saying that these
cautious and deliberately ambiguous wishes have to this day remained “a
voice crying in the wilderness”. And the Octobrist woodpeckers patiently
repeat them year after year.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Memorandum, p. 8 —Lenin

[2]
Memorandum, pp. 60, 61, 82.  —Lenin
 



[3]
In Russian political writing, the term “diehard” (zubr,
literally, aurochs) was applied to the extreme Right-wing representatives
of landlord reaction.





[4]
See Note 47.





[5]
Temporarily bonded peasants—serfs who after the abolition of
serfdom in 1861 were obliged to perform certain services for the landlords,
i.e., do corvée service or pay quit-rent. The temporarily bonded
status of the peasants continued until they had, by agreement with the
landlords, acquired their allotments by paying compensation. It was only
under the decree of 1881, which discontinued the “obligatory relation”
between the peasants and the landlords as from January 1, 1883, that the
landlords were obliged to accept compensation.





[6]
In 1889 the tsarist government introduced the administrative office of
rural superintendent to strengthen landlord rule over the
peasants. The rural superintendents, who were selected from among the
landed nobility, were vested with vast administrative and also judicial
powers over the peasants, including the right to arrest peasants and
subject them to corporal punishment.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Revolutionary Upswing









Lenin: The Revolutionary Upswing







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Revolutionary Upswing[2]




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27, June 17 (4), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 102-109.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The great May Day strike of the proletariat of all Russia
and the accompanying street demonstrations, revolutionary leaflets, and
revolutionary speeches before gatherings of workers have clearly shown that
Russia has entered a period of revolutionary upswing.  

This upswing did not come as a bolt from the blue. The way had been
paved for it over a long period by all the conditions of Russian life, and
the mass strikes over the Lena shootings and the May Day strikes merely
marked its actual arrival. The temporary triumph of the counter-revolution
was inseparably bound up with a decline in the mass struggle of the
workers. The number of strikers gives an approximate yet absolutely
objective and precise idea of the extent of the struggle.  

During the ten years preceding the revolution, from 1895 to 1904, the
average number of strikers was 43,000 a year (in round figures). In 1905
there were 2,750,000 strikers, in 1906—1,000,000, and in
1907—750,000. The three years of the revolution were distinguished by a
rise in the strike movement of the proletariat unprecedented anywhere
in the world. Its decline, which began in 1906–07, became definite in
1908, when there were 175,000 strikers. The coup d’état of June 3,
1907, which restored the autocratic rule of the tsar in alliance with the
Duma of the Black-Hundred landlords and the commercial and industrial
magnates, was an inevitable result of the flagging of the revolutionary
energy of the masses.  

The three years 19080-10 were a period of Black-Hundred
counter-revolution at its worst, of liberal-bourgeois renegacy and of
proletarian despondency and disintegration.

    

The number of strikers steadily dropped, reaching 60,000 in 1909 and 50,000
in 1910.  

However, a noticeable change set in at the end of 1910. The
demonstrations in connection with the death of the liberal Muromtsev, and
of Leo Tolstoy, and also the student movement, clearly indicated that a
fresh breeze had begun to blow, that the mood of the democratic masses had
reached a turning-point. The year 1911 saw the workers gradually going over
to an offensive—the number of strikers rose to 100,000. Signs
from various quarters indicate that the weariness and stupor brought about
by the triumph of the counter-revolution are passing away, that once again
there is an urge for revolution. In summing up the situation, the
All-Russia Conference, held in January 1912, noted that “the onset of a
political revival is to be noted among broad democratic circles, chiefly
among the proletariat. The workers’ strikes in 1910–11, the beginning of
demonstrations and proletarian meetings, the start of a movement among
urban bourgeois democrats (the student strikes), etc., are all indications
of the growing revolutionary feelings of the masses against the June Third
regime”. (See the “Notification” of the Conference,

p. 18.[1]

)



By the second quarter of this year these sentiments had become so
strong that they manifested themselves in actions by the masses, and
brought about a revolutionary upswing. The course of events during
the past eighteen months shows with perfect clarity that there is nothing
accidental in this upswing, that it has come quite naturally and was made
inevitable by the whole development of Russia in the previous period.  

The Lena shootings led to the revolutionary temper of the masses
developing into a revolutionary upswing of the masses. Nothing could be
more false than the liberal invention, which Trotsky repeats in the Vienna
Pravda after the liquidators, that “the struggle for freedom of
association is the basis of both the Lena tragedy and the powerful
response to it in the country”. Freedom of association was neither the
specific nor the principal demand in the Lena strike. It was not lack of
the freedom of association that the Lena

    

shootings revealed, but lack of freedom from provocation, lack of rights in
general, lack of freedom from wholesale tyranny.  

The Lena shootings, as we have already made clear in

Sotsial-Demokrat[3] No. 26, were an exact reflection of the
entire regime of the June Third monarchy. It was not at all the
struggle for one of the rights of the proletariat, even the most
fundamental, the most important of them, that was characteristic of the
Lena events. What was characteristic of those events was the complete
absence of any kind of elementary legality. The characteristic
feature was that an agent provocateur, a spy, a secret police
agent, a menial of the tsar, resorted to mass shootings without any
political reason whatever. It is this general lack of rights typical of
Russian life, this hopelessness and impossibility of fighting for
particular rights, and this incorrigibility of the tsarist
monarchy and of its entire regime, that stood out so distinctly against the
background of the Lena events as to fire the masses with
revolutionary ardour.  

The liberals have been straining every nerve to represent the Lena events and
the May Day strikes as a trade union movement and a struggle for
“rights”. But anyone who is not blinded by liberal (and
liquidationist) controversies will see in them something different. He will see
the revolutionary character of the mass strike, which is especially
emphasised by the St. Petersburg May Day leaflet of various Social-Democratic
groups (and even of one group of worker Socialist-Revolutionaries!), which we
reprint in full in our news

section,[4] and which repeats the slogans advanced by the All-Russia
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912.  

And then, it is not really slogans that are the main proof of the
revolutionary character of the Lena and May Day strikes. The slogans
formulated what the facts showed. The mass strikes spreading from
district to district, their tremendous growth, the speed with which they
spread, the courage of the workers, the increased number of mass meetings
and revolutionary speeches, the demand that the fines imposed for
celebrating May Day be cancelled, and the combination of the political and
the economic strike, familiar to us from the time of the first Russian
revolution, are all

    

obvious indications of the true nature of the movement, which is a
revolutionary upswing of the masses.  

Let us recall the experience of 1905. Events show that the
tradition of the revolutionary mass strike lives on among
the workers and that the workers at once took up and revived this
tradition. The strike wave of 1905, unprecedented in the world, involved
810,000 strikers during the first, and 1,277,000 during the last quarter of
the year, being a combination of the political and the economic
strike. According to tentative estimates, the strikes over the Lena events
involved about 300,000 workers and the May Day strikes about 400,000, and
the strike movement continues to grow. Every day the newspapers, even the
liberal ones, bring news of how the wildfire of strikes is spreading. The
second quarter of 1912 is not quite over, and yet it is already becoming
quite obvious that, as regards the size of the strike movement, the
beginning of the revolutionary upswing in 1912 is not lower, but rather
higher than the beginning in 1905!  

The Russian revolution was the first to develop on a large scale this
proletarian method of agitation, of rousing and uniting the masses and of
drawing them into the struggle. Now the proletariat is applying this method
once again and with an even firmer hand. No power on earth could achieve
what the revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat is achieving by this
method. A huge country, with a population of 150,000,000 spread over a vast
area, scattered, oppressed, deprived of all rights, ignorant, fenced off
from “evil influences” by a swarm of authorities, police, spies—the
whole of this country is getting into a ferment. The most backward
sections both of the workers and the peasants are coming into direct or
indirect contact with the strikers. Hundreds of thousands of revolutionary
agitators are all at once appearing on the scene. Their influence is
infinitely increased by the fact that they are inseparably linked with the
rank and file, with the masses, and that they remain among them, fight for
the most urgent needs of every worker’s family, and combine with
this immediate struggle for urgent economic needs their political protest
and struggle against the monarchy. For counter-revolution has stirred up in
millions and tens of millions of people a bitter hatred for the monarchy,
it has given them the, rudiments of an understanding

    

of the part played by it, and now the slogan of the foremost workers of the
capital—long live the democratic republic!—spreads through thousands of
channels, in the wake of every strike, reaching the backward sections, the
remotest provinces, the “people”, the “depths of Russia”!  

Very characteristic are the comments made on strikes by Severyanin, a
liberal, which were welcomed by Russkiye Vedomosti and
sympathetically reprinted by Rech: 


   “Have the workers any grounds for admixing economic or
   any [!] demands to a May Day strike?” asks Mr. Severyanin; and he answers:
   “I make bold to think that they have none. Every economic strike can and
   should be begun only after a serious weighing of its chances of
   success.... That is why, more often than not, it is unreason able to link
   such strikes with May Day.... Indeed, it would be rather strange to do so:
   we are celebrating the international workers’ holiday, and we use the
   occasion to demand a ten per cent rise for calico of such-and-such
   grades.”  


That is how the liberal reasons! And this piece of infinite vulgarity,
meanness and nastiness is sympathetically accept ed by the “best” liberal
papers, which claim to be democratic!  

The crudest self-interest of a bourgeois, the vilest coward ice of a
counter-revolutionary—that is what lies behind the florid phrases of the
liberal. He wants the pockets of the employers to be safe. He wants an
“orderly” and “harmless” demonstration in favour of “freedom of
association”! But the proletariat, instead of this, is drawing the masses
into a revolutionary strike, which indissolubly links politics
with economics, a strike which wins the support of the most backward
sections by the success of the struggle for an immediate improvement in the
life of the workers, and at the same time rouses the people against the
tsarist monarchy.  

Yes, the experience of 1905 created a deep-rooted and great tradition
of mass strikes. And we must not forget the results that these strikes
produce in Russia. Stubborn mass strikes are inseparably bound up in our
country with armed uprising.  

Let these words not be misinterpreted. It is by no means a question of
a call for an uprising. Such a call would be most unwise at the
present moment. It is a question of establishing the connection
between strike and uprising in Russia.  
 

How did the uprising grow in 1905? Firstly, mass strikes,
demonstrations and meetings made clashes between the people and the police
and troops more and more frequent. Secondly, the mass strikes roused the
peasantry to a number of partial, fragmentary, semi-spontaneous
revolts. Thirdly, the mass strikes very soon spread to the Army and Navy,
causing clashes on economic grounds (the “bean” and similar
“mutinies”), and subsequently insurrections. Fourthly, the
counter-revolution itself started civil war by pogroms, by
Violence against democrats, and so on.  

The revolution of 1905 was defeated not because it had gone “too
far”, or because the December

uprising[5] was “artificial”, as renegades among the liberals, and
their like imagine. On the contrary, the cause of the defeat was that the
uprising did not go far enough, that the realisation of
its necessity was not sufficiently widespread and firmly assimilated among
the revolutionary classes, that the up rising was not concerted, resolute,
organised, simultaneous, aggressive.  

Let us see now whether signs of a gathering revolt are in
evidence at present. In order not to be carried away by revolutionary
enthusiasm, let us take the testimony of the Octobrists. The
German Union of Octobrists in St. Petersburg consists mainly of so-called
“Left” and “constitutional” Octobrists, who are particularly popular
among the Cadets, and who are most capable (in comparison with the other
Octobrists and Cadets) of observing events “objectively”, without making
it their aim to frighten the authorities with the prospect of revolution.


Here is what the St. Petersburger Zeitung, the newspaper of
these Octobrists, wrote in its weekly political review on May 6 (19): 


   “May has come. Regardless of the weather, this is
   usually not a very pleasant month for the inhabitants of the capital,
   because it begins with the proletarian ‘holiday’. This
   year, with the impression of the Lena demonstrations still fresh in the
   minds of the workers, May Day was particularly dangerous. The atmosphere of
   the capital, saturated with all sorts of rumours about strikes and
   demonstrations, portended a fire. Our loyal police were visibly agitated;
   they organised searches, arrested some persons and mobilised large forces
   to prevent street demonstrations. The fact that the police could think of
   nothing more clever than to raid the editorial offices of the workers’
   papers

    

   and arrest their editors does not testify to a particularly intimate
   knowledge of the wires by which the puppet regiments of the workers were
   pulled. Yet such wires exist. This is evident from the disciplined
   character of the strike and from many other circumstances. That is why this
   May Day strike, the largest we have witnessed so far, was so
   ominous—there were some 100,000 or perhaps even 150,000 workers of big
   and small workshops on strike. It was only a peaceful parade, but the solid
   unity of that army was remarkable, all the more because the recent unrest
   among the workers was accompanied by other alarming facts. On various naval
   vessels, sailors were arrested for conducting revolutionary
   propaganda. Judging by all the information that has got into the press, the
   situation is not very good on our naval vessels, which are not numerous as
   it is.... The railwaymen are also giving cause for anxiety. True,
   matters nowhere went so far as an attempt to call a strike, but arrests,
   including such a conspicuous one as that of A. A. Ushakov, an assistant
   station master on the Nikolayevskaya Railway, show that there is a certain
   danger there as well.  

   “Attempts at revolution on the part of immature worker
   masses can, of course, have only a harmful effect on the outcome of the
   Duma elections. These attempts are all the more unreasonable because the
   Tsar has appointed Manukhin, and the Council of State has passed the
   workers’ Insurance Bill”!!  


That is how a German Octobrist reasons. We, on our part, must remark
that we have received exact first-hand information about the sailors which
proves that Novoye Vremya has exaggerated and inflated the
matter. The

Okhrana[6] is obviously “working” in agent provocateur
fashion. Premature attempts at an uprising would be extremely unwise.  The
working-class vanguard must understand that the sup port of the working
class by the democratic peasantry and the active participation of the armed
forces are the main conditions for a timely, i.e., successful, armed
uprising in Russia.  

Mass strikes in revolutionary epochs have their objective logic. They
scatter hundreds of thousands and millions of sparks in all
directions—and all around there is the inflammable material of extreme
bitterness, the torture of unprecedented starvation, endless tyranny,
shameless and cynical mockery at the “pauper”, the “muzhik”, the
rank-and-file soldier. Add to this the perfectly unbridled, pogromist
Jew-baiting carried on by the Black Hundreds and stealthily fostered and
directed by the Court gang of the dull witted and bloodthirsty Nicholas
Romanov. “So it was, so it will

be”[7]—these revealing words were uttered by the

    

Minister Makarov, to his own misfortune, and to the misfortune of his class
and his landlord tsar!  

The revolutionary upswing of the masses imposes great and responsible
duties on every working-class Social-Democrat, on every honest
democrat. “All-round support for the movement of the masses that is
beginning [we should say already: the revolutionary movement of
the masses that has begun], and its expansion on the basis of full
implementation of the Party slogans”—this is how the All-Russia
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. defined these duties. The Party slogans—a
democratic republic, an eight-hour day, confiscation of all the landed
estates—must become the slogans of all democrats, of the
people’s revolution.  

To be able to support and extend the movement of the masses, we need
organisation and more organisation. Without an illegal party we
cannot carry on this work, and there is no point in just talking about
it. In supporting and extending the onslaught of the masses, we must
carefully take into account the experience of 1905, and in explaining the
need for and inevitability of an uprising, we must warn against and keep
off premature attempts. The growth of mass strikes, the enlistment
of other classes in the struggle, the state of the organisations, and the
temper of the masses will all suggest of themselves the moment when all
forces must unite in a concerted, resolute, aggressive, supremely
courageous onslaught of the revolution on the tsarist monarchy.  

Without a victorious, revolution there will be no freedom in Russia.


Without the overthrow of the tsarist monarchy by a proletarian and
peasant uprising there will be no victorious revolution in Russia.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, p. 467.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The article “The Revolutionary Upswing” was published early in
June 1912, after Lenin had made, at. a meeting of the Paris section of the
R.S.D.L.P. Organisation Abroad, a report on developments in Russia
(April 26 [May 9], 1912) and read a paper entitled “The Revolutionary
Upswing of the Russian Proletariat” (May 31 [June 13]). A printed notice
issued by the Paris section of the R.S.D.L.P. Organisation Abroad gave a
detailed outline of the paper coinciding with the main propositions of this
article.





[3]
Sotsial-Demokrat (The Social-Democrat)—the Central
Organ of the R.S.D.L.P., published illegally from February 1908 to
January 1917. In all 58 issues appeared. The first issue appeared in
Russia,

   

and then publication was transferred, first to Paris and afterwards to
Geneva. By decision of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., the
Editorial Board consisted of representatives of the Bolsheviks, Mensheviks
and Polish Social-Democrats.  

Sotsial-Demokrat published more than eighty articles and other
items by Lenin. On its Editorial Board Lenin upheld a consistently
Bolshevik line. Two members of the Board—Kamenev and Zinovyev—took a
conciliatory view of the liquidators and tried to defeat Lenin’s
line. Another two members, the Mensheviks Martov and Dan, obstructed the
work of the Board and at the same time openly defended liquidationism in
Golos Sotsial-Demokrata.  

Lenin’s uncompromising struggle against the liquidators resulted in
Martov and Dan resigning from the Editorial Board in June 1911. From
December 1911 the newspaper was edited by Lenin.





[4]
The leaflet mentioned by Lenin was printed in St. Petersburg and
circulated at the factories before May 1, 1912. It called on the workers to
hold meetings and demonstrations in Nevsky Prospekt on May Day, under the
slogans put forward by the Sixth (Prague) All-Russia Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P.: “A constituent assembly, an eight-hour working day, and
confiscation of the landed estates.” The leaflet ended with the militant
appeals: “Down with the tsar’s government! Down with the autocratic
Constitution of June 3! Long live a democratic republic! Long live
socialism!”

It was signed: “Meeting of Representatives of All Organised Workers of
St. Petersburg”, “Social-Democratic ‘Unity’ Group”, “City Central
Social-Democratic Group”, “Group of Worker Socialist-Revolutionaries”,
“Group of Worker Social-Democrats of St. Petersburg”, and
“Representatives of May Day Committees”.  

On June 4 (17), 1912, the full text of the leaflet was published in the
news section of Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27.





[5]
The December uprising was the armed uprising of the Moscow
workers against the autocracy in December 1905. For nine days the workers,
led by the Moscow Bolshevik Social-Democrats, fought gallantly on the
barricades against the tsar’s troops. The government did not succeed in
crushing the revolt until fresh troop. arrived from St. Petersburg. It
dealt with the insurgents with monstrous cruelty; the workers’ districts
ran with blood, and thou sands of workers were killed in Moscow and the
vicinity.





[6]
The Okhrana was an agency of the secret police in tsarist
Russia, in charge of political investigation. It was under the jurisdiction
of the Police Department.





[7]
See Note 1.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Slogans of the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912 and the May Day Movement









Lenin: The Slogans of the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912 and the May Day Movement







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Slogans of the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912 and the May Day Movement




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27, June 17 (4), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 110-115.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Elsewhere in this issue, the reader will find the full text
of a leaflet printed and circulated by the St. Petersburg workers before
the May Day action that will from now on be famous. That leaflet is very
much worth dwelling on, for it is a most important document in the history
of the working-class movement in Russia and in the history of our Party.


The leaflet reflects a certain state of disorganisation of the
Social-Democratic Party in the capital, for the appeal is signed, not by
the St. Petersburg Committee, but by individual Social-Democratic groups
and even a group of worker Socialist-Revolutionaries. In most parts of
Russia, the state of our Party is such that its directing committees and
centres are constantly being arrested, and constantly re establish
themselves thanks to the existence of all kinds of factory, trade union,
sub-district and district Social-Democratic groups—the very same
“nuclei” that have always roused the hatred of the liberals and
liquidators. In the latest issue of the magazine published by those
gentlemen (Nasha Zarya, 1912, No. 4), the reader can see again and
again how Mr. V. Levitsky, writing with impotent rage and vomiting
abuse, hisses against the “rebirth of the Party through an artificial
revival of politically dead nuclei”.  

What makes the leaflet under review all the more typical and noteworthy
is the fact that, owing to the arrest of the St. Petersburg Committee, it
was the nuclei that had to appear on the scene, nuclei deprived by
the will of the police of the “directing centre” so hateful to the
liquidators. Owing to this fact, which every revolutionary will find sad,

    

the independent life of the nuclei came into the open. The nuclei
had in all haste to rally their forces, establish contacts, and restore the
“underground” in the face of fierce persecution by the police,
who positively raged before May Day. The groups, representatives, etc.,
whose names appear under the leaflet, all constitute that very
underground that is hateful to the liberals and the
liquidators. While the same liquidationist leader, Mr. Levitsky, speaking
on behalf of Nasha Zarya and Zhivoye Dyelo, of course
assailed, foaming at the mouth, the “cult of the underground”
(see p. 33 of the above-mentioned issue), we had, in the shape of the
St. Petersburg leaflet, a precise and complete document revealing to us the
existence of that underground, its vitality, the content of its
work, and its significance.  

The St. Petersburg Committee has been wiped out through the arrests, so
now we shall see just what the underground nuclei are like in themselves,
what they are doing or can do, what ideas they have actually made their own
or evolved in their midst, and not merely borrowed from the supreme Party
body, what ideas really enjoy the workers’ sympathy.  

The leaflet shows what the nuclei are doing: they are carrying on the
work of the St. Petersburg Committee, which for the time being is shattered
(to the delight of all the diverse enemies of the underground). They
continue preparing for May Day. They hastily re-establish the contacts
between different underground Social-Democratic groups. They en
list worker Socialist-Revolutionaries too, for they are well aware of the
importance of uniting the proletariat round a living revolutionary
cause. They rally these different Social-Democratic groups, and even a
“group of worker Socialist-Revolutionaries”, round specific
slogans of the struggle. And this is when the real character of
the movement, the real sentiment of the proletariat, the real
strength of the R.S.D.L.P. and of its January All-Russia
Conference, stands out.  

As a result of the arrests, there happens to be no hierarchic body able
to decree the advancing of particular slogans. Hence the proletarian
masses, the worker Social-Democrats and even some of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries can be united only by slogans that are
really indisputable for the masses,

    

only by slogans that derive their strength not from a “decree from above”
(as demagogues and liquidators put it), but from the conviction of
the revolutionary workers themselves.  

And what do we find?  

We find that, after the St. Petersburg Committee had been
shattered, at a time when its immediate restoration was impossible, and
when one group of workers influenced another group solely by ideological,
and not by organisational, means, the slogans adopted were those of the
All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. which was convened in
January 1912 and which evokes a positively mad, savage hatred on the
part of the liberals, the liquidators, Lieber, Trotsky and Co.!  

“Let our slogans be,” the St. Petersburg workers wrote in their
leaflet, “a constituent assembly, an eight-hour working day, the
confiscation of the landed estates.” And further on the leaflet launches
the call: “Down with the tsarist government! Down with the autocratic
Constitution of June 3! Long live the democratic republic! Long live
socialism!”  

We see from this instructive document that all the slogans put
forward by the Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. have been adopted by the
St. Petersburg proletariat and have set their seal on the first steps of
the new Russian revolution. All kinds of slanderers and detractors of the
January Conference may carry on their dirty business as much as they
like. The revolutionary proletariat of St. Petersburg has answered
them. The work started long before the last Conference by revolutionary
Social-Democrats, calling on the proletariat to assume the role of leader
of the people’s revolution, has borne fruit despite all
police persecution, despite the reckless pre-May Day arrests and hounding
of revolutionaries, despite the torrent of lies and abuse from the liberal
and liquidationist press.  

Hundreds of thousands of St. Petersburg proletarians, followed by
workers throughout Russia, resorted to strikes and street demonstrations
not as one of the separate classes of bourgeois society, not with “their
own” merely economic slogans, but as the leader raising aloft the banner
of the revolution for the whole people, on behalf of the
whole people, and with the aim of awakening and drawing into the

    

struggle all the classes who need freedom and are capable of
striving for it.  

The revolutionary movement of the proletariat in Russia has risen to a
higher level. Whereas in 1905 it began with mass strikes and

Gaponiads,[1] in 1912, despite the fact that the police has smashed our
Party organisations, the movement is beginning with mass strikes and the
raising of the republican banner! The separate “nuclei” and
disconnected “groups” of workers did their duty under the most difficult
and trying conditions. The proletariat set up its own “May Day
committees” and went into action with a revolutionary platform
worthy of the class which is destined to free man kind from wage slavery.


The May Day movement also shows what meaning some words about
“unity” have and how the workers unite in reality. Rubanovich, a
spokesman for the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, writes in

Budushcheye,[2] Burtsev’s Paris newspaper, that “we must point
out the following note worthy feature of this May Day action: at the
preparatory meetings, St. Petersburg workers refused to recognise the
division existing among the various socialist groups; ...  the prevailing
tendency was towards agreement”. The leaflet we have reprinted clearly
shows what fact prompted such an inference. The fact is that the
Social-Democratic nuclei, which had lost their guiding centre,
re-established contact with all the various groups by winning over workers
regardless of the views they held and advocating to them all their
Party slogans. And precisely because these Party slogans are correct,
because they are in keeping with the proletariat’s revolutionary tasks and
comprise the tasks of a revolution of the whole people, they were accepted
by all workers.  

Unity materialised because the January Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. gave up the idle game of bringing about agreement among small
groups abroad, gave up the idle wooing of the liquidators of the
revolutionary party, and put forward clear and precise fighting slogans
at the right time. The proletariat’s unity for revolutionary
action was achieved not by compromising between the proletarian
(Social-Democratic) and the non-proletarian (Socialist Revolutionary)
parties, not by seeking agreement with the liquidators who have broken away
from the Social-

    

Democratic Party, but by rallying the workers of Russian Social-Democratic
organisations and by these workers making a correct appraisal of the tasks
of the moment.  

A good lesson for those who, succumbing to the idle chatter of the
liberals of the Bund and the Trotskys from Vienna, are still capable of
believing in “unity”—with the liquidators. The vaunted “Organising
Commission” of Lieber, Trotsky and the liquidators cried out from the
house-tops about “unity”, but in fact it could not, and did not, supply
a single slogan actually uniting the revolutionary struggle of the
workers. The liquidators supplied their own, non-revolutionary
slogans, slogans of a liberal labour policy, but the movement disregarded
them. That is what lies at the bottom of the Trotskyist fables about
“unity”!  

Swearing and vowing that he was “unifying”, and cursing the
Conference as hard as he could, Trotsky assured good souls in Vienna on
April 23 (May 6) that “the struggle for freedom of association is the
basis” (!!) of the Lena events and of their repercussions, that
“this demand is, and will be, the central [!!] issue of the
revolutionary mobilisation of the proletariat”. Scarcely a week had passed
when these pitiful phrases of the yes-man of the liquidators were swept
away like so much dust—by the “representatives of all the organised
workers of St. Petersburg”, “the Social-Democratic Obyedineniye group”,
“the central Social-Democratic city group”, “the group of worker
Socialist-Revolutionaries”, “the group of worker Social-Democrats” and
“the representatives of May Day committees”.  

The Social-Democratic proletariat of St. Petersburg has realised that a
new revolutionary struggle must be started, not for the sake of one right,
even though it should be the most essential, the most important for the
working class, but for the sake of the freedom of the whole
people.  

The Social-Democratic proletariat of St. Petersburg has realised that
it must generalise its demands, and not break them up into parts, that the
republic includes freedom of association, and not vice versa, that it is
necessary to strike at the centre, to attack the source of evil, to destroy
the whole system, the whole regime, of the Russia of the tsar and the Black
Hundreds.  
 

The Social-Democratic proletariat of St. Petersburg has realised that
it is ridiculous and absurd to claim freedom of association from
Nicholas Romanov, from the Black-Hundred Duma, that it is
ridiculous and absurd to presume that Russia’s present political system,
our “autocratic Constitution of June 3”, is compatible with
freedom of association, that in a country where there is a general and
indiscriminate lack of rights, where arbitrary rule and provocation by the
authorities reign supreme, and where there is no “freedom” even for
simply helping tens of millions of starving people—it is only liberal
chatterers and liberal labour politicians that can put freedom of
association as “the central issue of revolutionary mobilisation”.  

The Social-Democratic proletariat of St. Petersburg has realised that
and unfurled the republican banner, demanding an eight-hour day
and confiscation of the landed estates as the only guarantee of the truly
democratic character of the revolution.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
On January 9, 1905, the tsar ordered his troops to fire on a peaceful
demonstration of St. Petersburg workers who were marching to the Winter
Palace with the priest Gapon at their head to submit

   

a petition to the tsar. The atrocious shooting of the defenceless workers
gave rise to mass political strikes and demonstrations all over Russia
under the slogan of “Down with the autocracy!” The events of January 9
were the starting-point of the revolution of 1905–07.





[2]
Budushcheye (L’Avenir)—a liberal bourgeois weekly
published in Paris from October 1911 to January 1914 in Russian (some items
were published in French). It was edited by V. L. Burtsev and Mensheviks
and Socialist-Revolutionaries contributed to it.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liquidators Oppose Revolutionary Mass Strikes









Lenin: The Liquidators Oppose Revolutionary Mass Strikes







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liquidators Oppose Revolutionary Mass Strikes




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27, June 17 (4), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 116-117.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The leading article of this issue had already gone to press
when we received the first issue of the liquidationist Nevsky
Golos. V. Yezhov, the well-known liquidator of Nasha Zarya,
at once presented the new organ with such a gem that one is left gasping!
Here it is, if you please: 


   “Owing to this [i.e., owing to the variety of the
   strikes, which in some cases did not go beyond a protest against the
   imposition of fines for celebrating May Day, while in other cases they
   supplemented the protest with economic demands, etc.], the principle
   involved in the protest (after all, it was not over a few kopeks that the
   strike was called) became obscured [!??!] in a considerable number of
   cases, being complicated by economic demands....  

   “Their own experience should have suggested to the
   workers that it was inadvisable [!!] to complicate their protest by
   economic demands, just as it is inadvisable to complicate [!?] an ordinary
   strike by demands involving principles.  

   “It is necessary to give organisational form to the
   sentiments of the worker masses. It is necessary to increase propaganda for
   trade unions, to recruit new members for them. This is all the more
   necessary since there are many hotheads among the workers nowadays who are
   carried away by the mass movement and speak at meetings against
   unions, alleging them to be useless and unnecessary.  

   “A period of economic strikes [only economic?] is ahead
   of us. It would be an irreparable mistake to allow them to become inter
   twined with political actions of the workers [!!!]. Such a combination
   would have a harmful effect [!!??] on both the economic and the political
   struggle.”  


Here you have the perfectly liberal Mr. Severyanin copied by the
liquidator!  Utter incomprehension of the fact that a
revolutionary mass strike necessarily combines the
economic with the political strike; narrow-mindedness, a monstrous
distortion of the revolutionary character of the upswing and

    

attempts to measure it by the yardstick of “ordinary strikes”; the most
reactionary advice “not to complicate” politics with economics and not to
“intertwine” them; and the using of the legally published press for an
attack in the spirit of Struve and Maklakov against the revolutionary
worker Social-Democrats, who are described as “hotheads” speaking out
“against unions”!  

A liberal cannot understand a revolutionary Social-Democrat
except as one who is “against unions”. But the workers at the meetings
were, of course, not “against unions”, but against substituting
liberal slogans for revolutionary ones, which is what Mr. Yezhov and
Co. are doing. Our slogan is not freedom of association, said the workers,
and “trade unions” are not the only, nor the chief, means of “giving”
our movement “organisational form”. Our slogan is the demand for a
republic (see the appeal of the St. Petersburg workers), we are building an
illegal party capable of leading the revolutionary onslaught of
the masses upon the tsarist monarchy. That is what the workers said at the
meetings.  

But the Liebers and Trotskys are assuring the workers that it is
possible for the Social-Democratic proletariat and its Party to “unite”
with liberals à la Yezhov, Potresov and Co.!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Uniters”









Lenin: 'Uniters'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Uniters”




Published:

      Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27, June 17 (4), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 118-121.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The liquidators are doing their utmost to “unite”. The
other day they almost “united” with the Polish Socialist

Party[1]—with its Left wing (Lewica), which is a faction of Polish
social-nationalism.  

For more than ten years Polish Social-Democrats have been waging a
struggle against the social-nationalism of the P.S.P. As a result, a
section of the P.S.P. (the Left wing) had some of its nationalist
prejudices knocked out of their heads. But the struggle continues. Polish
worker Social-Democrats are opposed to unity with the
above-mentioned faction of the P.S.P. as an organisation because they think
it would be harmful to their cause. Individual workers and groups of the
Left wing, who refuse to stop at a half-way revision of the nationalist
principles of the P.S.P., are joining the ranks of the Social-Democratic
Party. And this is the time when our liquidators are out to “unite” with
the P.S.P. Left wing!  

It is just as if the Russian Social-Democrats began, independently of
the Bund, to “unite” with, say, so-called

“Socialist-Zionists”[2] or, ignoring the Lettish Social-Democracy,
with the so-called “Lettish Social-Democratic

Union”[3] (actually a Socialist-Revolutionary organisation).  

This is apart from the formal aspect of the matter. At the Stockholm
Congress, the Polish Social-Democratic Party concluded an agreement with
the R.S.D.L.P., by which any groups in Poland wishing to join the
R.S.D.L.P. can do so only by joining an organisation of the

P.S.D.[4] And at the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. held in
December 1908, even a proposal to discuss the question of uniting with the
Left wing was voted down by an overwhelming majority.  
 

It is quite clear that, while constantly shouting about “unity”,
Trotsky and his liquidationist friends are actually aggravating the
split in Poland. Fortunately for the R.S.D.L.P., this whole band of
liquidators, together with the “conciliators” trailing behind them, is
completely powerless to accomplish anything in practice, and this
refers to Poland as well. Otherwise the amalgamation of the liquidators
with the P.S.P. would certainly cause a very sharp split in Poland.  

Why, then, have the liquidators embarked on this obviously adventurist
policy?  Certainly not because things are going well with them. The point
is that they are in need of uniting with someone, of forming some sort of
“party”. Social-Democrats, the Polish Social-Democracy, refuse to go
along with them, so, instead of Social-Democrats, they have to take members
of the P.S.P., who have nothing in common with our Party. In the Russian
towns, our old Party organisations refuse to go along with them, so they
have to take, instead of the Social-Democratic nuclei, the so-called
“initiating groups” of liquidators, who have nothing in common with the
R.S.D.L.P.  

“One does not fly from a good life.” Is it not time, liquidator
gentlemen, you started to unite with the Socialist-Revolutionaries (the
Socialist-Revolutionary liquidators) as well? After all, these
gentlemen, too, seem very anxious to “unite”. What a “broad” party you
would then have! Larin himself would be

content.[5] 
 *     *  * 

While “uniting” with “foreign powers”, the liquidators
continue to bargain with the “conciliators” over the terms of “uniting”
the liquidator-conciliator camp. Mr. V. Levitsky contributed to Nasha
Zarya an article which is a sort of manifesto addressed to “all
trends” that are prepared to fight against the recent Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P.  

Mr. Levitsky entitled his article “For Unity—Against a
Split”. Quite like Trotsky, isn’t it? Ever since the pro-Party elements
thoroughly rebuffed the liquidators in all the spheres of
activity, Levitsky and Co. have been using a very “conciliatory”
language. Why, they are wholly in

    

favour of “unity”. They only advance the following four modest conditions
for “unity”: 

(1) A fight against the Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., which has united
all the Social-Democrats, except a handful of waverers.  

(2) The formation, in place of the Party, of “a central initiating
group” (Mr. Levitsky’s italics, Nasha Zarya No. 4,
p. 31). (What is meant by the liquidators’ “initiating” groups has
recently been explained in the press by Plekhanov—see his Dnevnik

Sotsial-Demokrata[6] No. 16. Both the Bund and Trotsky, who are
doing service for the liquidators, are concealing Plekhanov’s explanation
from their readers. But you can’t conceal it, gentlemen!)  

(3) No revival of the “politically dead nuclei” (ibid.,
p. 33).  

(4) Acceptance of the slogan “against the cult of the
underground” (ibid., p. 33).  

The programme has been outlined clearly enough if not as frankly and
confidently as in the past. And there and then Levitsky explains at great
length to all the Trotskys:

After all, gentlemen, you have no choice. You had better accept our terms,
and in exchange we (i.e., Levitsky and Co.) will readily agree to the
following: “to console yourselves”, you (i.e., Trotsky and his like) can
say that it is not you who have moved closer to the liquidators, but the
other way round.  

Martov, writing in the same issue of Nasha Zarya, threatens in
advance the future Social-Democratic group in the Fourth Duma that if it
turns out to be anti-liquidationist like its crafty predecessor, then
“cases like the Belousov

affair[7] will not be exceptions, but the rule”, meaning, in plain
language, that the liquidators will split the Duma group. Your
bark, liquidator gentlemen, is worse than your bite. Had you had the
strength to do so, you would long ago have formed your own liquidationist
group in the Duma.  

The cause of “unity” is in good hands, sure enough.  

The miserable comedy of “unification” enacted by the liquidators and
Trotsky is repellent to the least exacting people. Unity is being
achieved, only it is not unity with the liquidators, but against
them.  
    

     *     *  * 

As regards the incredibly

Khlestakovian[8] role staged by Trotsky, Lieber (the Bund), and the
liquidators, with their vaunted “Organising Commission”, we think it
sufficient to call the attention of the readers—those who prefer not to
trust words but to verify the points at issue by a serious and careful
study of the documents—to the following facts.  

In June 1911, following the withdrawal of Lieber and Igorev from the
meeting of the Central Committee members, the Organising Commission

Abroad[9] was formed in Paris. The first organisation in Russia to be
approached by it was the Kiev organisation. Even Trotsky admits that its
status as an organisation is indisputable. In October 1911, the Kiev
organisation took part in forming the Organising Commission in Russia. In
January 1912 the latter convened the conference of the R.S.D.L.P.  

In January 1912, a meeting was held by the representatives of the Bund,
the Central Committee of the Letts and the Caucasian Regional Committee
(all three being liquidationist groups). The Poles withdrew at
once, declaring that the whole undertaking was a liquidationist
affair. The “conciliators” and Plekhanov followed suit and refused to
join, Plekhanov declaring in Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 16
that that conference was being called by the
liquidators. It is now June 1912, and yet neither the Bund nor Trotsky
have succeeded in “uniting” anyone, except the Golos
and the Vperyod groups; they have not won over a single
serious and indisputable organisation in Russia, have not said a
word to deny the substance of Plekhanov’s statement, nor made the slightest
change in the propaganda conducted by the liquidators in Nasha
Zarya and similar press organs.  

For all that, there is no end of phrase-mongering and bragging about
“unity”.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the decision of the liquidators’ Organising
Committee to invite the Left wing of the P.S.P. to the August
liquidationist conference.  

Polska Partia Socjalistyczna—the Polish Socialist Party
(P.S.P.), a reformist nationalist party founded in 1892. In 1906 it split
into the Left-wing P.S.P. and the chauvinist Right-wing P.S.P.





[2]
Zionist-Socialists—members of the Zionist-Socialist Workers’
Party, a Jewish petty-bourgeois nationalist organisation founded in
1904. They sought to isolate the Jewish workers from the revolutionary
struggle of the world proletariat, and advocated a compromise with the
bourgeoisie with a view to bringing about the establishment of a Jewish
state.





[3]
The Lettish Social-Democratic Union, founded abroad in the
autumn of 1900, put forward demands that were close to those of the Russian
Socialist-Revolutionaries. It was imbued to a considerable extent with
nationalist tendencies. In 1905 it gained some influence among a section of
the peasantry, but it was not long before the Lettish Social-Democratic
Labour Party superseded it. Subsequently the Union ceased to play any
appreciable role.





[4]
The Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P., held in Stockholm on
April 10-25 (April 23–May 8), 1906, decided to merge the R.S.D.L.P. with
the Social-Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania and with
the Lettish Social-Democratic Labour Party. They became part of the
R.S.D.L.P. as territorial organisations working among the proletariat of
all nationalities in the territories concerned.





[5]
Lenin has in mind the Menshevik liquidators’ plan to liquidate the
illegal Party and replace it by a “broad”, petty-bourgeois labour party
without a programme, a party similar to the British Labour Party, with a
supreme body in the form of a “labour congress” in which
Social-Democrats, Socialist-Revolutionaries and anarchists alike would be
represented. Lenin exposed this exceedingly harmful attempt of the
Mensheviks to liquidate the Social-Democratic Labour arty and dilute the
vanguard of the working class with petty-bourgeois elements. This idea of
the Menshevik liquidators amounted to renunciation of the dictatorship of
the proletariat.





[6]
Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata (The Diary of a
Social-Democrat)—a non-periodical organ published by G. V. Plekhanov
in Geneva from March 1905 to April 1912, at considerable
intervals. Altogether 15 issues appeared. Publication was resumed in
Petrograd in 1916, but only one issue appeared.





[7]
In February 1912 T. 0. Belousov, a Menshevik liquidator, member of the
Third Duma for Irkutsk Gubernia, withdrew from the Social-Democratic Duma
group. See Lenin’s article “Deputy T. 0. Belousov’s Withdrawal from the
Social-Democratic Group in the Duma” (see present edition, Vol. 17,
pp. 521–26).





[8]
Khlestakov—a character in Gogol’s comedy The
Inspector-General, typifying a reckless braggart and liar.





[9]
The Organising Commission Abroad (O.C.A.) for the convening of
a general Party conference was established by a meeting of members of the
Central Committee on June 1 (14), 1911, and consisted of representatives of
the Bolsheviks, conciliators and Polish Social-Democrats. The other
organisations and groups abroad which had been invited to join the
Commission did not send their representatives. The O.C.A. sent a group of
Party functionaries to Russia, including its authorised representative
G. K. Orjonikidze, to help in making preparations for the planned
conference. It also issued an appeal “To All Social-Democratic Party
Organisations, Groups and Circles”, calling on them to set about electing
members to the Russian Organising Commission (R.O.C.). But as soon as the
O.C.A. was set up a majority in it was gained by the conciliators and the
Polish Social-Democrats who backed them. The conciliatory majority pursued
an unprincipled policy aimed at continuing talks with the Vperyod
group and Trotsky, who had refused to send their delegates to the
O.C.A. The conciliators’ publications accused the Bolsheviks of
factionalism. They used their predominance on the O.C.A. to hold up the
dispatch of Party money to Russia and obstructed preparations for the
conference.  

As a result of the work done by the Bolsheviks, the Russian Organising
Commission was set up. At the end of October the O.C.A. discussed the
Notification which the R.O.C. had adopted concerning its establishment and
its resolutions by which it assumed full powers for the convening of the
conference while the Organising and the Technical commissions were to be
subordinated to the R.O.C. After the conciliatory majority of the
O.C.A. had refused to submit to these decisions the Bolshevik
representatives with drew from the O.C.A. On October 30 (November 12)
Orjonikidze, who had arrived in Paris, made a report to the meeting of the
O.C.A. on the activities of the R.O.C., whereupon the O.C.A. was compelled
to recognise the leading role of the R.O.C. Nevertheless, it was not long
before the O.C.A. began an open fight against the R.O.C. On November 20
(December 3) it issued a leaflet entitled “An Open Letter to the Russian
Organising Commission” accusing the R.O.C. of factionalism. The anti-Party
actions of the O.C.A.

   

were exposed by Orjonikidze in a letter to the Editor published in
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 25, on December 8 (21), 1911. The entire work
of convening the Party conference, held in January 1912, was carried out by
the R.O.C., which had rallied all the illegal Party organisations in
Russia.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Nature and Significance of Our Polemics Against the Liberals









Lenin: The Nature and Significance of Our Polemics Against the Liberals







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Nature and Significance of Our Polemics Against the Liberals




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 12, June 10, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 122-128.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. Prokopovich, a well-known advocate of revisionism and
of a liberal labour policy, contributed to Russkiye Vedomosti an
article entitled “Danger Ahead”. The danger, according to this
politician, is that the elections to the Fourth Duma will be shaped by the
police chiefs. To combat this danger, he proposes “the unity of all the
constitutionalist elements of the country”, i.e., the Social-Democrats and
the Trudoviks, as well as the Cadets and the Progressists.  

The Right-Cadet Russkiye Vedomosti in an editorial note
declares its “satisfaction” with Mr. Prokopovich’s
article. “Such unity of the opposition forces,” it says, “we regard as
an urgent requirement of the present moment.”  

The official-Cadet Rech gives a summary of Mr. Prokopovich’s
article and, quoting the opinion of Russkiye Vedomosti, comments
for its own part: 


   “However, judging by the publications of the
   Social-Democratic trend, which bend all their energies mostly to fight the
   opposition, one can hardly attach any real importance to this appeal”
   (i.e., the appeal for “unity”).  


Thus the important question of the election tactics and the attitude of
the workers to the liberals is being raised once more. Once again we see
that the liberals pose this question not like serious politicians, but like
matchmakers. Their aim is not to establish the truth, but to obscure it.


Indeed, ponder over the following circumstance. Do the liberals mean
amalgamation of the parties when they speak of “unity”? Not in the
least. Mr. Prokopovich, Russkiye Vedomosti and Rech are
all agreed on this score.  
 

Consequently, what they mean by unity is joint action against the
Rights—from Purishkevich to Guchkov—is it not? It would seem that is
so!  

The question arises: does anyone among the “Lefts” reject such joint
action?  

No one does. That is common knowledge.  

An agreement with the liberals to vote against the Rights is precisely
what is meant by “unity” between the democrats and the liberals in the
elections. Why, then, are the liberals dissatisfied? Why do they not say
that the “Lefts” have quite definitely and explicitly declared in favour
of agreements? Why are they so shy of mentioning the fact that it is
the liberals who have said nothing clear, definite, explicit
and official about agreements with the Lefts, with the democrats, with the
Marxists? Why is it that, in speaking of the election tactics, they do
not say a word about the well-known decision of the Cadet conference,
which permitted of blocs with the “Left Octobrists”?  

The facts are there, gentlemen, and no amount of dodging can alter
them. It is the Lefts, the Marxists, that have declared, clearly,
explicitly and officially, in favour of an agreement with the
liberals (including both the Cadets and the Progressists) against the
Rights. And it is none other than the Cadets who have evaded a
quite explicit and official answer regarding the Lefts!  

Mr. Prokopovich knows these facts very well, and it is therefore
absolutely unpardonable on his part to distort the truth by keeping silent
about the explicit decision of the Marxists and the evasiveness of the
Cadets.  

What is the reason for this silence? It is only too obvious from the
quoted statement of Rech alleging that we “bend all our energies
mostly to fight the opposition”.  

From the wording used by Rech, it follows inevitably that if
they want to unite with the liberals, the democrats must not
“bend all their energies” to fight the opposition. But in that case say
so plainly, gentlemen! State your terms explicitly and officially. The
trouble with you, however, is that you cannot do so. You would
merely make everyone laugh if you tried to formulate such a condition. By
putting forward such a condition you would refute yourselves, for you have
all of you unanimously admitted that there are

    

“profound differences” between the liberals and the democrats
(to say nothing of the Marxists).  

And since there are differences, and profound ones at that, how is it
possible to avoid fighting?  

The falsity of the liberals is precisely that, on the one hand, they
reject amalgamation, acknowledge the existence of profound differences,
emphasise that it is impossible “for any of the parties to renounce the
fundamental provisions of its programme” (Russkiye Vedomosti),
and, on the other band, they complain of the “fight against the
opposition”!!  

But let us examine the matter more closely. To begin with, is it true
that the newspapers and magazines, to which Rech refers, bend
all their energies mostly to fight the opposition? No,
far from it. The liberals cannot point to a single question, not one, in
which the democrats do not bend all their energies mostly
to fight the Rights!! Let anyone of you who wishes to check this statement
make a test. Let him take any, say, three successive issues of any Marxist
newspaper. Let him take three political questions as test cases and compare
the documentary data showing against whom the fight of the
Marxists on the questions selected is mostly “directed” in those
newspaper issues.  

You will not make that simple and easy test, liberal gentlemen, because
any such test will prove you wrong.  

Nor is that all. There is another, and particularly important,
consideration which refutes you even more strongly. How do the
democrats in general, and the Marxists in particular, carry on
their fight against the liberals? They carry it on in such a way, and only
in such a way, that each—positively and absolutely each—reproach or
accusation levelled at the liberals naturally involves an even
sharper reproach, an even graver accusation levelled at the
Rights.  

That is the gist of the matter, the crux of the issue! A few examples
will make our idea quite clear.  

We accuse the liberals, the Cadets, of being counter
revolutionary. Show us a single one of our accusations of this
kind that does not reflect with even greater force upon the Rights.  

We accuse the liberals of “nationalism” and “imperialism”. Show us
a single one of our accusations of this kind

    

that is not directed with even greater force against the Rights.  

We have accused the liberals of being afraid of the movement of the
masses. Now can you find in our newspapers a formulation of this accusation
such as is not directed against the Rights as well?  

We have accused the liberals of defending “certain” medieval
institutions that are capable of “operating” against the workers. To
accuse the liberals of that means accusing thereby all
the Rights of the same thing, and of even more.  

These examples can be multiplied indefinitely. You will find that
always and everywhere, without any exception, the working-class democrats
accuse the liberals exclusively for being close to the Rights, for the
irresolute and fictitious nature of their fight against the
Rights, for their half-heartedness, thereby accusing the Rights,
not merely of “half a sin”, but of a “whole sin”.  

“The fight against the liberals” waged by the democrats and the
Marxists is more profound, more consistent and richer in content, and it
does more to enlighten and rally the masses, than the fight against the
Rights. That, gentle men, is how matters stand!  

And in order not to leave any doubts on this score, in order to
forestall any absurd distortion of the meaning and significance of our
fight against the liberals—to forestall, for example, the absurd theory
of “one reactionary mass” (i.e., the lumping together of the liberals and
the Rights in the single political concept of a reactionary bloc, of a
reactionary mass)—we always take care, in our official statements, to
speak of the fight against the Rights in terms different from
those we use in speaking of our fight against the liberals.  

Mr. Prokopovich knows this very well, as does every educated
liberal. He knows, for instance, that in our definition of the social,
class nature of the various parties, we always stress the medievalism of
the Rights and the bourgeois nature of the liberals. And there is a world
of difference between these two things. Medievalism can (and should) be
destroyed, even keeping within the framework of capitalism. Bourgeois
nature cannot be destroyed within this frame work, but we can (and should)
“appeal” from the bourgeois

    

landlord to the bourgeois peasant, from the bourgeois liberal to the
bourgeois democrat, from bourgeois half freedom to bourgeois full
freedom. It is in such appeals, and only iii such appeals, that our
criticism of the liberals consists during the period Russia is passing
through, i.e., the criticism which we are voicing from the standpoint of
the immediate and next tasks of this period.  

Take the following statement in Mr. Prokopovich’s article. “The
creation of sound conditions for the political life of the mass of the
people—this is the immediate aim which at present unites the Lefts and
the opposition.”  

Nothing could he more meaningless, more empty and misleading than this
statement. Even an Octobrist, even an astute “nationalist”, will
subscribe to it, because it is so vague. It is a mere promise, sheer
declamation, diplomatic concealment of one’s thoughts. But if
Mr. Prokopovich, like so many other liberals, has been given a tongue so
that he may conceal his thoughts, we shall try to do our duty and reveal
what is concealed behind his statement. To be on the safe side, let us take
a minor example, something of rather little importance.  

Is the two-chamber system a sound condition for political life? We do
not think so. The Progressists and the Cadets think it is. For holding such
views, we accuse the liberals of being anti-democratic, of being
counter-revolutionary. And by formulating this accusation against the
liberals, we level an even greater accusation at all the Rights.  

Further, the question arises: How about “unity between the Lefts and
the opposition”? Do we, on account of this difference of opinion, refuse
to unite with a liberal against a Right? By no means. The
counter-revolutionary views of the liberals on this question, as well as on
all similar, much more important questions of political liberty,
have been known to us for a long time—since 1905 or even
earlier. Nevertheless, we repeat even in 1912 that both in a second ballot
and at the second stage of the elections it is permissible to enter into
agreements with the liberals against the Rights. For, despite its
half-heartedness, bourgeois monarchist liberalism is not at all the same as
feudal reaction. It would be very bad working-class politics not to take
advantage of this difference.  
 

But to proceed. How should we take advantage of it? On
what terms is “unity between the Lefts and the opposition” possible?
The answer of the liberal is: since the Lefts are waging a relentless fight
against the opposition, there is no point in even talking of unity. And the
liberal goes on to explain his idea as follows: the more modest the demand,
the wider is the circle of those who agree with it, the more complete is
the unity, and the greater the force capable of implementing that demand. A
“tolerable” constitution providing for a two-chamber system (and
other—how shall we put it mildly?—slight digressions from democracy)
will have the support of all democrats and all liberals; that is a great
deal. But if you insist on “pure” democracy, the Progressists will drop
out, and you will also “alienate” many Cadets, with the result that the
“constitutionalist elements” will be disunited and weakened.  

That is how the liberal reasons. But we reason differently. Our main
premise is that unless the masses are politically conscious there can be no
change for the better. The liberal looks to the upper ranks, while we look
to the “lower ranks”. If we refrain from explaining the harm of the
two-chamber system, or even relax ever so slightly the “fight” against
all sorts of anti-democratic views on this question, we may “attract” the
liberal landlord, merchant, lawyer, professor, who are all of a feather
with Purishkevich, and can do nothing serious against the
Purishkeviches. By “attracting” them, we alienate the masses—in the
sense that the masses, to whom democracy is not just a diplomatic
signboard, not a showy phrase, but their own, vital cause, a question of
life and death, would lose their confidence in the partisans of the
two-chamber system; and also in the sense that relaxing the attacks on the
two-chamber system implies inadequate political education of the masses,
and unless the masses are politically conscious, wide-awake and full of
determination, no changes for the better can be brought about.


The Cadets and the Prokopoviches tell us that by our polemics against
the liberal we are driving a wedge between the Lefts and the
opposition. Our answer is that consistent democracy repels the most
wavering and unreliable liberals, those most tolerant to
Purishkevichism—and they represent a mere handful; on the other hand, it
attracts the millions

    

now awakening to a new life, to a “sound political life”, by which we
mean something quite different from, something that is not at all the same
as, that which Mr. Prokopovich means by it.  

Instead of the two-chamber system, we might cite as an example the
question of the composition of the land committees. Should influence in
these committees be so divided as to give one-third to the landlords,
one-third to the peasants and one-third to the bureaucrats, as the Cadets
propose, or should they be elected quite freely, on the basis of a
fully democratic electoral law? What, Mr. Prokopovich, are we to
understand, in regard to this point, by “sound conditions for the
political life of the mass of the people”? Whom will we repel and whom
will we attract by adhering to a consistently democratic course on this
question?  

And let not Russkiye Vedomosti reply that “at present one
point dominates over all the other points of the programme, a point common
to all the progressive parties—the demand for political
liberty”. Precisely because this point dominates—and this is
indisputable, it is gospel truth—there is a need for the widest masses,
for millions upon millions of people, to distinguish between half freedom
and freedom and to see the indissoluble connection between political
democracy and democratic agrarian reform.  

Unless the masses are interested, politically conscious, wide awake,
active, determined and independent, absolutely nothing can be accomplished
in either sphere.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Capitalism and “Parliament”









Lenin: Capitalism and 'Parliament'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism and “Parliament”




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 13, June 17, 1912.

      Signed: A Non-Liberal Sceptic.

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 129-131.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The facts of democracy must not make us lose sight of a
circumstance, often overlooked by bourgeois democrats, that in the
capitalist countries representative institutions inevitably give rise to
specific forms in which capital exercises its influence on the state
power. We have no parliament, but then there is no end of parliamentary
cretinism among the liberals and of parliamentary licence among
all the bourgeois deputies.  

The workers must thoroughly master this truth if they want to learn how
to use representative institutions for promoting the political
consciousness, unity, activity and efficiency of the working class. All the
social forces hostile to the proletariat—the “bureaucrats”, landowners
and capitalists—are already using these representative institutions
against the workers. One has to know how they are doing this if
one wants to learn to uphold the independent interests of the working class
and its independent development.  

The Third Duma decided to award bonuses to home manufacturers of
machinery. Who are these borne manufacturers? The ones “operating” in
Russia!  

But upon examination we find that they, are foreign capitalists who
have transferred their plants to Russia. Tariff rates are high and profits
immense, so foreign capital is moving into Russia. For instance,
an American trust—a corporation of capitalist millionaires—has built a
huge farm machinery works in Lyubertsi, near Moscow. In Kharkov, farm
machines are made by the capitalist Melhose and in Berdyansk by the
capitalist John Grieves. These manufacturers are very much of the “truly
Russian”, “home” variety, aren’t they?  
 

But, of course, unless they were helped in every way by Russian
capitalists, they would have been unable to operate in Russia at
all. One good turn deserves another. American, British and German
capitalists rake in profits with the help of Russian capitalists, who get
quite a big share. Take, for example, the Lena gold-fields or the mining
enterprises in the Urals. How many millions foreign and Russian capitalists
have shared between them there!  

The Duma is very useful to the industrialists in this respect. Both in
the Duma and in the Council of State, the capitalists have a goodly number
of representatives. The landlords, too, would not amount to much nowadays
with out capital. For both the capitalists and the landlords, the Duma is a
ready-made machinery for passing laws on “bonuses” (to be awarded to
themselves), protective tariffs (i.e., another form of bonuses to
themselves), concessions (a third form of bonuses to themselves), and so
on, without limit.  

The “Sceptic”, a liberal writing in the liberal Rech, had
some very apt comments to make on this matter. He writes with so much
feeling against the “nationalists” (who award ed themselves “bonuses”
to stimulate the “home” manufacture of machinery by Messrs. Grieves,
Melhose, Elworthy, and other companies) that I, too, have become somewhat
infected with scepticism.  

Yes, the liberal “Sceptic” has not made a bad job of ex posing the
“nationalists”. But why does he say nothing about the Cadets? When
Golovin, for instance, was seeking a concession, did not his position as
member of the Duma and former Chairman of the Duma stand him in
good stead in that useful and lucrative pursuit?  

When Maklakov was gobbling up his “Tagiyev” fees, did not his
position as member of the Duma make it easier for him to get such
“profitable”

cases?[1] 

And what about the numerous other Cadet landlords, merchants,
capitalists, financiers, lawyers and brokers who extended their business,
promoted their “connections”, and put through their “affairs”, thanks
to their position as members of the Duma and to the benefits and advantages
that position affords?  

What if an inquiry were made into financial transactions

    

carried out by Duma members or with the aid of Duma members?  

But no—in all capitalist countries measures have been taken to
protect “trade secrets” and to guarantee that not a
single “parliament” should permit such an inquiry.  

However, the working-class deputies undoubtedly know a great deal about
this matter; and if they took pains to look around, obtain additional
Information, collect material, look up newspaper files, inquire at the
stock exchange, etc., they could themselves carry out a very instructive
and useful “inquiry” into the business transactions carried out
by Duma members or with the aid of such members.  

In European parliaments, such transactions are well known, and the
workers constantly expose them, naming the persons involved, so as to
enlighten the people.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the following facts: 

In October 1910 F.A. Golovin, a member of the Third Duma, announced
that he was resigning his powers as a deputy, and shortly afterwards took
an active part in a railway concession.  

In March 1912 V.A. Maklakov, another member of the Third Duma, in spite
of his status as a deputy, acted as defence counsel for Tagiyev, a big oil
industrialist of Baku charged with manhandling Bebutov, an engineer
employed by him.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Elections and the Opposition









Lenin: The Elections and the Opposition







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Elections and the Opposition




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 14, June 24, 1912.

      Signed: K. F..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 132-135.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Marxists long ago defined their fundamental attitude to the
elections. The flight-wing parties—from Purishkevich to Guchkov—the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie (Cadets and Progressists) and the democrats
(worker democrats and bourgeois democrats, i.e., Trudoviks) are the
three principal camps contesting the elections. The distinction
between these camps is a basic one, for they represent different classes
and have entirely different programmes and tactics. Correct practical
conclusions regarding the election campaign can only be drawn if the
principles on which each of the three camps bases its policy are clearly
understood.  

The Marxists fully established these

points[1]

about six months ago, and since then they have been proved correct above
all by the utterances of the liberal opposition. Our “neighbours and
enemies on the right”, while by no means sharing our views, have with
commendable zeal provided us with the best confirmation of the correctness
of our points. We may proclaim the following law: the development
of Cadet political activity and political views provides excel lent
evidence in support of Marxist views. Or, in other words:

when a Cadet begins to speak, you may rest assured that he will refute the
views of liberal labour politicians no less effectively than a Marxist.


That is why, incidentally, it is doubly useful for the workers to look
closely into Cadet policy: first of all, they will get to know the liberal
bourgeois very well and, secondly, they will learn to see more clearly the
mistakes made by certain supporters of the working class.  
 

It is this doubly useful result that one may well expect from the
recent comments of Rech on the important pre-election statements
made by Russkiye Vedomosti. These are statements by Mr. Akimov
(V. Makhnovets), an old Economist, i.e., an opportunist of the period
1897–1902. They amount to a straightforward defence of the “progressive
bloc”, whose “platform” (a platform that, by the way, has not
been published!) Mr. Akimov, who chooses to call him self a
Social-Democrat, considers “perfectly acceptable for the
Social-Democrats”.  

We have been, and are still being, told by numerous political babes
(from Paris to Krasnoyarsk) and seasoned diplomats (from Vienna to

Vilna),[3] that a liberal labour policy is a “bogey”. But take a look
at Mr. Akimov, my dear opponents! You will probably be unable to deny that
Akimov is an obvious embodiment of liberal labour policy. Nor will you be
able to say that he is unique, i.e., that he is an isolated phenomenon and
an inimitable rarity, the only one of its kind. For, numerous though
Mr. Akimov’s inimitable qualities are, he is not an isolated phenomenon,
and it would be a downright untruth to say he is. He made his statement
after and in the same vein as Mr. Prokopovich. He found for himself a
widely circulated liberal paper, a convenient rostrum from which his
speeches carry far. He obtained a “good press” among the liberal
journalists. Oh, no, he is not an isolated phenomenon. It does not matter
that he ceased long ago to belong to any group. It does not matter that his
right to the name of Social-Democrat is absolutely fictitious. But be
represents a political line which has roots, which is living and,
though it often goes into hiding, invariably comes into the open
when there is the slightest revival of political activity.  

Rech “gives full credit to the sober realism” of
Mr. Akimov’s arguments, and stresses with especial pleasure his opinion
that “the Social-Democrats should at present put forward those of their
political aims that will have the support of sufficiently large,
politically strong sections of the people”.  

Rech certainly has good reason to rejoice. What Nasha
Zarya says with a thousand twists and turns, piling one little
reservation on another, covering up its tracks, and flaunting

    

pseudo-Marxist catchwords that have long become out worn, Mr. Akimov blurts
out bluntly and rather brusquely, rather simply, with a
naïiveté verging on innocence.  

From a formal point of view, Nasha Zarya and Nevsky
Golos are perfectly in a position, of course, to disclaim all
responsibility for Mr. Akimov. But what actually hap pens is that the
general reader, who is not versed in fine points and is not interested in
them, derives “Akimovism”, and nothing but “Akimovism”, from these
liquidationist publications. “Don’t wreck the Progressist cause,” wrote
Martov. “Put forward those aims” that will have the sup port of the
Progressists, writes Akimov, who, naturally, makes the reservation
that the non-partisanship of the Progressists makes it easier for any party
to maintain its in dependence (on paper). To put forward more aims
than are acceptable to the Progressists means precisely to “wreck” their
cause—this is how Martov’s slogan is interpreted by the actual political
struggle, by the crowd which Akimov represents so well.  

Akimov is convinced that the Cadets and Progressists constitute “large
and politically strong sections of the people”. This is just the sort of
liberal untruth about which Nevskaya Zvezda wrote in a recent
article on the nature and significance of the Marxists’ polemics against
the

      liberals.[2]

In reality, however, the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, taken as a whole,
comprising the Cadets, the Progressists and many others, is a very small
section of the people and one that is remarkably weak politically.  

The bourgeoisie can never constitute a large section of the people. As
for being politically strong, it can be and is that in a whole series of
capitalist countries, but not in Prussia or Russia. In these two countries,
its amazing, monstrous, all but incredible political impotence is fully
explained by the fact that the bourgeoisie here is far more afraid of
revolution than it is of reaction. Political impotence is an inevitable
result of this. And all talk about the “political strength” of the
bourgeoisie is thoroughly false, and consequently good for nothing at all,
if it avoids this fundamental feature of the state of affairs in
Russia.  
 

Mr. Akimov has come out as a most outspoken and moderate liberal. We
regard you as a force, Cadet and Progressist gentlemen, he says. We fully
accept your platform (although there is no such platform!) and we ourselves
are now putting forward those aims that have your support. All we
ask of you is “that the list of the [Progressist] bloc should include the
Social-Democrats”. This is what Akimov wrote, word for word! I will accept
everything, anything, he says, if only you include me in the liberal list!


It was truly ungracious of Rech to decline even so
moderate a request. After all, it is a question of the June Third voters,
the Cadets remind Akimov. And what do the Social-Democrats amount to among
them?  Nothing, “with the exception of the big cities, of which
there is no question”. And the official Cadet newspaper condescendingly
teaches the humble and docile Akimov: “Apart from the border regions, they
[the Social-Democrats] will almost everywhere else have to be guided, not
by the hope of putting up candidates of their own, but by considerations
making for the victory of the progressive bloc over the reactionary bloc of
the oppressors of the people.”  

The liberal has brusquely declined to take the hand humbly proffered by
the liberal labour politician! A well-deserved reward for refusing to fight
in the big cities. The big cities belong to us because we are strong, say
the Cadets, and the rest of Russia belongs to us because the June Third men
and their June Third law, which guarantees our monopoly of opposition, are
strong too.  

Not a bad reply. The lesson which Akimov has been taught is a cruel but
useful one.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 397–402.—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 122–28 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[3]
By “political babes” Lenin means here the Bolshevik
conciliators who a their little groups in Russia and abroad.  

The “seasoned diplomats” were the few liquidators grouped
around Trotsky’s Vienna Pravda, and the Bund leaders.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Significance of the St. Petersburg Elections









Lenin: The Significance of the St. Petersburg Elections







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Significance of the St. Petersburg Elections




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 15, July 1, 1912.

      Signed: F. F..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 136-142.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

According to newspaper reports, the question of the date
when the Fourth Duma should be convened and of the time when elections to
it should be held has aroused some doubts among the ruling circles. Some
were in favour of postponing the convening of the Duma until January, while
others declared for October. Now the question is said to have been decided
in favour of the latter opinion.  

Thus the elections are quite near at hand—a mere seven to nine
weeks. We must take steps to redouble our efforts with regard to
all aspects of our pre-election work.  

I should like to deal in this article with a special question, which,
however, has acquired very great general importance for the worker
democrats. I mean the role of the St. Petersburg elections.  

The elections in St. Petersburg’s second urban curia are the focal
point of the entire Fourth Duma election campaign.  

Only in St. Petersburg is there a tolerably well organised
working-class press, one which, for all the fierce persecution it is
subjected to, for all the fines and the arrests of its editors, for all the
instability of its position, and for all that it is kept down by the
censorship, is able to reflect, to some little degree, the views of worker
democrats.  

In the absence of a daily press, the elections remain an obscure
matter, and their significance in terms of the political enlightenment of
the masses is reduced by half, if not more.  

For this reason, the St. Petersburg elections acquire the significance
of a model of the election campaign which worker democrats have to
undertake in the incredibly difficult

    

conditions of Russian reality. Nowhere else are the workers in a position
to hold an election campaign visible to every one. To be sure, the
elections in the worker curia are highly important, but there the workers
cannot come up against the other classes of the population, and therefore
cannot present on an adequate scale the national demands,
and the views on the tasks involved in a common policy, which have
deen worked out by the progressive, proletarian
democrats, so that they may serve all democrats in general as a
guide.  

In St. Petersburg the elections are direct. Hence the pre-election
struggle here may take much more definite, more distinct and more partisan
forms than elsewhere. The other big cities would have been as important as
St. Petersburg. but administrative pressure in the provinces is
still so much stronger than in the capital that it is difficult
for worker democrats to force their way through, to get a hearing.  

Lastly, in St. Petersburg the struggle in the second curia has to take
place between the liberals and the democrats.  The Cadets consider the
second curia to be their domain.  St. Petersburg is represented by
Milyukov, Rodichev and Kutler.  

Obviously, the fact that a fairly large number of democratic voters are
represented by the liberals can by no means be considered normal. The
elections to the Second Duma showed that Cadet “domination” among the
democratic urban voters is very far from being solid. In St. Petersburg
itself, the “Left bloc” in the Second Duma elections, i.e., the bloc of
worker and bourgeois democrats (Narodniks), not only could, but
certainly would, have won, if at that time Mensheviks like Dan and
Co. had not split the workers’ election campaign and thereby given rise,
among the Narodniks, to wavering and vacillations that were exceedingly
harmful to the success of the cause. One has only to recall that in the
Second Duma elections even the “Socialist Revolutionaries” followed the
Mensheviks’ lead to the last minute, defending their bloc with the Cadets!


The electoral law now in force permits of a second ballot, so that no
blocs are required, or permissible, at the first stage.  
 

The struggle in St. Petersburg will be between the worker democrats and
the liberals. The Narodniks will hardly be strong enough to act
independently—they have been “liquidating” themselves much too
zealously by following our liquidators’ line. The worker democrats are
therefore almost certain to be supported by the bourgeois democrats
(Trudoviks and Narodniks), if not at the first stage of the election, then
at any rate when a second ballot is taken.  

The liberals have their leader, Mr. Milyukov, from St. Petersburg. They
have had a large following so far. The funds which the liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie supplies them with, the propaganda weapons in the form of two
daily newspapers, and an organisation which is virtually tolerated and all
but legalised de facto, all afford the Cadets tremendous
advantages.  

On the workers’ side are the mass of the workers, consistent and
sincere democracy, energy and devotion to the cause of socialism and
working-class democracy. The workers can win if they rely on
these forces and if they have a workers’ daily newspaper. The
workers’ struggle for seats in the Duma for St. Petersburg is undoubtedly
acquiring a vast and country-wide significance in the entire
Fourth Duma election campaign.  

Those who like to talk of “unity” of the whole opposition—from the
Progressists and Cadets to the warily dodging liquidator Martov and the
crudely simple-minded Prokopovich and Akimov—are all at pains to evade
the issue of the St. Petersburg elections or to leave it out. They bypass
the political centre but readily make their way into what may be called the
political backwoods. They speak volubly, fervently and eloquently of what
will be opportune at the second stage of the elections, i.e., when the
principal, the chief, the decisive, part of the election campaign is over,
and they “are eloquently silent” about St. Petersburg, which has been won
by the Cadets and which has to be won back from them, has to be
restored to the democrats.  

There were no democratic deputies for St. Petersburg under the law of
December 11,1905, nor under that of June 3,

1907,[2] so that “restored” would seem to be an unsuitable term. But
St. Petersburg belongs to the democrats by virtue of the entire course of
the entire emancipation movement in

    


    

Russia, and at a certain stage of its development even the
monstrously high dam of the June Third electoral law will be unable to stem
the “democratic flood”.  

The majority of the voters in the second curia undoubtedly come from
the democratic sections of the population. The Cadets induce them to follow
their lead by simply deceiving them, by making themselves, a
liberal-monarchist bourgeois party, out to be democrats. This kind of
deceit has been, and is, practised by all liberals in the world in
elections to every sort of parliament. And the workers’ parties in all
countries gauge their success by, among other things, the extent to which
they succeed in freeing petty-bourgeois democrats from liberal influence.


The Russian Marxists, too, must set themselves this task clearly,
specifically, and firmly. That is why, with regard to the big cities, they
have said plainly in their well-known January decisions that blocs there
are permissible, in view of the known absence of a Black-Hundred danger,
only with the democrats, against the

      liberals.[1]

This decision “takes the bull by the horns”. It gives a straightforward
answer to one of the most important questions of election tactics. It
determines the spirit, the trend, and the character of the
entire election campaign.  

On the other hand, those liquidators who like to talk of the Cadets as
of “representatives of the “urban democracy are committing a grave
error. This kind of talk distorts matters by representing the
liberals’ election victories over the democrats, and the
liberals’ election tricks played on democratic voters, as proof of
the Cadets’ “democracy”.  As though Europe did not know of dozens of
instances of anti-democratic parties for years keeping various democratic
strata in leading strings, until real bourgeois democrats, but most often
Social-Democrats, freed those strata from the influence of political
parties that were alien to them in spirit.  

The election struggle in St. Petersburg is a struggle for hegemony
between the liberals and the worker democrats within the whole of Russia’s
emancipation movement.  

This exceptionally important role of the St. Petersburg elections leads
us, incidentally, to two practical conclusions.

    

He to whom much is given, much shall be asked. The St. Petersburg workers
will have to carry on the election campaign in the urban second curia on
behalf of all the worker democrats of all Russia. It is a great
and difficult task that they have to tackle. They must serve as a
model. They must show the greatest initiative, energy and
perseverance. They have done so in regard to the workers’ daily
newspaper. At the elections, too, they must continue the work they have
begun so splendidly.  

The attention of all Russia is riveted on the election struggle in
St. Petersburg. All Russia should also help St. Petersburg. Unless
the St. Petersburg workers receive the most varied aid from all parts of
Russia, they will be unable to overcome the “enemy” by themselves.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 469–70.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Lenin is referring to the law of December 11(24), 1905, on elections to
the Duma. That law divided the electorate into four curias—landowner
(landlords), urban (the bourgeoisie), peasant and worker. It granted the
suffrage to persons who had reached the age of 25 years. With regard to the
landowner and urban curias, it established property qualifications; in the
peasant curia, only house holders had the right of suffrage, and in the
worker curia, only per sons who had been working on their job for at least
six months. The elections were unequal. One landlord vote equalled
3 capitalist, 15 peasant and 45 workers’ votes. The law debarred from
elections women, agricultural workers, unskilled workers, handicrafts men,
students and servicemen. In the case of the worker curia, the suffrage was
granted only to those in factories employing at least fifty male
workers. Factories employing over a thousand workers elected one delegate
for every full thousand. Elections were multi stage: two-stage for the
landlords and capitalists, three-stage for the workers and four-stage for
the peasants.  

For the law of June 3, 1907, see Note 43.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Comparison of the Stolypin and the Narodnik Agrarian Programmes









Lenin: A Comparison of the Stolypin and the Narodnik Agrarian Programmes







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Comparison of the Stolypin and the Narodnik Agrarian Programmes




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 15, July 1, 1912.

      Signed: R. S..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 143-149.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In previous articles (see Nevskaya Zvezda Nos. 3
and

  6)[1]

we have cited the basic data on landownership in European Russia and
described the nature of the agrarian question in Russia. The main point of
this question is to abolish medievalism in landownership.  

The contradiction between capitalism, which prevails throughout the
world, including Russia, and medieval landownership, as embodied
both in the landed estates and in the peasant allotments, is
irreconcilable. The old, medieval system of landownership is bound to be
broken up, and the more drastic, ruthless and bold this break-up, the
better for the entire development of Russia and the better for the workers,
and for the peasants, who are today crushed and oppressed by innumerable
survivals of medievalism, as well as by capitalism.  

The question may be asked: Such being the situation, how can one
compare the Stolypin and the Narodnik agrarian programmes? Are they not in
direct opposition to each other?  

Yes, they are, but this opposition does not remove the one fundamental
point which the two programmes have in common, namely, the fact
that both recognise the necessity of breaking up the old
system of landownership. The old has to be broken up—as early and
thoroughly as possible, say those in charge of Stolypin’s “land
distribution”; but it has to be broken up in such a way as to ensure that
the whole burden of it falls on the shoulders of the majority of the

    

peasants—of the most ruined and most disinherited of them. The landlords
should Lose nothing in the process. If it is inevitable that they should
lose part of their land, then the land should be alienated exclusively by
the freely given consent of the landlords, and at a price considered
“fair” by the landlords. The well-to-do peasants should be supported, and
there is no reason to shrink from the ruin of the mass of “weak”
peasants.  

Such is the meaning of the Stolypin agrarian programme. The Council of
the United Nobility, which entrusted Stolypin with drafting it, behaved as
a true representative of the reactionaries—not of those who make fine
speeches but of those who mean business. The Council was perfectly loyal to
its class interests when it banked on the strong. And indeed, after 1905 it
became obvious that the police and the bureaucracy alone were inadequate as
a protection against the peasants.  

Where else was the Council of the United Nobility to seek for allies?
Only among the insignificant minority of the well-to-do peasants—the
kulaks. It could not have found any other allies in the countryside. And to
win over the “new landlords” to their side, the reactionaries did not
shrink from delivering the whole countryside into their hands
literally to be sacked and plundered.  

If a break-up is inevitable, then let us break up allotment
landownership in our favour and for the benefit of the new
landlords—that is the gist of the agrarian policy which the council
of the United Nobility dictated to Stolypin.  

But, speaking in purely theoretical terms, it has to be admitted that a
break-up—a no less, and indeed much more, drastic one—is also possible
from the other side. It cuts both ways. If, for instance, the 70
million dessiatines of land belonging to 30,000 landlords were to pass to
10 million peasant households in addition to the 75 million dessiatines
they already own, and if the two categories of land were merged
and then distributed among the well-to-do and middle peasants (the poor
peasants could not use the land any way, because they have nothing to
plough, sow, fertilise and cultivate it with), what would be the result of
the reform?  
 

Pose this question from a purely economic standpoint. Consider this
fundamental possibility from the angle of the general conditions of
capitalist economy throughout the world. You will see that our suggested
reform would result in a more consistent, drastic and ruthless
break-up of medieval landownership than the Stolypin programme
envisages.  

Why medieval and none but medieval? Because capitalist
landownership cannot be abolished, by its very nature, through any
transfer of the land, not even through the transfer of all the land to the
state (i.e., through what the science of political economy calls land
“nationalisation”). Capitalist landownership is the holding of land by
those who have capital and adapt themselves best to the market. Regardless
of whether the land is still owned by the landlord, or by the state or the
allotment peasant, it is bound to have a master, who can always
rent it. The renting of land is increasing in all capitalist
countries, under the most diverse forms of landownership. No bans whatever
can prevent the capitalist, the master who has capital and knows the
market, from laying his hands on the land, since the market dominates the
whole of social production, i.e., since this production remains capitalist.


Nor is that all. The renting of land is even more convenient
for pure capitalism, for the fullest, freest, and most “ideal” adaptation
to the market, than is ownership of land. Why? Because private ownership of
land hampers its transfer from hand to hand, hinders the
adaptation of land tenure to the conditions of the market,
perpetuates ownership of the land by a particular family or person
and his heirs, even if they are bad farmers. Renting is a more flexible
form, under which the adaptation of land tenure to the market takes place
most simply, most easily and most rapidly.  

That, incidentally, is why Britain is not an exception among the
capitalist countries, but is the country that, from the point of view of
capitalism, has the most perfect agrarian system, as Marx pointed out in
his criticism of

Rodbertus.[3] And what is Britain’s agrarian system? It is the old
system of landownership, landlordism, with the new, free, purely capitalist
renting of land.  
 

And what if that landlordism were to exist without land lords, i.e., if
the land, were owned, not by landlords,, but by the state? That, from the
point of view of capitalism, would be a still more perfect
agrarian system, with still greater freedom of adaptation of land tenure to
the market, with still greater ease in the mobilisation of the land as an
object of economy, with still greater freedom, breadth, clarity and
definiteness in the class struggle characteristic of every form of
capitalist landownership.  

And the more a country is lagging behind world capitalism, the greater
the effort it must make to overtake its neighbours, the more it has
“neglected” its “disease”, the disease of medieval landownership and
small-scale bondage farming, and the more imperative that country’s need
for a radical break-up of all its relations of
landownership, of a]l its agrarian system, the more natural will be the
rise and wide dissemination in that country, among its agricultural
population, of all sorts of ideas and plans of land nationalisation.  

Both the year 1905 and the two first Dumas proved beyond question—and
the Third Duma confirmed it indirectly, through its “peasant” deputies
(sifted through a landlord sieve)—that all sorts of ideas and plans for
nationalising the land are extremely widespread among Russia’s agricultural
population. Before approving or condemning these ideas, one should ask
oneself why they have become wide spread and what
economic necessity has evoked them.  

It is not enough to criticise those ideas from the stand point of their
inner logic and harmony or of their theoretical correctness. They should be
criticised from the standpoint of the economic necessity reflected in them,
however “fanciful”, inaccurate or “twisted” this reflection may some
times be.  

The economic necessity which at the beginning of the twentieth century
gave rise among the Russian peasantry to ideas of nationalising the land is
the necessity of a drastic break-up of the old system of landownership. The
ideas of “equalised division” of all the land are ideas of
equality, necessarily born of the struggle against the survivals
of serfdom and inevitably transplanted to the land in a situation
where 30,000 “residual serf-owners” possess 70

    

million dessiatines, while 10 million bond peasants possess 75 million
dessiatines.  

There is nothing utopian about the transfer of the first category of
land into the second category, or rather to the owners of this second
category. What is utopian is merely the dream of equality among the masters
of the land while the market dominates; it is utopian to dream of the
“right to land” for all “citizens, men and women” (including
those who have no household) under capitalism. But the utopian character of
these ideas should not allow us to forget the very true, living
reality which is actually behind them.  

There is nothing utopian about the abolition of all medieval
distinctions of landownership—landlord, allotment, etc. There is nothing
utopian about breaking up the old relations in regard to the land. On the
contrary, the development of capitalism most imperatively demands
this break up. There can be neither “equalised
division” of the land nor “socialisation” of it under
capitalism. That is utopia.  

Land nationalisation is quite feasible economically under capitalism,
and its real significance would consist in any case—that is, no
matter how it was effected, by whom and on what conditions, whether stably
and for a long time or unstably and for a short time—in the maximum
elimination of all that is medieval in Russian landownership and Russia’s
agrarian system; it would consist in the freest adaptation of the
new system of land tenure and landownership to the new conditions
of the world market.  

Let us imagine for a moment that the Left Narodniks’ plan was put into
practice, say, through the equal division of all the lands among all
citizens, men and women. Such division under capitalism is the greatest
absurdity. Under capitalism, it would not and could not last even a
year. But does this imply that its results would be zero or negative?  

Not in, the least! Its results would be of tremendous ad
vantage—not the kind the Left Narodniks expect, but a most real
advantage. That advantage would consist in all distinctions between the
present social-estate and category forms of landownership being broken
up. It would be a tremendous

    

gain for the whole national economy, for capitalism, for the proletariat,
because nothing could be more harmful to the development of Russia than our
old, present-day, landownership. Both landlordism and allotment land
ownership are thoroughly feudal forms of landownership.  

An equalised redivision of the land could not last, but it would be
impossible to go back to the old system! No “restoration” could
revive the boundaries once they had been removed. No political force on
earth could prevent the establishment of such new boundaries,
limits, and forms of land tenure as would correspond to the new
requirements of the market.  

“Departition the land,” I recall a Left Narodnik saying in the Second
Duma. He fancied that the result would be “equalised land tenure”. He was
mistaken. But speaking through him was, as the irony of history
would have it, the most consistent and fearless radical bourgeois,
who is aware of the absurdity of the old, medieval “partitions”
of our “allotment”, “nobility”, “church”, etc., etc., landowner ship,
and is aware of the necessity of breaking down all those
partitions to make way for a new distribution of the land. Only,
this distribution would have to be not “per capita”, which is the
Narodnik’s dream, but per capital, as imposed by the
market.  

The Narodniks’ constructive plans are utopia. But their constructive
plans have an element that is destructive in relation to medievalism. And
that element is by no means utopia. It is the most living reality. It is
the most consistent and progressive reality from the standpoint of
capitalism and the proletariat.  

Let us briefly sum up our views. The real similarity between the
Stolypin and the Narodnik agrarian programmes lies in the fact that
both advocate a radical break-up of the old, medieval
system of landownership. And that is very good. That system deserves no
better than to be broken up. The most reactionary of all
are those Cadets of Rech and Russkiye Vedomosti who
reproach Stolypin for causing a break-up, instead of proving the need for a
still more consistent and resolute break-up. We shall see in a following
article that the Stolypin type of break-up cannot do away

    

with bondage and labour service, while the Narodnik type

    can.[2]


For the time being we shall note that the only entirely real result of
the Stolypin break-up is a famine among 30 million people. And it remains
to be seen whether the Stolypin break-up may not teach the Russian people
how they should carry out a more thorough break-up. It is
no doubt teaching that. But will it succeed in it? Time will tell.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 32–35 and 73–77 of this volume—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 243–53 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[3]
See Karl Marx, Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. II,
Part Two. These propositions of Marx’s were set forth and explained by
Lenin in “The Agrarian Question in Russia Towards the Close of the
Nineteenth Century” (see present edition, Vol. 15, pp. 139–42).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Situation in the R.S.D.L.P. and the Immediate Tasks of the Party









Lenin: The Situation in the R.S.D.L.P. and the Immediate Tasks of the Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Situation in the R.S.D.L.P. and the Immediate Tasks of the Party




Published:

      Published on July 16, 1912 in Gazeta Robotnicza No. 15–16.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 150-157.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The R.S.D.L.P. has passed through unprecedentedly hard
years of rampant counter-revolution and is now on the right way to
re-establishing its organisation and increasing its forces and its guiding
influence on the Russian proletariat, which dealt powerful blows at the
autocracy in 1905 and will destroy it in the coming revolution.  

The hard years 1908–11 were years of division; it was in that period
that the present Executive Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of
Poland and Lithuania, which had joined our Party in 1906 and had marched
with us Bolsheviks against the Menshevik opportunists, seceded from the
R.S.D.L.P.  

The worker Social-Democrats of Poland should make a critical appraisal
of this secession of the present Executive from the R.S.D.L.P. Therefore I
very gladly accept the proposal of the Warsaw Committee of the
S.D.P. of Poland and Lithuania that I should briefly explain in Gazeta

Robotnicza[4] the causes of the division in the Party and the sorry
role which the present Executive played in it, and should point out the
immediate tasks of the Social-Democratic proletariat of all Russia.  
I

Our comrades, the Polish workers, are familiar with the
differences existing between the Bolsheviks and Mensheviks during the
revolution of 1905. A number of prominent representatives of the S.D.P. of
Poland and Lithuania, such as Rosa Luxemburg, were on the Mensheviks’ side
at first, in 1904, but the revolution soon revealed their error, clearly
demonstrating the Mensheviks’ opportunism.  
 

The counter-revolution of 1908–11 initiated a new stage in Russian
history. The old autocracy moved a step closer to a bourgeois monarchy. The
Duma of the landlords and the big bourgeoisie came into being. Tsarism bad
not yet lost its feudal character, but it was pursuing a bourgeois agrarian
policy designed to institute private landownership as early as possible, at
the price of unprecedented ruin and extermination of millions of
peasants. Bourgeois liberalism made a sharp turn towards
counter-revolution, and indulged in veritable orgies of renegacy.  

Unparalleled division and dissension prevailed among the intelligentsia
in general. The proletariat was subjected to persecution on the part of
tsarism, which was taking its vengeance for the revolution, and to torrents
of slander on the part of the renegades.  

The task of the R.S.D.L.P. was to preserve the revolutionary
Social-Democratic Party of the working class by adapting itself to the
new conditions of work.  

The very first steps towards accomplishing that task brought out new
anti-proletarian trends in the R.S.D.L.P. that tended to undermine the
very existence of the Party. They were engendered by the historical
situation which our counter-revolution had created. These bourgeois trends
are liquidationism and otzovism.  

The liquidators, caught up by the wave of bourgeois desertion,
repudiated the revolution. Giving up the illegal Party as a bad job, they
sought only a legal basis for them selves in the allegedly
“constitutional” regime of June 3 (16) and advocated its constitutional
renovation. An “open workers’ party” and slogans of constitutional
reform were the gist of their policy. It was not a Social-Democratic,
but a liberal labour policy.  

Obviously, it would be simply ridiculous to compare the liquidators
with the West-European opportunists within the Social-Democratic workers’
parties (as the present Executive does under Tyszka’s influence). Our
liquidators re fuse to recognise the Party in its illegal, i.e., its
present, form, and are founding a new, legal party. It is not a
trend inside the Party, but a withdrawal from the Party. The liquidators’
obvious repudiation and destruction of the Party gave rise to sharp
resistance from the Mensheviks themselves.

    

The worker Mensheviks in Russia refused to follow the liquidators,
and outside Russia the Menshevik Plekhanov put himself at the head of the
“pro-Party” Mensheviks (anti-liquidators). Plekhanov has now publicly and
unequivocally admitted in the press that the liquidators are founding a
new party.  

We shall adds for the Polish workers’ information, that the
liquidators’ main press organs are: abroad, Golos

Sotsial-Demokrata[5] (Martov, Dan, Axelrod and other Golos
supporters); in Russia, Nasha Zarya (Potresov, Levitsky,
Cherevanin and others). The “otzovists” (from the word

  otozvat,[1]

meaning the Social-Democratic deputies to the Third Duma) boycotted the
Third Duma, for they did not realise the necessity of using the Duma
rostrum and all “legal opportunities” for revolutionary Social-Democratic
work. They reduced the slogans of the revolutionary tactics of 1905 to
meaningless phrases. Experience soon showed that boycotting the Third Duma
was an absurdity leading the Russian Social-Democrat boycotters to
anarchism even against their will. In the summer of 1907 most Bolsheviks
favoured a boycott; but as early as the spring of 1908 they had learned the
lesson taught by experience and very sharply rebutted otzovist propaganda
in St. Petersburg and Moscow. After being defeated so thoroughly in Russia,
the otzovists and their defenders eked out a miserable existence abroad in
the form of the absolutely impotent little group of Vperyod
(Lunacharsky, Alexinsky and others).  

Needless to add that, owing to the weakness of the majority of
organisations in Russia and to the fact that the groups abroad were out of
touch with the work going on in Russia, most of those groups were quite
“freely” engaged in destroying and disrupting the Party, completely
ignoring all discipline and holding no mandate from any organisation in
Russia to direct a newspaper or publish pamphlets and leaflets. Besides the
little groups holding different views on questions of principle, there
sprang up, as usually hap pens, various little groups that had no
principles at all, and strove to make some little political capital by
broker age, petty diplomacy, and intrigues under the guise of

    

“reconciling” and “uniting” the Party. Past masters in this respect
were Trotsky with the Vienna newspaper Pravda and Tyszka with the
Executive Committee.  
II

The R.S.D.L.P. was confronted with the question of how to
re-establish the Party.  

Clearly, it was impossible to re-establish the Party jointly
with those who wanted to liquidate the Party or with those who
boycotted the Duma and legal opportunities. Either the little groups abroad
which were pursuing that bourgeois policy must abandon it in submission to
the overwhelming majority of the organisations, groups and circles in
Russia, or Russia must re-establish the Party in spite of those
groups abroad.  

In January 1910 the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. held a plenary
meeting for the last time; it made an attempt to save the liquidators and
otzovists, who were breaking away from the Social-Democrats, and to guide
them on to the path of Party work. The absurdity and un-Social-Democratic
character of both deviations were so obvious that no one ventured
to defend them. It was unanimously recognised that both were
bourgeois trends, and that only by repudiating them could
conditions be provided for the revival of the Party.  

But unanimous decision is insufficient if it is not followed by united
action. The liquidators and otzovists, contrary to the decisions of the
Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee, did not relax but
intensified their destructive work. It turned out that it was the
Party’s Central Organ, led by the Bolsheviks and the Poles, that fought
for the Party during a year and a half (January 1910 to
June 1911), with the Menshevik Plekhanov contributing vigorously to the
struggle against the liquidators.  

“Working” against the Party with might and main were the
liquidators, the Vperyod group, Trotsky and the Bund. The Letts
vacillated, most often siding with the liquidators.  

The liquidators carried their destructive work to the point of
destroying the Central Committee of the Party! The Plenary Meeting resolved
to re-establish the C.C. in

    

Russia and to co-opt new members; but the liquidators would not even attend
a single sitting, and declared that both the illegal Party and the illegal
C.C. were “harmful”. Under these circumstances, can anyone compare the
liquidators with the West-European opportunists unless he is bent on
intrigue?  

The Party was left without a C.C., and its disintegration was
unavoidable. Only the Russian organisations, i.e., those operating
in Russia, could re-establish it. And that is when Tyszka displayed his
hypocritical policy of intrigue in all its splendour by winning in the
Executive Committee a majority over the adherents of a more principled
policy and pushing the Executive to a break with the R.S.D.L.P., to the
point where it found itself between the Party and the liquidators
of the Party.  

To explain that policy, which harms the Polish Social-Democratic
movement, we shall first of all cite a fact of the ideological
struggle in our Party.  

The Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee unanimously condemned
liquidationism, as we have pointed out above. But one section of the most
important resolution (known as its Clause 1) was formulated in such a way
as to have the directly opposite meaning; it played into the hands of the
liquidators. This clause expressed the opinion that at present, i.e., at a
time of counter-revolution, the Social-Democrats were for the first
time making full use of the methods of the international
Social-Democracy. This clause, which left a loophole for renegade theories,
was proposed by Tyszka, who tried to manoeuvre between the liquidators and
the Party. It is only natural that the liquidators should have
enthusiastically supported the clause, helping Tyszka to “victory”; some
of the Bolsheviks—the so-called group of “conciliators” (i.e., virtual
Trotskyists)—also went over to the side of the liquidators.  

After the Plenary Meeting Plekhanov superbly and scathingly ridiculed
the clause (not knowing who its author was) for its “looseness”,
vagueness, and generality. I spoke after Plekhanov and told about my
fruitless struggle against Tyszka’s alliance with the “conciliators” and

     liquidators.[2]

 

In two years, not one of the numerous writers of the Executive
has spoken a single word in defence of that clause.  

All that Tyszka’s manoeuvring has resulted in is a liquidationist
distortion of the views of the Party.  

The results of this policy have been even more unfortunate in regard to
the organisational question.  

The Central Committee does not exist. The Party can be re-established
only by a conference of the organisations in Russia. But how to convene
such a conference?  Obviously, it must be convened not together
with those who are liquidating the Party, but without them.  

Tyszka is walking the tight-rope, manoeuvring and playing at
“unification” of the Party with those who are liquidating it. First
Tyszka plus a small group of “conciliators” (a perfectly impotent little
group abroad, which did not during a whole year receive a single order for
its printed writings from any organisation in Russia) joined the
Bolsheviks, assumed control over the convening of a conference,
gave money to the agents who were to convene it, and dispatched those
agents, asserting as they did so that they were “unifying” the Party (an
assertion which brought Homeric laughter both from the liquidators and from
us).  

The agents began their tour with Kiev, with a Menshevik
organisation whose status was so indisputable that even our sworn enemies,
Trotsky and the Letts, admitted this in the press. In view of the furious
attacks of the liquidators on our Conference, the Polish workers must know
that it was with the participation of the above-mentioned organisation that
the Russian Organising Commission for the convening of the Conference was
formed (in October 1911). And it was a delegate from that organisation
(Kiev) that was chairman of the Credentials Committee at the Conference!


It should be clear that the majority on the Russian Organising
Commission consists of Bolsheviks and part of the “pro-Party” (i.e.,
anti-liquidationist) Mensheviks. The other little groups were not
represented on it, being no more than fictitious units abroad having no
connections in Russia.  

That is when Tyszka, in despair because there was no possibility of
mediating and intriguing, playing at unification with the liquidators,
dissociated himself from the

    

Russian Organising Commission and did not attend the Conference even though
he had been invited three times.  

Instead, he attended a meeting of the

liquidators[6] to discuss the convening of another
(liquidationist) conference, and then left it, saying that there were
liquidators there!! Is not a “conciliator” like that a

       buffoon?[3]

III

The January Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. united most of the
organisations in Russia: St. Petersburg, Moscow, the Volga, the Caucasus,
the South, the Western Territory. The Conference established that the
liquidators (Nasha Zarya) had placed themselves outside the
Party. It disclaimed all responsibility for the little groups abroad which
were disrupting the Party by their actions.  

At its twenty-three sittings, the Conference examined all the tactical
questions in detail and adopted a whole series of resolutions in the spirit
of the previous four years work of the Central Organ and all the leading
Party bodies. The Conference defined its terms of reference as the supreme
Party body and elected the Central Committee.  

It is quite understandable why the liquidators, and all the impotent
little groups abroad along with them, attack the Conference, foaming at the
mouth. The Conference condemned them. Every condemned person is entitled to
abuse his judges all day long.  

But there is no other Central Committee, no other
Social-Democratic Party in Russia. Tyszka and the Executive who kept away
from this Conference and assure the Polish workers that it is possible
(with the help of brokers) to “unify” the Party with the liquidators, are
deceiving the workers. As a result of this deceit, the Polish workers were
unable to confer with their Russian comrades, to discuss with them tactics
and slogans at such an important time

    

as the revolutionary upswing in April and May, as well as the elections to
the Fourth Duma.  

The revolutionary upswing of the Russian proletariat is obviously
growing stronger. To assist this strengthening, consolidate the illegal
organisation, give the movement the correct revolutionary slogans, rebut
the opportunism of the legalist liquidators, imbue the legal organisations
with an anti-liquidationist spirit, and carry out the elections to the
Fourth Duma along these lines—these are the immediate tasks which the
R.S.D.L.P. is now carrying out in practice—tasks the theoretical attitude
to which was defined at the All-Russia Conference in January.  

As far as the trend of their work is concerned, the Polish
revolutionary worker Social-Democrats are marching with us. I should
therefore like to close by expressing confidence that the proletariat of
Poland will be able to join us, the R.S.D.L.P., organisationally as well,
despite the vacillation of the present Executive on matters of principle.


 
Notes
 

[1]
To recall.—Tr.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 16, pp. 226–31.—Ed.  

[3]
The Executive Committee, writing in Vorwärts, calls
Trotsky an agent of the liquidators, and in Czerwony

Sztandar[7] it argues that there can be no unity, not only with the
liquidationist Left wing of the Polish Socialist Party, but with the
liquidationist Bund in Poland!! Tyszka, on the other hand, promises to
unify the R.S.D.L.P. with the Russian liquidators.  —Lenin
 



[4]
Gazeta Robotnicza (Workers’ Newspaper)—an illegal
organ published by the Warsaw Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of
Poland and Lithuania from May to October 1906. Publication was resumed in
1912. The split among the Polish Social-Democrats in 1912 gave rise to two
parallel Party committees. There were two Warsaw Committees and two
newspapers bearing the same title of Gazeta Robotnicza, one of
them being published by the supporters

   

of the Executive Committee in Warsaw and the other by the oppositionist
Warsaw Committee in Cracow. Lenin’s article “The Situation in the
R.S.D.L.P. and the Immediate Tasks of the Party” was published in the
Cracow Gazeta Robotnicza No. 15–16. For the split in the
Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania, see Lenin’s article “The
Split Among the Polish Social-Democrats”





[5]
See Note 20.





[6]
This refers to the meeting which the liquidators held in Russia in the
middle of January 1912. The meeting was called on the initiative of the
Bund and the Central Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of the
Lettish Territory. It is known as the “Meeting of National
Social-Democratic Organisations”. It was attended by two delegates from
the Lettish Social-Democrats, two from the Bund, one from the Caucasian
Regional Committee and one from the Social-Democracy of Poland and
Lithuania (this last delegate was present only at the second sitting). The
meeting set up an Organising Committee for convening the
Trotskyist-liquidationist August conference of 1912.





[7]
Czerwony Sztandar (Red Banner)—an illegal newspaper
published by the Executive Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of
Poland and Lithuania from 1902 to 1918 (Zurich-Cracow-Warsaw
Berlin). Publication was suspended between 1914 and 1917. In all 195 issues
appeared.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Reply to the Liquidators









Lenin: A Reply to the Liquidators







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Reply to the Liquidators[1]




Written: Written in July 1912 

Published:

      First published in 1933, in Lenin Miscellany XXV.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 158-159.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The liquidators of Nevsky Golos are doing their
utmost to disrupt the unity of the workers’ elections in
St. Petersburg. They will fail. Hypocritical shouts about “unity”
(coming from liquidators!!) cannot
deceive anyone.  

The unity of the working-class democracy is certain.  

The workers do not follow the lead of those who liquidate the workers’
democratic Party and merely promise to replace it by an open “party”
pursuing a liberal labour policy. Unity of the mass of the workers and not
“agreement”, to the detriment of this unity, with the circles of
liquidationist splitters from among the intelligentsia—this is what the
politically-conscious workers want. And

Pravda[2] is following this slogan.  

We are not put out by the unworthy sallies of the liquidators, who are
openly asking where to “find” that which does not make
a boast of being “open”. Draw up your “open” platform, gentlemen, found
your new, “open” party—and a good riddance to you!  
  

P.S. I earnestly ask you to answer me immediately, or as soon as
possible, on the matter I have raised here. Keeping silent will not
do. You can spoil everything and evoke protests from the workers
on the left by keeping silent about this. The liquidators must be
rebuffed. We cannot conduct an election campaign without saying
for whom we are doing it (people might think it is for the benefit
of the liquidators).

    

If you do not want to aggravate and spoil everything “on the
left”, publish this “reply to the liquidators”. If you do not
publish it, send this sheet back to me without delay. It is
important to me!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin’s note “A Reply to the Liquidators” was written for
Pravda, the Editorial Board of which received it on July 11(24),
1912.





[2]
Pravda (Truth) —a legal Bolshevik daily newspaper
published in St. Petersburg, was founded on the initiative of the
St. Petersburg workers in April 1912. Its first issue appeared on April 22
(May 5), 1912.  

Pravda was published with money collected by the workers. In
1912 the workers made 620 group contributions to the Bolshevik press, 2,181
in 1913 and 2,873 from January to May 1914. Among the correspondents of
Pravda were advanced workers. In the course of one year alone the
newspaper published more than 11,000 items by worker correspondents. Its
circulation reached 40,000 to 60,000 copies daily.  

Lenin, who was abroad, guided Pravda and contributed to it
almost every day. He gave directions to the editors and gathered the
Party’s best writers round the newspaper.  

Pravda was a constant target of police persecution. In the
first year of its existence it was confiscated 41 times; its editors were
sued 36 times and held in prison for a total of 47 1/2 months. During two
years and three months the tsarist government closed down the newspaper
eight times, but it continued to appear under different

   

titles:

Rabochaya Pravda, Severnaya Pravda, Pravda
Truda, Za Pravdu, Proletarskaya Pravda, Put
Pravdy, Rabochy, and Trudovaya Pravda. It was closed
dawn again on July 8 (21), 1914, shortly before the beginning of the First
World War.  

Publication was not resumed until after the February Revolution of
1917. On March 5 (18), 1917, Pravda began to appear as the Central
Organ of the R.S.D.L.P.(B.). Upon his return from abroad on April 5 (18),
Lenin became a member of the Editorial Board and assumed the leadership of
the newspaper. Between July and October 1917 Pravda, being
persecuted by the Provisional Government, had to change its title four
times—to Listok Pravdy, Proletary, Rabochy and
Rabochy Put. From October 27 (November 9) onwards it appeared
under its old title of Pravda.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Switzerland (July 12, 1912)









Lenin: In Switzerland (July 12, 1912)







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Switzerland (July 12, 1912)




Published:
Pravda No. 63, July 12, 1912.

      Signed: B. Z..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 160-162.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The local socialists call Switzerland a “republic of
lackeys”. This petty-bourgeois country, in which inn-keeping has long been
a major industry, has depended too much on wealthy parasites squandering
millions on summer travel in the mountains. A small proprietor toadying to
rich tourists—such, until recently, was the most widespread type of Swiss
bourgeois.  

Things are changing now. A large-scale industry is developing in
Switzerland. The use of waterfalls and mountain rivers as direct sources of
electric power is playing a big part in this. The power of falling water,
which replaces coal in industry, is often called “white coal”.  

The industrialisation of Switzerland, i.e., the development there of a
large-scale industry, has put an end to the former stagnation in the
working-class movement. The struggle between capital and labour is assuming
a more acute character. The drowsy, philistine spirit which often in the
past pervaded some of the Swiss workers’ associations is disappearing to
give way to the fighting mood of a class-conscious and organised
proletariat that is aware of its strength.  

The Swiss workers entertain no illusions about the fact that theirs is
a bourgeois republic upholding the same kind of wage slavery as exists in
all the capitalist countries with out exception. At the same time, however,
they have learned very well to use the freedom of their republican
institutions to enlighten and organise the wide mass of the workers.  

The fruits of their work were clearly revealed during the general
strike in Zurich on July 12 (June 29, old style).  
 

This is how it came about. The painters and fitters in Zurich had been
on strike, for several weeks, demanding higher wages and shorter hours. The
enraged employers decided to break the resistance of the strikers. The
government of the bourgeois republic, eager to serve the capitalists, came
to their aid, and began to deport foreign strikers! (There are
many foreign workers, particularly Italians, who go to Switzerland to
work.) But the use of brute force did not help. The workers held their
ground as one man.  

Then the capitalists resorted to the following method. In Hamburg,
Germany, there is a firm, owned by Ludwig Koch, which specialises in
supplying strike-breakers. The Zurich capitalists—patriots and
republicans, don’t laugh!—had that firm send in strike-breakers, who they
knew included all sorts of criminals convicted in Germany for pandering,
brawling, etc. The capitalists supplied this riff-raff or gang of convicts
(lumpenproletarians) with pistols. The brazen band of strike-breakers
filled the taverns in the workers’ district and there engaged in unheard-of
hooliganism. When a group of workers gathered together to eject the
hooligans, one of the latter shot down a worker who was on strike.


The workers’ patience was exhausted. They beat up the murderer. It was
decided to make an interpellation in the Zurich City Council on the
hooligans’ outrages. And when the city authorities, in defence of the
capitalists, prohibited strike picketing, the workers resolved to protest
by a one-day general strike.  

All the trade unions declared unanimously for the strike. The printers
were the only sad exception. They declared against the strike, and the
meeting of 425 representatives of all the Zurich workers’ organisations
replied to the printers’ decision with a stentorian cry of “Shame!” The
strike was decided on, even though the leaders of political organisations
were against it (the same old spirit of the philistine, opportunist Swiss
leaders!).  

Knowing that the capitalists and the management would try to wreck the
peaceful strike, the workers acted according to the wise maxim, “In war as
in war.” In war-time one does not tell the enemy when an attack
will take place. The workers purposely declared on Thursday that the strike
would take place on Tuesday or Wednesday, whereas in reality

    

they had fixed it for Friday. The capitalists and the management
were taken by surprise.  

The strike was a signal success. Thirty thousand leaflets in German and
Italian were circulated early in the morning. Some 2,000 strikers occupied
the tram depots. Every thing stopped. Life in the city came to a
standstill. Friday is a market day in Zurich, but the city seemed dead. The
consumption of spirits (all alcoholic drinks) was prohibited by the strike
committee, and the workers strictly obeyed this decision.  

An imposing mass demonstration took place at 2 p.m. When the speeches
were over, the workers dispersed peace fully, and without singing.  

The government and the capitalists, who had hoped to provoke the
workers to violence, saw their failure and are now beside themselves with
rage. Not only strike picketing, but also open-air meetings and
demonstrations have been prohibited by special decree throughout the Zurich
Canton. The police occupied the People’s House in Zurich and arrest ed a
number of the workers’ leaders. The capitalists announced a three-day
lock-out by way of avenging themselves for the strike.  

The workers are keeping calm; they scrupulously observe the boycott of
spirits and wine, saying among themselves:

“Why shouldn’t a working man rest three days a year, since the rich rest
all the year round?”  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Democracy and Narodism in China









Lenin: Democracy and Narodism in China







V. I.  

      Lenin
Democracy and Narodism in China




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 17, July 15, 1912.

      Signed: Vl. Ilyin.

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 163-169.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The article by Sun Yat-sen, provisional President of the
Chinese Republic, which we take from the Brussels socialist newspaper,
Le Peuple, is of exceptional interest to us Russians.  

It is said that the onlooker sees most of the game. And Sun Yat-sen is
a most interesting “onlooker”, for he appears to be wholly uninformed
about Russia despite his European education. And now, quite independently
of Russia, of Russian experience and Russian literature, this enlightened
spokesman of militant and victorious Chinese democracy, which has won a
republic, poses purely Russian questions. A progressive Chinese democrat,
he argues exactly like a Russian. His similarity to a Russian Narodnik is
so great that it goes as far as a complete identity of fundamental ideas
and of many individual expressions.  

The onlooker sees most of the game. The platform of the great Chinese
democracy—for that is what Sun Yat-sen’s article represents—impels us,
and provides us with a convenient occasion, to examine anew, in the light
of recent world events, the relation between democracy and Narodism in
modern bourgeois revolutions in Asia. This is one of the most serious
questions confronting Russia in the revolutionary epoch which began in
1905. And it confronts not only Russia, but the whole of Asia, as will be
seen from the platform of the provisional President of the Chinese Re
public, particularly when this platform is compared with the revolutionary
developments in Russia, Turkey, Persia and China. In very many and very
essential respects, Russia is undoubtedly an Asian country and, what is
more, one of

    

the most benighted, medieval and shamefully backward of Asian countries.


Beginning with its distant and lone, forerunner, the nobleman Herzen
and continuing right up to its mass representatives, the members, of the
Peasant Union of 1905 and the Trudovik deputies to the first three Dumas of
1906–12, Russian bourgeois democracy has had a Narodnik
colouring. Bourgeois democracy in China, as we now see, has the same
Narodnik colouring. Let us now consider, with Sun Yat-sen as an example,
the “social significance.” of the ideas generated by the deep-going
revolutionary movement of the hundreds of millions who are finally being
drawn into the stream of world capitalist civilisation.  

Every line of Sun Yat-sen’s platform breathes a spirit of militant and
sincere democracy. It reveals a thorough understanding of the inadequacy of
a “racial” revolution. There is not a trace in it of indifference to
political issues, or even of underestimation of political liberty, or of
the idea that Chinese “social reform”, Chinese constitutional reforms,
etc., could be compatible with Chinese autocracy. It stands for complete
democracy and the demand for a republic. It squarely poses the question of
the condition of the masses, of the mass struggle. It expresses warm
sympathy for the toiling and exploited people, faith in their strength and
in the justice of their cause.  

Before us is the truly great ideology of a truly great people capable
not only of lamenting its age-long slavery and dreaming of liberty and
equality, but of fighting the age-long oppressors of China.  

One is naturally inclined to compare the provisional President of the
Republic in benighted, inert, Asiatic China with the presidents of various
republics in Europe and America, in countries of advanced culture. The
presidents in those republics are all businessmen, agents or
puppets of a bourgeoisie rotten to the core and besmirched from head to
foot with mud and blood—not the blood of padishahs and emperors, but the
blood of striking workers shot down in the name of progress and
civilisation. In those countries the presidents represent the bourgeoisie,
which long ago renounced all the ideals of its youth, has thoroughly
prostituted itself, sold itself body and soul to the millionaires

    

and multimillionaires, to the feudal lords turned bourgeois, etc.  

In China, the Asiatic provisional President of the Re public is a
revolutionary democrat, endowed with the nobility and heroism of a class
that is rising, not declining, a class that does not dread the future, but
believes in it and fights for it selflessly, a class that does not cling to
maintenance and restoration of the past in order to safeguard its
privileges, but hates the past and knows how to cast off its dead and
stifling decay.  

Does that mean, then, that the materialist West has hopelessly decayed
and that light shines only from the mystic, religious East? No, quite the
opposite. It means that the East has definitely taken the Western path,
that new hundreds of millions of people will from now on share in
the struggle for the ideals which the West has already worked out for
itself. What has decayed is the Western bourgeoisie, which is already
confronted by its grave-digger, the proletariat. But in Asia there is
still a bourgeoisie capable of championing sincere, militant,
consistent democracy, a worthy comrade of France’s great men of the
Enlightenment and great leaders of the close of the eighteenth century.


The chief representative, or the chief social bulwark, of this Asian
bourgeoisie that is still capable of supporting a historically progressive
cause, is the peasant. And side by side with him there already exists a
liberal bourgeoisie whose leaders, men like Y\"uan Shih-kai, are above all
capable of treachery: yesterday they feared the emperor, and cringed before
him; then they betrayed him when they saw the strength, and sensed the
victory, of the revolutionary democracy; and tomorrow they will betray the
democrats to make a deal with some old or new “constitutional” emperor.


The real emancipation of the Chinese people from age-long slavery would
be impossible without the great, sincerely democratic enthusiasm which is
rousing the working masses and making them capable of miracles, and which
is evident from every sentence of Sun Yat-sen’s platform.  

But the Chinese Narodnik combines this ideology of militant democracy,
firstly, with socialist dreams, with hopes of China avoiding the capitalist
path, of preventing capitalism, and, secondly, with a plan for, and
advocacy of, radical

    

agrarian reform. It is these two last ideological and political trends that
constitute the element which forms Narodism—Narodism in the
specific sense of that term, i.e., as distinct from democracy, as a
supplement to democracy.  

What is the origin and significance of these trends? Had it not been
for the immense spiritual and revolutionary upsurge of the masses, the
Chinese democracy would have been unable to overthrow the old order and
establish the republic. Such an upsurge presupposes and evokes the most
sincere sympathy for the condition of the working masses, and the bitterest
hatred for their oppressors and exploiters. And in Europe and
America—from which the progressive Chinese, all the Chinese who
have experienced this upsurge, have borrowed their ideas of
liberation—emancipation from the bourgeoisie, i.e., socialism,
is the immediate task. This is bound to arouse sympathy for socialism among
Chinese democrats, and is the source of their subjective
socialism.  

They are subjectively socialists because they are opposed to oppression
and exploitation of the masses. But the objective conditions of
China, a backward, agricultural, semi-feudal country numbering nearly 500
million people, place on the order of the day only one specific,
historically distinctive form of this oppression and exploitation, namely,
feudalism. Feudalism was based on the predominance of agriculture and
natural economy. The source of the feudal exploitation of the Chinese
peasant was his attachment to the land in some form. The political
exponents of this exploitation were the feudal lords, all together and
individually, with the emperor as the head of the whole system.  

But it appears that out of the subjectively socialist ideas and
programmes of the Chinese democrat there emerges in fact a programme for
“changing all the juridical foundations” of “immovable property”
alone, a programme for the abolition of feudal exploitation alone.


That is the essence of Sun Yat-sen’s Narodism, of his
progressive, militant, revolutionary programme for bourgeois-democratic
agrarian reform, and of his quasi-socialist theory.  

From the point of view of doctrine, this theory is that of a
petty-bourgeois “socialist” reactionary. For the idea that capitalism can
be “prevented” in China and that a “social revolution” there will be
made easier by the country’s backwardness,

    

and so on, is altogether reactionary. And Sun Yat-sen himself, with
inimitable, one might say virginal, naïveté, smashes his
reactionary Narodnik. theory by admitting what reality forces him to admit,
namely that “China is on the eve of a gigantic industrial [i.e.,
capitalist] development”, that in China “trade [i.e., capitalism] will
develop to an enormous extent”, that “in fifty years we shall have many
Shanghais”, i.e., huge centres of capitalist wealth and proletarian need
and poverty.  

But the question arises: does Sun Yat-sen, on the basis of his
reactionary economic theory, uphold an actually reactionary agrarian
programme? That is the crux of the matter, its most interesting point, and
one on which curtailed and emasculated liberal quasi-Marxism is
often at a loss.  

The fact of the matter is that he does not. The dialectics of the
social relations in China reveals itself precisely in the fact that, while
sincerely sympathising with socialism in Europe, the Chinese democrats have
transformed it into a reactionary theory, and on the basis of this
reactionary theory of “preventing” capitalism are championing a
purely capitalist, a maximum capitalist, agrarian programme!  

Indeed, what does the “economic revolution”, of which Sun Yat-sen
talks so pompously and obscurely at the beginning of his article, amount
to?  

It amounts to the transfer of rent to the state, i.e., land
nationalisation, by some sort of single tax along Henry George lines. There
is absolutely nothing else that is real in the “economic
revolution” proposed and advocated by Sun Yat-sen.  

The difference between the value of land in some remote peasant area
and in Shanghai is the difference in the rate of rent. The value of land is
capitalised rent. To make the “enhanced value” of land the “property of
the people” means transferring the rent, i.e., land ownership, to the
state, or, in other words, nationalising the land.  

Is such a reform possible within the framework of capitalism? It is not
only possible but it represents the purest, most consistent, and ideally
perfect capitalism. Marx point ed this out in The Poverty of
Philosophy, he proved it in detail in Volume III of Capital,
and developed it with particular

    

clarity in his controversy with Rodbertus in Theories of Surplus
Value.  

Land nationalisation makes it possible to abolish absolute rent,
leaving only differential rent. According to Marx’s theory, land
nationalisation means a maximum elimination of medieval monopolies and
medieval relations in agriculture, maximum freedom in buying and selling
land, and maximum facilities for agriculture to adapt itself to the
market. The irony of history is that Narodism, under the guise of
“combating capitalism” in agriculture, champions an agrarian programme
that, if fully carried out, would mean the most rapid development
of capitalism in agriculture.  

What economic necessity is behind the spread of the most progressive
bourgeois-democratic agrarian programmes in one of the most backward
peasant countries of Asia? It is the necessity of destroying feudalism in
all its forms and manifestations.  

The more China lagged behind Europe and Japan, the more it was
threatened with fragmentation and national disintegration. It could be
“renovated” only by the heroism of the revolutionary masses, a heroism
capable of creating a Chinese republic in the sphere of politics, and of
ensuring, through land nationalisation, the most rapid capitalist progress
in the sphere of agriculture.  

Whether and to what extent this will succeed is another question. In
their bourgeois revolutions, various countries achieved various degrees of
political and agrarian democracy, and in the most diverse combinations. The
decisive factors will be the international situation and the alignment of
the social forces in China. The emperor will certainly try to unite the
feudal lords, the bureaucracy and the clergy in an attempt at
restoration. Yuan Shih-kai, who represents a bourgeoisie that has only just
changed from liberal-monarchist to liberal-republican (for how long?), will
pursue a policy of manoeuvring between monarchy and revolution. The
revolutionary bourgeois democracy, represented by Sun Yat-sen, is correct
in seeking ways and means of “renovating” China through maximum
development of the initiative, determination and boldness of the peasant
masses in the matter of political and agrarian reforms.  
 

Lastly, the Chinese proletariat will increase as the number of
Shanghais increases. It will probably form some kind of Chinese
Social-Democratic labour party. which, while criticising the
petty-bourgeois utopias and reactionary views of Sun Yat-sen, will
certainly take care to single out, defend and develop the
revolutionary-democratic core of his political and agrarian programme.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Italian Socialist Congress









Lenin: The Italian Socialist Congress







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Italian Socialist Congress




Published:
Pravda No. 66, July 15, 1912.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 170-172.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A few days ago the Thirteenth Congress of the Italian
Socialist Party came to a close in the town of Reggio Emilia.  

The struggle within the Italian Socialist Party hag assumed
particularly sharp forms in recent years. Originally there were two basic
trends: revolutionary and reformist. The revolutionaries upheld the
proletarian character of the movement and combated all manifestations of
opportunism, i.e., the spirit of moderation, deals with the bourgeoisie,
and renunciation of the ultimate (socialist) aims of the working-class
movement. The cardinal principle of this trend and the basis of its views
are the class struggle.  

The reformists, in fighting for reforms, i.e., individual improvements
of political and economic conditions, kept forgetting the socialist
character of the movement. They advocated blocs and alliances with the
bourgeoisie to the point of socialists entering bourgeois ministries, of
renouncing consistently republican convictions (in monarchical Italy,
republican propaganda In itself is not considered unlawful), of defending
“colonial policy”, the policy of seizing colonies, of oppressing,
plundering and exterminating the natives, etc.  

These two basic trends, which exist in one form or another in
all socialist parties, gave rise in Italy to two further extreme
trends that deviated completely from socialism and tended therefore to
dissociate themselves from the workers’ Socialist Party. One of these
non-socialist extremes is syndicalism, which became
“fashionable” in Italy at one time. The syndicalists inclined towards
anarchism, slipped into revolutionary phrase-mongering, destroyed the
discipline of the working-class struggle and opposed the use of

    

the parliamentary platform by socialists, or upheld such opposition.  

Anarchist influence is feeble everywhere, and the working-class
movement is rapidly ridding itself of this sickness.  

The Italian syndicalists (led by Arturo Labriola) are already
outside the Socialist Party. Their role in the working-class
movement is negligible. The Marxist revolutionaries in Italy, as in other
countries, do not in the least indulge in anarchist sentiments and trends,
which disrupt the proletarian movement.  

The reformists are less staunch with regard to the extreme Right
reformists who, by drifting to a liberal labour policy, pass completely
into the liberal camp and desert to the bourgeoisie. That is why the
removal of these traitors to the working-class cause from the Socialist
Party seldom takes place without the Marxist revolutionaries having to wage
a most bitter struggle against all reformists. This was the case
in France, for example, where Millerand, an opportunist and reformist,
ended by a deal with the bourgeoisie and entered a bourgeois Ministry.


The same is true of Italy. There the reformists have split into Left
reformists (led by Turati) and Right reformists (led by Bissolati). The
Reggio Emilia Congress marked the last act of this split.  

There were three trends at the Congress:

(1) the revolutionaries (they had about 12,500 votes at the Congress,
according to the number of their supporters in the Party);

(2) the Left reformists (about 9,000), and

(3) the Right reformists (about 2,000). The revolutionaries moved for
expelling Bissolati and another three extreme Right reformists from the
Party. As for the Left reformists, one-third of them also favoured
expulsion, but they wanted the reason for it to be expressed in “milder”
terms, while two-thirds were against expulsion and for a mere censure.


The revolutionaries, who were in a majority, as the above figures show,
gained the upper hand, and Bissolati and Co. were expelled.  

What were Bissolati’s views and actions which necessitated his
expulsion from the Party? Bissolati, in the face of numerous decisions of
the Party, went so far in backing the bourgeois Ministry as to almost
become a “minister

    

without portfolio” himself (that is, not being a minister, he behaved like
a supporter and member of the bourgeois Ministry).  

Despite republican convictions, which Italian socialists strictly
adhere to, Bissolati began to make trips to the Quirinal, where he visited
the king and held negotiations with him! He went as far as to defend
Italy’s present war against Turkey, although the entire Party has
emphatically condemned the war as shameless bourgeois plundering and a
dirty business—massacring African natives in Tripoli by means of improved
deadly weapons.  

Following the expulsion of Bissolati and Co., all the Right
reformists left the Party and founded a party of their own, which
they named the Socialist Reformist Party. Behind that façade is
in reality a “party” of liberal-monarchist “labour”
politicians.  

A split is something distressing and painful. But some times it becomes
indispensable, and then all weakness, all “sentimentality” (a term used
in Reggio by a compatriot of ours, Balabanova), is a crime. The leaders of
the working class are not angels, saints or heroes, but people like anyone
else. They make mistakes. The Party puts them right. The German Workers’
Party sometimes had to correct the opportunist errors of even such great
leaders as Bebel.  

But when someone persists in an error, when, to defend an error, a
group is formed that spurns all the decisions of the party, all the
discipline of the proletarian army, a split becomes indispensable. And the
party of the Italian socialist proletariat has taken the right path by
removing the syndicalists and Right reformists from its ranks.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Freedom of Speech” in Russia









Lenin: 'Freedom of Speech' in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Freedom of Speech” in Russia




Published:
Pravda No. 66, July 15, 1912.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 173-174.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The newspaper At Your Service, Sir, commonly known
as Novoye Vremya, has reprinted a report received by its worthy
colleague, Peterburgskiye Vedomosti, from Ivanovo-Voznesensk.



   “In our industrial town,” says the report, “foul
   language in the street has supplanted human speech. It is used by factory
   workers and cabbies and well-dressed people, and by policemen performing
   their official duties.”  


Commenting on this picture of mores, Novoye Vremya remarks:



   “A lucky workers’ town, where the most daring
   Social-Democratic expectations of completely unrestricted freedom of speech
   have been realised.”  


How very instructive, this caddish sally, isn’t it?  

Surely it is common knowledge, gentlemen of the editorial board of a
newspaper loyally serving the government, that freedom of speech with
regard to foul language has been “realised” in the Third Duma precisely
by those Right-wing parties closest to the government. Surely everyone
knows that the Purishkeviches, Markovs and their colleagues have
become famous for this throughout Russia.  

It is imprudent of Novoye Vremya to talk like that, very
imprudent indeed. Why, it could have played its servant’s role much more
adroitly. Yet here is a paper, one sincerely devoted to the government,
suddenly reminding us of the kind of “freedom of speech” that
Purishkevich and Co.

    

practise and the kind practised by the Social-Democratic deputies to the
Duma.  

Freedom of speech for the Purishkeviches in a landlord Duma, and
freedom of speech at workers’ meetings.... It is an excellent pre-election
topic brought up by Novoye Vremya, which is so clumsy in its
zealous servility!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## How P. B. Axelrod Exposes the Liquidators









Lenin: How P. B. Axelrod Exposes the Liquidators







V. I.  

      Lenin
How P. B. Axelrod Exposes the Liquidators




Written: Written late in July 1912 

Published:

      Published in Nevskaya Zvezda Nos. 18 and 19, July 22 and 29, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the newspaper text verified against the text in the collection Marxism and Liquidationism Part II, St. Petersburg, 1914.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 175-186.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

P. B. Axelrod is destined to play an original role in the
development of the opportunist trend among the Marxists. His idea of a
“labour congress”, for example, once made quite a stir. A certain number
of workers were attracted and carried away by his propaganda. But the more
widespread that propaganda became and the nearer the idea drew to being put
into effect, the clearer became the spurious character of the
scheme, which fizzled out of itself. Experience con firmed what the
Bolsheviks had pointed out more than once, namely, that Axelrod’s “ideas”
are an invention of the opportunist intelligentsia, a dream of how to
“bypass” grim class and political struggles.  

Exactly the same story has now been repeated with regard to the idea of
a workers’ publishing house and a “non-factional” workers’ newspaper. Any
St. Petersburg worker will recall how much the liquidators made of that
idea until very recently, how they tempted the workers with the dream of
“bypassing” all struggle among the worker democrats, and how comically
they fumed against Zvezda because it showed that the issue of a
liberal labour policy (think of the bakers’

decision[2]) cannot be bypassed and that all talk about workers’ control
over a non-factional newspaper is sheer demagogy.  

And now Axelrod, writing in the liquidationist Nevsky Golos
No. 6, has excellently exposed—has had to expose—the demagogy of his
own friends. Demagogy means lavishing promises that cannot be
fulfilled. The idea of a broad labour congress, a legal workers’ publishing
house and a non-factional workers’ newspaper is tempting. But the point is

    

that these tempting things cannot be achieved without first waging
a stubborn and difficult struggle for political liberty in general, for the
victory of Marxism among the worker democrats, etc. Demagogic promises are
easy to give. But life soon shows that they cannot be fulfilled, and
exposes the opportunism of “rosy dreams”.  

In Nevsky Golos No. 6, Axelrod dishes up an amazing amount of
empty declamation, asserting, for instance, that he and his friends are
“progressive spokesmen of the Party”, while their opponents are
“reactionaries”. Of course, Axelrod likes very much to think so, and the
liquidators like to print what he thinks. Only, what cheap talk it is!
Praising himself for his “progressive” attitude.... Would it not be
better to explain the substance and meaning of the divergencies?



   “The idea of a non-factional Social-Democratic
   (genuinely Social-Democratic, without inverted commas) organ is utopian at
   present and, moreover, a utopia that objectively runs counter to the
   interests of the Party’s political development and the organisational
   unification of the proletariat under the banner of Social-Democracy. Drive
   Nature out of the door and she will fly in through the window and the
   cracks.”  


That is what Axelrod writes. Those are not bad ideas at all. They are
perfectly sound in principle. They show that Axelrod’s liquidationist
friends were quite wrong when yesterday they were still putting out among
the mass of the workers the very idea which Axelrod now condemns. Only, we
cannot regard the lavishing of unrealisable promises as a “progressive”
attitude.  


   “We may be said to have no factions that have taken
   shape organisationally,” writes Axelrod. “Instead, we have various
   circles and small groups, of which some hold more or less definite
   political, tactical and organisational views, while the others waver in
   various directions, getting in the way of the former.”  


The first sentence is not entirely correct. Axelrod knows very well
that there is something which has fully taken shape
organisationally—as far as that is possible nowadays. But the second is
correct: there are many small groups that are wavering and are
getting in the way of the others. By stating this truth under the
compulsion of events, Axelrod

    

exposes his friends again. Everyone is aware that what Axelrod’s friends
are just now making a display of is ostentatious “unification” on paper
of the wavering little groups. Do they not promise this fictitious
“unification” of all the liquidators and all the waverers in the very
same No. 6 of Nevsky Golos?  


   “The focal point and main source of the discord,”
   Axelrod continues, “is, on the one hand, the difference in the attitude of
   the various Party circles to the new, open Social-Democratic labour
   movement [shouldn’t you have said to the open Party, esteemed
   P. B. Axelrod? It is a bad thing to distort the essence of the divergency!]
   and, on the other hand, substantial differences over immediate political
   tasks and the political tactics of the Russian Social-Democratic
   movement. The requirements of both these categories are becoming
   particularly burning and topical issues just now when a new social and
   political movement is beginning.  And it is over them that the Russian
   Social-Democrats have split into two main camps. The question arises
   whether the projected labour newspaper will be able to take a neutral
   position between these two opposed camps, and whether such a position is
   permissible in principle. Obviously not.”...  


A very correct conclusion. Axelrod has given a good thrashing not only
to those of his friends who yesterday were clamouring for a neutral and
non-factional newspaper, but also to those who today are assuring na\"ive
people of their “agreement”, “unity”, solidarity, and so on, with the
neutral little groups.  

There are indeed two main camps. One of them has completely taken shape
organisationally. Its answers to all the questions listed by Axelrod are
quite formal, precise and definite, unlike the desultory and contradictory
little articles of certain writers. As for the other camp, i.e., the
liquidationist camp, to which Axelrod belongs, it has admittedly not taken
shape organisationally (what we have in stead is only hollow promises of an
open labour party, only talk about open political societies of the
workers, which are even less feasible than a labour congress would have
been in 1906–07), nor can it answer, in specific and precise terms, the
questions listed by Axelrod himself (what we have in stead of specific
answers is only the journalistic exercises of Yezhov, Levitsky, Klenov,
Chatsky, and others).  


As soon as a working group of publishers and journalists
   makes up its mind to put forward a specific programme of action, to take

    

   a definite stand on questions relating, say, to the election campaign, to
   put particular tasks and slogans before the workers in the campaign and
   declare itself for a particular tactic towards the different political
   parties—as soon, I say, as a publishing association decides to lend its
   publication the character of an essentially proletarian political Organ, it
   will be faced with the same vexed questions and differences that worry and
   rend asunder the Russian Social-Democracy. And then it may happen that that
   association itself will become a new source of the same kind of discord,
   unless its members come to terms and reach agreement on these questions
   beforehand.”  


Axelrod hits out at the liquidators very correctly and very well. What
the “association” needs, Nasha Zarya and Nevsky Golos
need still more badly. Then why cannot they come to terms on the
vexed questions and differences? Why cannot they give precise
answers at least to the more important questions listed by Axelrod
(the attitude to different parties, the tasks, slogans and tactics)?  

“Physician, cure thyself.” Axelrod has so well explained to the
workers the need for clear and precise answers to the “vexed
questions” that the writers of Nasha Zarya and
Nevsky Golos (and, perhaps, not only Nevsky Golos) ought
to heed his words. One cannot do without precise and clear answers
to the “vexed questions”, cannot confine oneself to articles—that would
indeed be the circle spirit. Decisions—precise, formal,
well-considered, and definite decisions—are needed. After all, it is not
for nothing that Axelrod speaks—and very aptly!—of a specific
programme of action, of tasks and slogans, etc.  

Incidentally, the reason why the liquidators are called liquidators is
that, while they have rejected the old, they offer nothing new. That an
open party is useful, and that open political societies are necessary, is
something which all liquidators have been dinning into our ears. But this
talk of theirs is not all that is required, and as for action,
there is no evidence of it, none whatsoever. There is no evidence of
precisely what Axelrod demands from the workers!  

In the Nevsky Golos feuilleton, below the dividing line,
Axelrod has given excellent evidence exposing the liquidators who write
above the dividing line, in the editorial section of the
paper. Read Axelrod’s feuilleton carefully and you will see that it is
deception and self-deception for the

    

liquidators to shout about “agreement” concerning an election platform, a
“single” platform, etc.  

“A Zvezda Supporter” has already exposed this deception in
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 16. But the exposure provided by Axelrod goes
even deeper and is still more valuable because it comes from Axelrod.  

We are entirely in favour of a single platform—namely, the
one which the Bolsheviks and pro-Party Mensheviks adopted long ago, and are
putting into effect, as “A Zvezda Supporter” justly points
out. We are entirely in favour of a single election campaign
precisely on that platform, on the basis of these same decisions, of
definite and precise answers to all the “vexed questions”.  

By shouting about “unity”, the liquidators seek to carry away
ignorant workers by the mere sound of the word. “Unity” is agreeable,
“non-factional newspapers” are more attractive! But read Axelrod at
least, and he will make it clear to you that non-factionalism is
impossible, that it is utopian; that there are two camps
among the worker democrats, and that these two camps are opposed.


What now? Are the liquidators by any chance going to defend a
“platform” in order to conceal their views?—a
diplomatic platform, such as the bourgeoisie likes so much?—, a
platform that does not furnish any answers to the “vexed questions” but
is “simply” and “merely” concerned with “getting into the Duma”?


That would be the height of unprincipledness. But the workers would
never accept it. Such platforms, no matter how “open”, could not hold
their own even for a single day.  

Yes, we have had enough of self-deception. It is time we faced up to
the truth, which this time has also been plainly acknowledged by the leader
of the liquidators, Axelrod. If you, liquidator gentlemen, choose to insist
on a platform of your “own” (although you have yet to put it forward, and
we do not believe in platforms concocted six weeks before elections!), if
you choose to insist on tactics of your “own” (although so far you have
nowhere stated them precisely, formally, in a manner befitting a party!),
then you alone are to blame. Then it is you who violate the unity
that is there already. Then it is you who will be held
entirely responsible for that violation.  
 

Yes, we have had enough of self-deception. Liquidationist cries about
“unity” are no more than a blind. Knowing very well that the workers are
against them, the liquidators are equally well aware what a complete,
shattering defeat their separate action would bring them. That is why they
are willing to promise anything as long as they are elected to the Duma.


That will not do. Only the bourgeois behave in that way. Worker
democrats believe only in programmes, decisions, tactics and slogans that
have been put into effect for years before the elections and are
merely repeated for the hundredth time during the elections. As
for those who make up meaningless “platforms” without such
decisions, just for the elections, they deserve no confidence
whatever.  

Axelrod’s feuilleton is useful as a means of destroying all
self-deception, of enlightening the various concocters of “new”,
“open”, “common” platforms.  
II

The closing part of Axelrod’s article, of which we spoke in
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 18, has now appeared in Nasha
Zarya. Taken as a whole, that final part has fully borne out our
appraisal, and we can merely repeat that Axelrod’s article is useful as a
means of destroying all self-deception, of re vealing the real nature of
liquidationism, of appreciating the sheer inanity of the vaunted
“non-factionalism” which today is being made so much of, and so very
uselessly, in certain quarters.  

Axelrod hits out at Trotsky, who is now in alliance (is it a stable
one?) with the liquidators, in a particularly eloquent and convincing
fashion. “The ideological and organisational union of the progressive
elements into an independent faction,” writes Axelrod, who amuses himself
by calling the liquidators Party progressives and calling us Party
reactionaries, “is—in view of the present state of affairs—their
direct duty and pressing task.” “In this situation in the Party, to talk
of ‘non-factionalism’ as the sole remedy means behaving like the ostrich,
which buries its head in sand at the approach of danger; it means deceiving
oneself

    

and others as to the actual state of affairs among the Social-Democrats.”
(Nasha Zarya No. 6, p. 15.)  

Poor Trotsky! It is downright cruel and ungracious of Axelrod to
inveigh against a true friend of the liquidators and a contributor to
Nasha Zarya in this way. What are we to expect now? Will Trotsky
come out with a devastating article against the factionalist Axelrod, or
will Martov reconcile the conciliator Trotsky with the factionalist Axelrod
by pasting together, as usual, what is falling apart with a dozen
plastering reservations?  

Really, how can anyone speak seriously now of the vaunted

 bloc[1]

of Trotsky, and the Lettish and Jewish near-Marxists, etc., with Axelrod?


Axelrod’s article contains a point that is worthy of serious analysis,
namely, the one on the “Europeanisation” of our Social-Democratic
movement. But before passing to that point, it is necessary to say a few
words about one of the methods of the liquidators.  

One page in Axelrod’s article (16) is a collection of the strongest,
most vicious and choicest terms of abuse, against the anti-liquidators in
general and this writer in particular. It would not be worth replying to
abuse at all (a person in Axelrod’s position can do nothing but revile and
curse) but for documentary evidence indicating that some deliberately use
such abuse while others are embarrassed by it.  

Mr. Chernov, for example, replying in

Zavety[3] to what Kamenev says to prove that he, leader of the
“Left” Narodniks, is drifting from democracy to liberalism, selects a
bunch of the most abusive expressions of the liquidators and
anti-liquidators, chuckling as he does so. Mr. Chernov’s method is so
despicable that it suffices to point to it and pass on.  

No struggle over principles waged by groups within the
Social-Democratic movement anywhere in the world has managed to
avoid a number of personal and organisational conflicts. Nasty types make
it their business deliberately to pick on “conflict” expressions. But
only weak-nerved dilettanti from among “sympathisers” can be embarrassed
by

    

these conflicts, can shrug them off in despair or in scorn, as if to say
“it is all a squabble!” Those who take a serious interest in the
working-class movement always learn—it is possible and necessary to learn
it, if only by studying the historical role of the great leaders of the
working-class movement—to distinguish between the “conflict” aspect of
the struggle of ideas, of the struggle of trends, and that aspect
of it which is a matter of principle. People will always be people, and no
historical clash between the Marxist and the anarchist trends (Marx and
Bakunin), between the Guesdist and the Jaurèsist, between the
Lassallean and the Eisenach trends, etc., has ever managed to do without
“conflict” material, without “squabbles”.  

There still exists a nasty type of writers who deliberately select
“from those days” bunches of accusations of a thousand and one
dishonesties, etc. But there are serious Social-Democrats who lay bare the
ideological roots of the differences, which in the splits of
particular groups, in the circumstances of political exile, etc.,
inevitably took the form of conflicts in the nature of desperate squabbles.


Let the reader not imagine that we want to frighten anyone away from
studying the data to which Axelrod alludes—merely alludes—in the more
abusive passages of his article. Quite the reverse. We invite
those who want to know every thing about the Social-Democratic movement to
study those data. They are available in complete form abroad, and
they include not only passionate accusations, but also documents and
evidence by neutral persons. A study of those documents and that evidence
will supply an answer to the question why the attempt to establish
complete peace between the liquidators and the anti-liquidators, made in
January 1910, ended in failure.  


One of the more interesting passages of fundamental importance in
Axelrod’s article is the following: 


   “To organise and unite as a faction is a direct
   obligation and pressing task of the advocates of a reform, or rather
   [listen to this!] revolution, in the Party, for this is the only way in
   which they will be able to accomplish their task—to Europeanise, i.e.,
   radically change the character of, the Russian Social-Democratic movement

    

   as it took shape in the pre-revolutionary period and developed further in
   the revolutionary period, and organise it on the same principles on which
   the European Social-Democratic party system is based.”  


And so, the liquidators advocate a revolution-in the Party. This
exceptionally truthful statement of Axelrod’s is worthy of note, for the
bitter truth is more useful than deceit that “uplifts

us”,[4] and more valuable than diplomatic quibbles and
reservations. Try to carry out a revolution in the Party, esteemed
P. B. Axelrod! We shall see whether you and your friends will be more
successful than those “revolutionaries” who only a short time ago tried
to accomplish a “revolution” (against the republic) in

Portugal.[5] 

But the chief thing in the statement just quoted is the vaunted
“Europeanisation”, which is being talked about in every possible tone by
Dan and Martov and Trotsky and Levitsky and all the liquidators. It is one
of the main points of their opportunism.  

“To Europeanise, i.e., radically change the character of, the Russian
Social-Democratic movement....”  Think over these words. What determines
the “character” of any Social-Democratic movement and
radical changes in it? The general economic and political
conditions of the country concerned, without a doubt. And there is no doubt
that the character of the Social-Democratic movement of a people can be
radically changed only if those conditions undergo
radical changes.  

These are all most elementary and indisputable truths. But it is these
truths that expose Axelrod’s opportunist error! The trouble with him is
that he wants to bypass a stubborn and grim struggle for a
radical change in Russian political conditions, which has not yet
taken place, by dreaming of a radical change in the “character of
the Russian Social-Democratic movement”.  

Just as the Cadets, who readily talk about Europeanisation (the
liquidators have borrowed both the Cadets’ catch word and their ideas), by
means of this loose term push into the background an exact concept of the
solid foundations of political liberty and “play” at
“constitutional opposition”, so the liquidators play at
“European Social-Democracy”, although—in the country where they amuse
them selves with their game—there is as yet no constitution,
as
    

yet no basis for “Europeanism”, and a stubborn struggle has
yet to be waged for them.  

A naked savage who put on a top-hat and imagined him self therefore to
be a European would look rather ridiculous. Milyukov, a supporter of the
bourgeoisie, reminds one of just such a savage when he asserts in the Third
Duma that “we have a constitution, thank God”, and so does Axelrod, a
supporter of the workers, when he puts on a top-hat inscribed “I am a
European Social-Democrat”. Both of them—Milyukov as well as
Axelrod—are ridiculous in their naïveté. They are both
opportunists, for, by uttering dreamy phrases about “Europeanism”, they
evade the difficult and urgent question of how a particular class, in
non-European conditions, ought to act for a stubborn struggle to
secure a basis for Europeanism.  

Axelrod has proved by his article that the result is evasion
of a vital and urgent matter by means of dreamy phrases. Trotsky has
prepared a perfectly European—yes, truly and perfectly European—plan
for setting up a “press committee” as an “elected collective
control body” of the workers for working-class newspapers (p. 18 of
Axelrod’s article). Trotsky probably even consulted “European
Social-Democrats” about this and received their blessing as a gift—a
blessing which he makes a great deal of.  

And now the “European Social-Democrat” Axelrod, after waiting two
months or so, during which Trotsky plagued all the St. Petersburg
Social-Democrats with his letters about “elected collective control
bodies”, making everyone laugh, has at last taken pity on Trotsky and
explained to him that a “press committee” is no good and is impossible,
and that what is needed instead is an “agreement” between the
workers and the liquidationist Zhivoye Dyelo (pp. 18 and 19 of
Axelrod’s article)!!  

This is a small example, and we must unfortunately con fine ourselves
to it. But it is a very typical one. The laugh able result produced by
Trotsky’s “European” plan for a “press committee” is also being
produced by the “European plans of all the liquidators for an “open
workers’ party” or “legal political societies of the workers”, for a
“campaign” for “freedom of association”, etc.  

The only result of Trotsky’s “European” plans for a “press

    

committee”, an “elected collective control body” for the working-class
newspaper “of all the working-class organisations that have taken shape”,
etc., is that the legalist game of a “workers’ publishing house” has
taught the workers a special lesson, while the liquidators have in fact
failed to produce either a “press committee” or a
working-class press! These are the facts.  

The “press committee” was a dream of the opportunist intellectual
who, ignoring the difficult non-European conditions of the working-class
movement in Russia, drew up a splendid European plan and took advantage of
the occasion to boast of his “Europeanism” to the whole world.  

This bitter lot of the liquidators is not accidental, it is
inevitable. As soon as their “European” plans come near to being
realised, they turn out to be soap bubbles, inventions of opportunist
intellectuals. This was the case with the labour congress, the “press
committee”, the workers’ legal political society (the confused little
reservations by which Martov seeks to “rescue” that “plan” in Nasha
Zarya No. 5 do not improve matters in the least) and the campaign for
freedom of association.  

The liquidators describe as “Europeanism” the conditions in which the
Social-Democrats have been active in the principal countries of Europe
since 1871, i.e., precisely at the time when the whole historical
period of bourgeois revolutions was over and when the foundations
of political liberty had taken firm shape for a long time to come. The
“change in the character” of the Social-Democratic movement in those
countries occurred, firstly, after a radical change in political
conditions—after a definite constitutional system had been firmly
established, comparatively speaking; secondly, that change was only a
temporary one, for a definite period (which has lately been nearing its
end, as is generally acknowledged by the most cautious Social-Democrats of
Europe).  

In these conditions of fully established bourgeois constitutionalism, a
campaign for, say, freedom of association or universal suffrage, and for
constitutional reforms in general, could be, under certain
circumstances, a campaign of the working class, a real political campaign,
a real struggle for constitutional reforms.  
 

In our country, however, opportunist intellectuals transplant the
slogans of such “European” campaigns to a soil lacking the
most elementary foundations of European constitutionalism, in an
attempt to bypass the specific historical evolution which usually
precedes the laying of these foundations.  

The difference between the reformism of our Axelrod and his friends,
who pose as “European Social-Democrats”, and the reformism of Bissolati,
that genuine European, is that Bissolati sacrifices the principles
of the class struggle and of consistent Marxist theory and practice for
the sake of reforms which are really effected (with certain
curtailments) by the really dominant liberal bourgeoisie. Axelrod, how
ever, makes the same sacrifice as Bissolati for the sake of
reforms which impotent, light-minded, dreamy liberals merely prattle
about.  

The liberal bourgeoisie here in Russia will become a real force only
when the development of the country overcomes the liberals’ timidity and
their conciliatory, half-hearted slogans. That is how it has been
everywhere. Liberals become a power only when the democracy has won in
spite of the liberals.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Axelrod’s article is dated May 17, 1912, or five months after
the solemn formation of the Trotskyist and liquidationist bloc to fight the
anti-liquidators under the banner of “non-factionalism”!  —Lenin
 



[2]
This refers to the resolution of the Board of the St. Petersburg
Bakers’ Union in favour of the publication of an anti-liquidationist
workers’ daily. The Board hailed the forthcoming publication of
Pravda and called on the membership to collect money for the
future newspaper. A report on the resolution appeared in Zvezda
No. 27, on April 8 (21), 1912.





[3]
Zavety (Behests)—a literary and political monthly
of a Socialist-Revolutionary trend, published legally in St. Petersburg
from 1912 to 1914.





[4]
The allusion is to the following lines from Alexander Pushkin’s poem
“The Hero”: 

I treasure deceit that uplifts us
Above a myriad low truism.






[5]
This refers to the rebellion which the Portuguese monarchists launched
in the summer of 1912 to restore the monarchy. The rebellion was put down.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Results of Six Months’ Work









Lenin: The Results of Six Months' Work







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Results of Six Months’ Work[3]




Written: Written on July 12–14 (25–27), 1912 

Published:

      Published in Pravda Nos. 78, 79, 80, 81, July 29 and 31, and August 1 and 2, 1912.

      Signed: A Statistician.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 187-202.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

By founding a workers’ daily newspaper, the workers of
St. Petersburg have accomplished a major feat, one that without
exaggeration can be called historic. The workers’ democratic movement has
rallied together and consolidated itself in incredibly difficult
conditions. Of course, it is not possible to talk of the stability
of the workers’ democratic press in our country. Everyone knows very well
the persecution to which working-class newspapers are subjected.  

For all that, the founding of Pravda is an outstanding proof
of the political, consciousness, energy and unity of the Russian workers.


It is useful to look back and note some results of the six months’ work
of the Russian workers for founding a press of their own. Since
January of this year the interest shown by working-class circles of
St. Petersburg in their press has become fully evident and a number of
articles dealing with a workers’ daily has appeared in newspapers of all
shades that come into contact with the world of labour.  
I

Data on who founded a daily working-class press in Russia and
how it was founded are, fortunately, available in a comparatively
full form. They are the data on the collection of funds for a
workers’ daily newspaper.  

Let us begin with the funds with which Pravda was brought into
being. We have the accounts of Zvezda, Nevskaya Zvezda
and Pravda for the period from January 1 to June 30, or exactly
six months. Publicity ensured the absolute

    

accuracy of the accounts, accidental errors being corrected immediately on
indications from those concerned.  

What is of the greatest importance and interest to us is not the sum
total of the funds collected, but the composition of the
givers. When, for example, Nevskaya Zvezda No. 3 gave the
total contributions for a workers’ daily newspaper as 4,288 rubles 84
kopeks (from January to May 5, exclusive of the donations which from
April 22, the day when Pravda first appeared, came directly to
that newspaper), we were at once prompted to ask: what was the role which
the workers themselves and groups of workers played in collecting this sum?
Does it consist of large donations by sympathisers? Or did the workers
themselves show in this case a personal and active concern for the
working-class press and make up a large sum out of donations from a
large number of workers’ groups?  

From the point of view of the initiative and energy of the workers
themselves, it is much more important to have 100 rubles collected
by, say, 30 groups of workers than 1,000 rubles collected by some dozens of
“sympathisers”. A newspaper founded on the basis of five-kopek
pieces collected by small factory circles of workers is a far more
dependable, solid and serious undertaking (both financially and,
most important of all, from the standpoint of the development of
the workers’ democratic movement) than a news paper founded with tens and
hundreds of rubles contributed by sympathising intellectuals.  

To obtain exact data on this fundamental and most important matter, we
have performed the following operation with regard to the figures on
collections published in the three newspapers mentioned. We have singled
out only the donations stated to have been made by groups
of factory or office workers.  

What we are interested in at the moment is the contributions made by
the workers themselves—moreover, not by individual ones, who may have
come across a collector by chance, not being linked with him ideologically,
i.e., in terms of their views and convictions; we mean groups of
workers, who must no doubt have discussed beforehand whether they
should donate any money, whom they should give it to and for what
purpose.  
    


 

Each report by Zvezda, Nevskaya Zvezda or
Pravda which indicated that the money contributed for a workers’
daily came from a group of factory or office workers, we assumed
to be a group contribution by the workers themselves.  

How many such group contributions by workers were there in the first
half of 1912?  

Five hundred and four group contributions!  

More than five hundred times, groups of workers made contributions for
the founding and maintenance of their paper, either donating what
they had earned in one day, or making a single contribution, or
contributing repeatedly from time to time. In addition to individual
workers and sympathisers, 504 groups of workers took a most active
part in founding their newspaper. This figure is an unquestionable
indication that a deep and conscious interest in a workers’ newspaper has
been aroused among the mass of the workers—and not just in any
workers’ paper, but in a workers’ democratic paper. Since the masses are so
politically conscious and active, no difficulties or obstacles can frighten
us. There are not, and cannot be, difficulties or obstacles which the
political consciousness, activity and interest of the mass of the workers
would be unable to overcome in some way or another.  

Those 504 group contributions break down by months as follows: 





January 1912 . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14


February ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
18


March ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
76


April ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
227


May ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
135


June ” . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
34


Six-month total . . . . . . . . .
504




This little table makes clear, incidentally, the great importance of
April and May as a period of radical change. From darkness to
light, from passivity to activity, from action by individuals to action by
the masses.  

In January and February group contributions by the workers were as yet
quite insignificant. Obviously, the activity was only just beginning. March
showed, a noticeable and substantial rise. Seventy-six group contributions
by

    

workers in one month—this indicates at all events a serious movement
among the workers, a tenacious effort by the masses to have their way at
all costs, undeterred by having to make donations. This speaks of the
workers’ deep confidence in their own strength and in the undertaking as a
whole, in the trend of the projected newspaper, and so on. In March there
was as yet no workers’ daily, which means that groups of workers were
collecting money and giving it to Zvezda, as it were, on credit.


April brought an enormous leap that decided the matter. Two
hundred and twenty-seven group contributions by workers in one month, an
average of over seven contributions a day! The dam had been broken, and the
founding of a workers’ daily paper was assured. Every group contribution
means not merely the sum of five-kopek and ten kopek pieces, but something
far more important—the sum of combined, massed energy, the determination
of groups to support a workers’ newspaper, to disseminate and
guide it, to bring it into being through their own participation.  

The question may arise: were not the April contributions greatest
after the 22nd, i.e., after Pravda had appeared? No, they
were not. Before April 22, Zvezda reported 188 group
contributions. Between the 22nd and the end of April, Pravda
reported 39 group contributions. This means that during 21 days of April,
before Pravda had appeared, there was an average of nine
contributions a day, while the last nine days of April saw only four
contributions a day by groups.  

Two important conclusions follow from this: 

Firstly, the workers were particularly active before the
appearance of Pravda. By giving money “on credit”, showing their
confidence in Zvezda, the workers expressed their determination to
have their way.  

Secondly, it is seen that it was the April effort of the
workers that brought the workers’ newspaper, Pravda, into
being. There can be no doubt as to the closest connection between the
general upswing of the working-class movement (not in a narrow guild,
narrow trade union sense, but with a scope affecting all the
people) and the founding of the daily newspaper of the St. Petersburg
worker democrats. We need something more than trade union publications, we
need a political newspaper of our own—this is what the

    

masses realised more and more in April; what we need is not just any
political workers’ newspaper, but a newspaper of the foremost worker
democrats; we need a newspaper not only to promote our working-class
struggle, but also to provide a model and a beacon for the whole people.


In May the upswing was still very marked. Group contributions averaged
more than four a day. On the one hand, it was an indication of the general
upswing in April-May. On the other, the mass of the workers realised that,
although the publication of a daily newspaper had already begun, its
position would be particularly difficult at first and group support
particularly necessary.  

In June the number of group contributions fell below the March
figure. Of course, the fact has to be taken into consideration that
after the workers’ daily newspaper had begun to appear
another form of assistance to the newspaper arose and acquired
decisive significance, namely, subscription to it and its circulation among
fellow-workers, acquaintances, countrymen, etc. The politically-conscious
friends of Pravda do not limit themselves to subscribing to the
paper but pass it on or send it to others as a sample, to make it known at
other factories, in neighbouring flats or houses, in the countryside and so
on. Unfortunately, we have no way of obtaining complete statistics on
this kind of group assistance.  
II

It will be most instructive to see how those 504
contributions by groups of workers are distributed among towns and
factory localities. In what parts of Russia and how readily did the workers
respond to the appeal to help in founding a workers’ daily newspaper?  

Fortunately, data on this are available for all of the workers’ group
contributions reported by Zvezda, Nevskaya Zvezda and
Pravda.  

In summing up these data, we must first of all single out
St. Petersburg, which naturally has taken the lead in the matter of
founding a workers’ newspaper, then fourteen towns and factory localities
which sent in contributions from more than one group of workers,
and lastly, all the other towns, thirty-five in all, which sent in only one
group

    

contribution each during the six months. This is the picture we obtain:






 
Total of group contributions




St. Petersburg . . .
412


14 towns with 2 to 12 group contributions each . . .
57


35 towns with 1 group contribution each . . .
35


Total for 50 towns . . . 
504




This shows that almost the whole of Russia took an active
part, to some extent or another, in founding a workers’ daily. Considering
the difficulties which the circulation of the workers’ democratic press
encounters in the provinces, it is amazing that so large a number
of towns should have responded within six months to the appeal of the
St. Petersburg workers.  

Ninety-two group contributions by workers in forty-nine towns
of

       Russia,[1]

besides the capital, is a very impressive figure, at least for a
beginning. There can be no question here of chance, indifferent, passive
givers; these are undoubtedly representatives of the proletarian masses,
people united by conscious sympathy for the workers’ democratic movement
although scattered throughout Russia.  

We note that the list of provincial towns is headed by Kiev with 12
group contributions, then comes Yekaterinoslav with 8, while Moscow with 6
is only in the fourth place. This lag of Moscow and its entire area can be
seen still more clearly from the following summary data on all the areas of
Russia: 
    

    

Number of group contributions by workers for a workers’ daily
  newspaper during six months—January to June 1912


St. Petersburg and vicinity . . . . . . . . . . . . .    
415


South . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    
51


Moscow and its area . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    
13


North and West . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
12


Urals and Volga region . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
6


Caucasus, Siberia and Finland . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
7


Total for Russia . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  
504




These data may be interpreted as follows: 

In terms of renewed activity of the worker democrats in Russia,
proletarian St. Petersburg has already awakened and is at its glorious
post. The South is awakening. Mother Moscow, however, and the rest of
Russia are still asleep. It is time she awoke too.  

The lag of the entire Moscow area becomes obvious when that area is
compared with the other provincial areas. The South is farther
from St. Petersburg, much farther away than Moscow. Nevertheless, the
South, which has fewer industrial workers than the Moscow area,
exceeds that area almost fourfold in the number of group
contributions by workers.  

Moscow seems to be lagging behind even the Urals and the Volga region,
for the number of workers in Moscow and its area exceeds their number in
the Urals and the Volga region not twice, but many times over. Yet Moscow
and its area made only 13 group contributions against 6 in the Urals and
the Volga region.  

There are probably two special reasons for the lag of Moscow and its
area. Firstly, the dominant industry here is the textile industry, in which
the economic situation, i.e., market conditions and conditions for a more
or less consider able increase in production, has been worse than, say, in
metallurgy. That is why textile workers participated less in strikes and
showed less interest in politics and in the workers’ democratic
movement. Secondly, in the Moscow area there are more factories scattered
over out-of-the-way localities and therefore less accessible to newspapers
than in the big city.  
 

In any case, we must undoubtedly draw a lesson from the data cited
above. The closest attention must be paid to the circulation of the
workers’ newspaper in Moscow. We cannot put up with the lag of
Moscow. Every politically-conscious worker realises that St. Petersburg
without Moscow is like one hand without the other.  

The bulk of Russia’s factory workers is concentrated in Moscow
and its area. In 1905, for instance, according to government statistics,
there were 567,000 factory workers here, i.e., more than one-third
of Russia’s total (1,660,000), and many more than in the St. Petersburg
area (298,000). The Moscow area is therefore destined to take the
first place for the number of readers and friends of a workers’
newspaper, for the number of politically-conscious representatives of the
workers’ democratic movement. Moscow will, of course, have to have a
workers’ daily newspaper of its own.  

Meanwhile St. Petersburg must help it. Every morning the readers of
Pravda should tell themselves and their friends:

“Workers, remember the Muscovites!”  
III

The above data should draw our attention from yet an other
standpoint, one that is very important and urgent as regards our practical
tasks. Everyone realises that a political newspaper is one of the basic
conditions for the participation of any class of modern society in the
political affairs of the country in general and in an election campaign in
particular.  

Thus, a newspaper is required by the workers in general, and for
carrying out elections to the Fourth Duma in particular. The workers know
very well that they can expect no good either from the Third or from the
Fourth Duma. But we must take part in the elections, firstly, to rally and
politically enlighten the mass of the workers during the elections, when
party struggles and the entire political life will be stimulated and when
the masses will learn politics in one way or other; and,
secondly, to get our worker deputies into the Duma. Even in the most
reactionary Duma, in a purely landlord one, worker deputies have
done, and can do, a great deal for the working-class cause, provided
they

    

are true worker democrats, provided they are connected with the masses and
the masses learn to direct them and check on their activity.  

In the first half of 1912 all the political parties in Russia
began, and virtually completed, what is known as the pre-election
mobilisation of the party forces. Mobilisation is a military
term. It means putting the army in a state of readiness for action. Just as
an army is put in a state of readiness before a war, the reserves being
called up and arms and ammunition distributed, so, before an election, all
parties sum up their work, reaffirm their decisions on party views and
slogans, rally their forces and prepare to fight all the other parties.


This work, we repeat, is virtually completed. The elections are only
a few weeks off. During this time we can and must bend our
energies to increase our influence on the voters, on the masses, but if a
party (the party of any class) has not got ready in six months, nothing can
help it any longer, for it is already a zero in the elections.


That is why the six months which our statistics cover are six months of
decisive mobilisation of the workers’ forces prior to the Fourth
Duma elections. They have been six months of mobilisation of all the forces
of the worker democrats—of course, not only with regard to the Duma
campaign, but we are for the moment devoting our attention to the latter.


A question arises at this point, a question raised recently by
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 16, and Pravda No. 61. It concerns
the so-called liquidators, who since January 1912 have been publishing the
newspapers Zhivoye Dyelo and Nevsky Golos in
St. Petersburg. The liquidators, who have their own separate newspapers,
say that “agreement” has to be reached with them, the liquidators, if
there is to be “unity” of the worker democrats in the elections,
otherwise they try to frighten us with the prospect of “duplicate

candidates”.[4] 

It seems that these attempts at intimidation have so far had very
little success.  

And this is quite understandable. How could anyone seriously take into
account people who have rightly earned the name of liquidators and
advocates of a liberal labour policy?  
 

But perhaps there are, nevertheless, many workers who follow the
erroneous, un-Social-Democratic views of this group of intellectuals? If
so, ought we not to pay special attention to these workers? We now have
objective, open and quite precise data for an answer to this question. As
we know, throughout the first half of 1912 the liquidators showed
particular vigour in attacking Pravda, Nevskaya Zvezda, Zvezda,
and all opponents of liquidationism in general.  

How successful were the liquidators among the workers? We can judge
this from the contributions for a workers’ daily newspaper published in the
liquidationist newspapers Zhivoye Dyelo and Nevsky
Golos. The liquidators recognised the need for a daily very long
ago—in 1911 or perhaps even 1910—and advocated the idea most
energetically among their supporters. In February 1912 Zhivoye
Dyelo, which was first issued on January 20, began to carry reports on
the contributions it received for this purpose.  

Let us single out from those contributions (which totalled 139.27
rubles in the first half of 1912) group contributions by workers,
just as we did in the case of the non-liquidationist papers. Let us sum up
all the sixteen issues of Zhivoye Dyelo and the five issues of
Nevsky Golos (its issue No. 6 appeared in July), and even add
contributions for the benefit of Zhivoye Dyelo itself (although we
did not take data on such contributions from the non-liquidationist
papers). We obtain the following data on the total of group contributions
by workers in six months: 


Number of group contributions by workers for a workers’ daily newspaper during the first half of 1912


 
Non-liqui- dationist newspapers
Liquida- tionist newspapers




January . . . . . . . . . .        
14
0


February . . . . . . . . . .       
18
0


March . . . . . . . . . .          
76
7


April . . . . . . . . . .          
227
8


May . . . . . . . . . .            
135
0


June . . . . . . . . . .           
34
0


Total . . . . . . . . . . 
504
15



 

And so, by dint of frantic effort, the group of liquidationist
intellectuals succeeded in enlisting the support of 15 groups of
workers in all!  

Could one imagine a more shattering defeat of the liquidators since
January 1912? Could one imagine a more specific proof of the fact that we
are in the presence of a group of liquidationist intellectuals who are
capable of publishing a semi-liberal magazine and newspaper, but totally
lack any serious support among the proletarian masses?  

Here, in addition, are data on the territorial distribution of the
donations sent to the liquidators by groups of workers: 


Number of group contributions by workers for a workers’ daily newspaper during the first half of 1912


 
Non-liqui- dationist newspapers
Liquida- tionist newspapers




St. Petersburg and vicinity . . . .     
415
10


South . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .     
51
1


Moscow and its area . . . . . .         
13
2


North and West . . . . . . . . .        
12
1


Urals and Volga region . . . . . .      
6
0


Caucasus, Siberia and Finland . . .     
7
1


Total . . . . . . . . . . . .  
504


  15[2]





And so, the liquidators’ defeat in the South during the six-month
period is even worse than in St. Petersburg.  

These exact workers’ statistics, which were published openly for as
long as six months in newspapers of opposed trends, definitely settle the
question of “liquidationism”. One may revile the opponents of
liquidationism and slander them as much as one pleases, but these exact
data on group contributions by workers are irrefutable.  

It is quite understandable now why neither Nevskaya Zvezda nor
Pravda took the liquidators’ threat of “duplicate candidates”
seriously. It would be ridiculous to take seriously threats from people who
in six months of open struggle revealed that they amount to little more
than zero. All the defenders of liquidationism have united in Zhivoye
Dyelo
    

and Nevsky Golos. And it took all of them together six months to
win over fifteen groups of workers!  

Liquidationism amounts to nil in the working-class movement; it is only
strong among the liberal intelligentsia.  
IV

The data in Pravda on all kinds of workers’
contributions are, generally speaking, extremely interesting. They provide
us, for the first time, with highly accurate data on the most diverse
aspects of the working-class movement and the life of Russian worker
democrats. We hope to return to the analysis of these data more than once.


At the moment, however, before we finish our survey of data on the
contributions made by groups of workers for a daily newspaper, we must
point out one practical conclusion.  

Workers’ groups made 504 contributions to their press, to
Zvezda and Pravda. The workers had absolutely no other
aim in view except the founding and maintenance of their workers’
press. That is precisely why a simple truthful summary of these data for
six months provides a most valuable picture of the life of worker democrats
in Russia. The five- and ten-kopek pieces collected and marked “from a
group of workers of such-and-such a factory” have made it possible also to
appraise the workers’ sentiments, their class-consciousness, their unity,
and their readiness to promote the working-class cause.  

That is why this custom of group collections by the workers, brought
into being by the upswing in April and May, should by all means be
continued, developed and expanded, and it goes without saying that accounts
of the collections are necessary too, such as have always been published in
Pravda.  

This custom is of vast importance from the standpoint of both the
stability of the working-class press and the common interests of the worker
democrats.  

The working-class press needs to be developed and strengthened. And
this requires money. Workers’ newspapers in Russia can be satisfactorily
organised through persevering effort only on condition that the workers
constantly

    

arrange massive collections. There is a workers’ paper in America
(Appeal to

Reason[5]) which has over half a million
subscribers. That Russian worker, we would say, paraphrasing a well-known
saying, is a poor worker indeed if he does not hope to overtake and surpass
his American fellow-workers.  

What is very much more important, however, is not the financial aspect
of the matter, but something else. Let us assume that a hundred workers in
different shops of a factory contribute one kopek each on pay-day
to the workers’ newspaper. That will add up to two rubles a month. Let us
assume, on the other hand, that ten well-paid workers meeting by chance
collect ten rubles at once.  

The former two rubles are worth more than the latter ten. This is so
obvious to any worker that it does not have to be explained at length.


It should be made a custom for every worker to contribute
one kopek to the workers’ newspaper every pay-day. Let
subscriptions to the paper be taken as usual, and let those who can
contribute more do so, as they have done in the past. It is very important,
besides, to establish and spread the custom of “a kopek for the
workers’ newspaper”.  

The significance of such collections will depend above all on their
being regularly held every pay-day, without interruption, and on an ever
greater number of workers taking part in these regular
collections. Accounts could be published in a simple form: “so-and-so many
kopeks” would imply that so many workers at the given factory had
contributed to the workers’ paper, and if there were any larger
contributions, they could be stated as follows: “In addition, so-and-so
many workers contributed so-and-so much.”  

If this custom of a kopek for the workers’ newspaper
becomes established, the workers of Russia will soon raise their papers to
the proper standard. Workers’ papers should give more information, and of a
more varied nature; they should have Sunday supplements and so on, and
should have their correspondents in the Duma, in all Russia’s towns and in
the major cities abroad. The workers’ newspaper should develop and improve
steadily, which cannot be done unless the greatest possible number
of workers regularly collect money for their press.  
 

Monthly reports on the workers’ kopek will show
everyone how the workers throughout Russia are shaking off their
indifference and drowsiness, how they are awakening to an intelligent and
cultured life—not in the official nor in the liberal sense of the
term. It will be possible to see clearly how interest in the workers’
democratic movement is growing, and how the time is drawing near when
Moscow and the other big cities will have workers’ papers of their own.


We have had enough of the domination of the bourgeois

Kopeika![6] That unscrupulous, huckster-minded newspaper has
reigned long enough. In a matter of six months, the workers of
St. Petersburg have shown how tremendously successful joint collections by
the workers can be. May their example and their initiative not be in
vain. May the custom of a workers’ kopek for the workers’
newspaper develop and gain strength!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Here is a complete list of the towns and localities:

Vicinity of St. Petersburg: Kronstadt, Kolpino and Sestroretsk.

South: Kharkov, 4 group contributions; Yekaterinoslav, 8; Ananyev,
2; Lugansk, 3; Kherson, Rostov-on-Dan, Pavlograd, Poltava; Kiev, 12;
Astrakhan, 4; Chernigov; Yuzovka, 3; Minakovo, Shcherba Mine, Rykov Mine,
Belgorod, Yelisavetgrad, Yekaterinodar; Mariupol, 2; Nizhne-Dneprovsk and
Nakhichevan.

Moscow area: Rodniki, 2; Ryazan; Tula, 2; Bezhetsk, 2.

North: Archangel, 5; Vologda.

West: Dvinsk, Vilna, Gomel, Riga, Lepaya and Mühlgrahen.

Urals: Perm, Kyshtym, Minyar and Orenburg.

Volga region: Sormovo and Balakovo Village.

Caucasus: Baku, 2; Grozny and Tiflis.

Siberia: Tyumen and Blagoveshchensk.

Finland: Helsingfors.  —Lenin

[2]
Moscow, 2; Nakhichevan, Novonikolayevsk and Archangel, 1 each.  —Lenin
 



[3]
The article “The Results of Six Months’ Work” was written in
the first half of July 1912. Lenin’s correspondence with Pravda
concerning the publication of this article survived. In one of his letters
to Pravda, Lenin asked the editors to print the article in four
instalments, as separate feature articles, and agreed only to corrections
made for censorship reasons. The article was published in the form
suggested by Lenin.





[4]
Lenin is referring to the Menshevik liquidators’ threat to nominate
their own candidates at the Fourth Duma election for the worker curia as a
counter to the Bolshevik candidates.





[5]
Appeal to Reason—a newspaper published by the American
Socialists, founded in Girard, Kansas, in 1895. It had no official
connection with the American Socialist Party but propagated socialist ideas
and was very popular among the workers. Among those who wrote for it was
Eugene Debs.





[6]
Gazeta-Kopeika (Kopek Newspaper)—a bourgeois daily
of the yellow press type, published in St. Petersburg from 1908. It was
closed down in 1918.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.[5]




Written: Written between July 17 (30) and August 20 (September 2) 1912, the postscript September 2 (15), 1912 

Published:

      First published in Russian in 1924 in Volume XII, Part One of the Collected Works of N. Lenin (V. Ulyanov).

      Published as a pamphlet in German, Leipzig, 1912.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 203-220.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The German comrades often have occasion to read re ports of
bitter struggles and fundamental divergencies inside the
R.S.D.L.P. Unfortunately, such reports originate from particular groups of
political exiles. In most cases they come from people who are either
absolutely unfamiliar with the actual state of affairs in Russia at the
present time or deliberately seek to mislead the German comrades by a
one-sided presentation of party politics. Every such group of exiles has
its own special “trend”, but in reality it consists of people who have
lost all living contact with the fighting Russian workers’ Party or have
never had such contact. Unfortunately, one of this kind of “informants”
succeeded in winning the confidence of Vorwärts. The Central
Organ of the German Social-Democratic Party in a series of articles opened
its columns to a torrent of unheard-of slander against the Russian Party,
poured out from the pen of that informant and supposed to be derived from
“objective” sources.  

Actually, those sources were “subjective” and false through and
through. Since Vorwärts did not insert our factual
correction, we had to issue a separate pamphlet entitled The
Anonymous Writer in Vorwärts and the State of Affairs in the

   R.S.D.L.P.,[1]

which was issued in several hundred copies and was sent to the executive
committees of all the German Party organisations of any importance and to
the editors of the major organs of the Party press.  

As far as the factual evidence of the pamphlet is concerned,
Vorwärts was unable to raise a single objection, and
thereby tacitly accepted it.  
 

To enable our German Party comrades to appraise the authenticity of
certain reports reaching them, we quote here a letter which the Central
Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. sent to the Executive Committee of the German
Social-Democratic Party. The Letts had suggested that the Executive should
arrange a joint meeting of eleven “centres” on the question of material
support for the election campaign, whereupon the Executive asked those
centres about their attitude to the matter. The letter is the answer given
by the Central Committee, and it reads as follows: 

July 30,

 1912[2]

To the Executive Committee of the German Social-Democratic Party

Dear Comrades, 

Recently we received a copy of the letter sent to you by the Committee
of the Lettish Social-Democracy Abroad on June 24. We saw no point in
explaining the queer plan of these Letts to you, as we did not think any
well-informed person would take that plan seriously. But we were surprised
to learn from your letter to us of July 22 that you intend to adopt that
plan. This compels us to express our emphatic protest, which we hereby send
you. Objectively, the intention of the Executive Committee is nothing short
of an attempt to contribute to the split in our Party (the R.S.D.L.P.) and
to the formation of a new party hostile to us. This is unprecedented in the
history of the whole Inter national. We shall furnish the German comrades
with accurate data to bear out our assertion.  
The Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.  Since January 1912

In January 1912 the R.S.D.L.P. held its All-Russia Conference which was
attended by delegates from the organisations of St. Petersburg, Moscow, the
Moscow district,

    

Kazan, Saratov, Tiflis, Baku, Nikolayev, Kiev, Yekaterinoslav, Vilna and
Dvinsk. This Conference restored the Party and elected a new Central
Committee in place of the one destroyed by the liquidators; furthermore,
the Conference was compelled to declare these liquidators to be outside the
Party. (See pamphlet The Anonymous Writer in Vorwärts and
the State of Affairs in the R.S.D.L.P., which was sent to the
Executive Committee; it mentioned the protest of the liquidators and of the
national organisations—the Poles, the Letts, the Bund and the groups
abroad.)  

In January also a meeting took place with the aim of setting up an
Organising Committee to convene a new conference—a “general Party
conference”, as the liquidators and their friends called it.  

In their letter to the Executive Committee of June 24, the Letts
affirmed that this “Organising Committee” involved the following
organisations and trends: the Bund, the Lettish Social-Democrats, the
Caucasian Regional Committee, the Menshevik Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata, the Vienna Pravda and the Vperyod
group.  

And so, on one side there is the Central Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P. elected at the Conference by Russian organisations, i.e.,
organisations working in Russia (the opponents call it the Leninist trend);
on the other side there is the so-called Organising Committee, which
promises to convene a “general” Party conference.  
What Is the Relation of the Hitherto Neutral Russian Social-Democrats
to the So-Called Organising Committee?

Plekhanov, the best known of the Mensheviks, who had been waging a
determined fight against the destruction of the Party by the liquidators,
did not attend the January Party Conference, although he was invited. In
April 1912 he published his correspondence with the representative of the
Organising Committee (see his Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 16).


Plekhanov refused to take part in the so-called Organising Committee
because, he said, the Bund was convening not a conference of the existing
Party organisations, but an

    

“inaugural” conference, i.e., one that was to found
a new party. The so-called initiating groups, which in reality are the
only groups backing the Organising Committee, are, according to Plekhanov,
liquidationist groups, which do not belong to the Party and want to form a
new party. In April 1912 Plekhanov wrote: “The new conference is being
called by the liquidators.”  

In July this Organising Committee published its Listok No. 3,
which contains not a word, not a hint, of a reply to Plekhanov. One can
judge from this how the Executive Committee is kept informed by the Letts,
those very same Letts who complain that the “Leninist” Central Committee
does not answer the letters of the Organising Committee.  

Is it really so very strange that the Central Committee of the
Party—of the old Party—should not reply to those who, according to the
hitherto neutral Plekhanov, are founding a new party?  

The Organising Committee must first of all prove to the neutral
Plekhanov that it is not forming a new party and not liquidating the old
one.  

The Letts who are taking part in the Organising Committee and who
appealed to the Executive Committee on June 24 should—after six months’
struggle of this Organising Committee of the liquidators against the
Party—have shown by facts and documents the results of this struggle;
instead, they show the Executive Committee the Potemkin

villages[6] of the liquidators.  

The Letts proposed that the Executive should convene eleven
“organisational” centres, organisations and factions of the Russian
Social-Democrats. That is literally what they stated (see p. 4 of the
Letts’ letter to the Executive of June 24).  

All over the world, parties have so far been formed of local
organisations united by a single central body. But in 1912 the Russian and
Lettish liquidators made a great discovery. From now on, a party may be
formed of “centres, organisations and factions”.  

According to the Letts’ latest liquidationist electoral geometry, the
eleven organisational centres, organisations and factions include, firstly,
the Organising Committee and, secondly, six factions, or organisations, or
centres, which
    

form that Organising Committee. The Letts’ letter says in so many
words: “Points 2 to 7 inclusive form the Organising Committee.”  

Thus the intellectualist groups that are liquidating the Party obtain a
treble vote, like the aristocracy in the “rotten boroughs”: 

(1) The Caucasian Regional Committee, a fictitious organisation 

(2) Ditto, as represented by the Paris Golos, although
Golos has no permanent mandate from the Caucasus, 

(3) Ditto, as represented by the Organising Committee. We maintain that
the Russian workers will indignantly and contemptuously reject the idea of
discussing the question of duplicate candidates, i.e., the attempt of the
liquidators jointly with the insignificant groups abroad to cause a split,
the more so since these groups represent only intellectualist
disorganisers.  

We wish to point out the fact that not a single one of the groups
abroad that are fighting against the Party has during the past six months
received a mandate from any organisation in Russia to publish its newspaper
or issue leaflets. If the Letts are trying to prove the contrary to the
Executive Committee, let them name in the Russian press at least one such
mandate prior to July 22.  

Golos Sotsial-Demokrata is not the organ of any Russian
organisation.  

Nor is Trotsky’s Vienna Pravda the organ of any Russian
organisation. Three years ago Pravda was the organ of the
Ukrainian

Spilka[7] (Southern Russia), but the Spilka can celled its mandate long
ago.  

Neither Vperyod, nor Plekhanov, nor the “pro-Party
Bolsheviks”, publish any organs that are Party organs of any organisation
in Russia.  

It is very easy to refer to groups which do not exist in reality. Nor
is it difficult to print reports expressing “sympathy”. But to bring out,
even for six months, the organ of an organisation operating in Russia, it
is necessary to have regular contacts, the unqualified confidence of the
mass of the workers in the localities, and unity of views on tactics, which
can be achieved only through joint work over a long period. The tiny groups
abroad which the Lettish

    

and Bundist disorganisers are mobilising against the Party lack all this.


As regards the Polish Socialist Party, we shall say briefly:

it is no Social-Democratic organisation. It has never
been part of the Social-Democratic Labour Party. There is only one reason
for inviting it, namely, it “promises” to become Social-Democratic and
join the liquidators! For the disorganisers and lovers of splits, this, of
course, is sufficient! If the Polish Socialist Party is to be invited to
take part in meetings, why not also invite the Socialist-Revolutionaries,
who take part in the Duma elections, the Zionist-Socialists, the Lettish
Union of Socialist-Revolutionaries, and other similar “trends”?  
The Social-Democratic Group in the Third Duma

Among the organisational centres the Executive Commit tee has included
the little groups abroad; on the other hand, it has not invited the
Social-Democratic group in the Duma. This is incredible, yet it is a
fact. It will be useful for the Russian workers to know how Trotsky and
Co. are misleading our foreign comrades.  

In their letter to the Executive Committee of June 24, the Letts wrote:



   “As regards the Social-Democratic Puma group, there can
   be no question of its good offices in the matter of financial assistance to
   the election campaign, for the Duma session is drawing to a close and
   simultaneously the Puma group is thereby dissolving itself” (p. 2 of the
   repeatedly quoted letter).  


This is either deliberate deception, or boundless political ignorance,
indicating clearly enough how far the Letts in Brussels are informed about
the elections in Russia.  

The letter is dated June 24. On June 9, i.e., June 22, new style, the
Third Duma was officially dissolved for an indefinite period, all the
deputies, the Social-Democrats among them, retaining their mandates. The
latter are there fore still Duma deputies, which is known to every
literate worker in Russia. But this is unknown to the slanderers of the
Party abroad.  
 

The only legally existing Social-Democrats in Russia, who are the only
official organisation in whatever part of the country they may be, are
precisely the members of the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma.


All the liquidators hate the group. The sheets of the liquidators
(Nasha Zarya) heap abuse and insinuations upon it, and all the
disorganisers abroad spread tittle-tattle about it. Why? Because the
majority of the group, in which pro-Party Mensheviks have always
predominated, have always fought with determination against the liquidators
and helped to make them quite harmless in St. Petersburg.  

In the pamphlet The Anonymous Writer, etc., we published an
important fact. No one could say a word to refute it. Only two
members of the group regularly contribute to the liquidationist
papers. Eight members of the group regularly contribute to the
anti-liquidationist

       papers.[3]


Both the Letts and Trotsky propose that the Executive Committee should
exclude from the meeting this body, the only all-Russia body to have
preserved unity!  Even if the Letts were mistaken and on June 24 did not
know what was known to all the workers in Russia, why did they not take the
trouble prior to July 22, i.e., in the course of a whole month, to correct
their mistake? Some mistakes are very useful to those who make them.  

The intention of the Letts and the liquidators who have misled the
Executive Committee is to impose liquidationist candidates on us, against
the majority of the Party in Russia, of the Social-Democratic group in the
Duma, by means of a bloc of fictitious little groups abroad and to obtain
money by fraud from the German workers. Such is the gist of the long
speeches (of the Letts, Bundists, Trotsky and Co.).  

But this deception will not go unpunished.  
Officially Verifiable Data on the Influence of the Liquidators Compared
with That of the Party

Every sensible person knows that the empty phrases about what is
alleged to be secret “organisations” sympathising with the liquidators
are not to be trusted at all.  
 

We maintain that all the liquidationist organisations in Russia are
fictitious.  

It is difficult for those who lack accurate information on the state of
affairs in Russian Social-Democratic circles to establish the truth. But
even they can ascertain it if they search the written records and examine
their meaning, refusing to take anything on trust. We have already given
the first commonly known and verifiable fact, namely, the division of the
forces in the Social-Democratic Duma group between the liquidators and
anti-liquidators.  

But now, after six months’ struggle between the liquidators and the
Party, there are further entirely objective, and still more convincing,
facts.  

In the letter of June 24 (pp. 5 and 6), the Letts mentioned the legal
Marxist papers in St. Petersburg. They named Zhivoye Dyelo and
Nevsky Golos, which advocate a Menshevik trend (that of Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata), and contrasted them with Zvezda and the
St. Petersburg Pravda (not to be confused with Trotsky’s
liquidationist Vienna Pravda), which, according to the Letts,
“are owned and led by Lenin’s group” alone.  

Even though this assertion is unfortunate, the Letts have in spite of
themselves cited a valid fact against the liquidators.  

While the term “open party” is no more than an empty, liberal phrase
of the liquidators, open activity in the Duma and in the press is
the principal activity of Marxist propaganda. It is here, and only here,
that facts are to be found which objectively show the relative strength of
the liquidators and the anti-liquidators.  

There are no other all-Russia political organs except those named by
the Letts. The liquidators have Zhivoye Dyelo and Nevsky
Golos; the anti-liquidators, Zvezda, subsequently named
Nevskaya Zvezda, and Pravda (St. Petersburg). There are
no other trends or factions in Russia, either in the press or in the public
mass arena; all the groups abroad named by the Letts are mere ciphers.


We now have the results of the six months’ activities of both trends.


During these six months (January–June 1912) all the Russian parties
began, and completed, their preparations

    

for the elections. Only six or eight weeks now remain till the
elections. Most of the electoral lists have been drawn up. The outcome of
the elections is virtually predetermined by these six months’ preparations.


“Points” 1–7 in the Letts’ list declared for the liquidators (the
Organising Committee, the Bund, the Lettish Social-Democracy,
Golos, the Vienna Pravda, the Caucasian Regional
Committee, Vperyod). The anti-liquidators were sup ported by the
Central Committee, which unites the Russian organisations, i.e., those
functioning in Russia (only the “Leninist trend”, as the liquidators
assert).  

Now let us see what each of the two has done.  

From January 1 to June 30 (old style), 1912, the liquidators published
in St. Petersburg sixteen issues of Zhivoye Dyelo and five issues
of Nevsky Golos, or twenty-one issues in all.  

During the same six months, the anti-liquidators published thirty-three
issues of Zvezda, fourteen issues of Nevskaya Zvezda and
fifty-three issues of Pravda, or one hundred issues in all.  

Twenty-one to one hundred.  

Such is the balance of forces between the liquidators and the Party in
Russia. The data on the newspapers are open data; anyone can check and
substantiate them.  

How do matters stand with the circulation of the papers? The Letts
affirm that the liquidators have distributed 30,000 copies. Let us assume
that this is not an overstatement. With regard to the anti-liquidationist
papers, a person whom Comrade Haase and other members have seen gave the
Executive Committee the figure of 60,000 copies. This ratio reduces the
influence of the liquidators, as compared with that of the Party, to
1 : 10.  

While information on circulation has not been published and may
therefore seem exaggerated, other data have been published that are more
important, and more convincing.  

They are the information concerning the connection of the liquidators
and of the Party with the mass of the workers in Russia.  
    

Open and Verifiable Data on the Links of the Liquidators and the Party
with the Mass of the Workers in Russia

The data on the number of newspaper issues and copies published do not
fully prove the superiority of the Party over the liquidators. Even small
groups of liberal intellectuals can publish newspapers. Any
newspaper which is “friendly to the workers”, or even a liberal newspaper
of a radical shade, will always find many readers in Russia. It will be
read not only by workers, but by liberals and also by petty-bourgeois
democrats.  

There are facts, however, which reveal much more simply and clearly the
links of the liquidators and the Party with the mass of the workers in
Russia.  

They are the data on the funds collected for a workers’ press.  

For a long time agitation has been carried on among the workers in
Russia for the collection of funds to publish a workers’ daily
newspaper. Everyone realised that without such a newspaper, participation
in the elections would almost be a fiction. A newspaper is the chief weapon
in an election campaign, the chief means of Marxist agitation among the
masses.  

But where is the money for a newspaper to come from?  

It is necessary to organise collections among the workers. These
collections form a fund and show the strength of the links of this or that
group. They are an indication of the prestige of the groups, the confidence
placed in them by the workers, and their actual influence on the
proletarian masses.  

Such collections for a workers’ newspaper were begun in St. Petersburg
early in 1912. Six months—from January Ito June 30—is a long enough
period. Data on the collections are published in all the newspapers listed
above, the liquidationist as well as the anti-liquidationist ones.  

The conclusions which may be drawn from these data for six months are
best evidence, an open, complete, objective and final answer to the
question concerning the balance of the forces of the liquidators and the
Party in Russia. Therefore we have given in the appendix a full translation
of all the accounts of money collections for a daily workers’

    

newspaper, taken from all the five above-mentioned news papers for six
months.  

Here we give only the totals.  

During the six months, the anti-liquidationist newspapers published
accounts of 504 money collections among groups of workers, i.e., those
giving the name of the workers’ groups which made the collections. These
collections were made in fifty Russian towns and factory settlements.  

During the same six months—from January 1 to June 30, 1912—the
liquidationist newspapers published accounts of fifteen money collections
among groups of workers. These collections were made in five Russian

towns.[4]


Here are the precise accounts: 


Money collections by groups of workers for a workers’ daily newspaper January 1 to June 30, 1912


  
In liquida- tionist newspapers
In anti- liquidation- ist newspapers




January . . . . . . . . . . .  
0
14


February . . . . . . . . . . . 
0
18


March . . . . . . . . . . .    
7
76


April . . . . . . . . . . .    
8
227


May . . . . . . . . . . .      
0
135


June . . . . . . . . . . .     
0
34


  
15
504


Ditto: According to the Main Areas of
    Russia


St. Petersburg . . . . . . . . .   
10
415


South Russia . . . . . . . . . .   
1
51


Moscow . . . . . . . . . . . . .   
2
13


North and West Russia . . . . . .  
1
12


Urals and Volga . . . . . . . . .  
0
6


Caucasus, Siberia and Finland . .  
1
7


  
15
504



 

After six months’ struggle against the Party, the liquidators were
completely routed.  

The liquidators do not count at all in the Russian Social-Democratic
labour movement. This is proved by the above-quoted data, which anyone can
verify. Such are the facts published in Russia for a whole half-year,
despite the bragging of Trotsky and the liquidators.  

It should be noted that Trotsky is a contributor to Zhivoye
Dyelo. Furthermore, the Letts themselves, in their letter of June 24,
admit that all the six groups, including Trotsky, the Menshevik
Golos, and the leaders of Zhivoye Dyelo and Nevsky
Golos, form the so-called Organising Committee. Therefore, our data
prove that not only the liquidators, but all their pretentious friends
abroad are of no account in the Social-Democratic labour movement in
Russia.  

On the average, only one group of workers in Russia out of thirty sides
with them.  

We give here the addresses and the dates of publication of all the
Social-Democratic papers in St. Petersburg.  
Liquidationist

1. Zhivoye Dyelo. St. Petersburg, Bolshaya Moskovskaya,
16. No. 1—January 20, 1912; No. 16 (last issue)—April 28, 1912
(suppressed).  

2. Nevsky Golos. St.Petersburg, Kolokolnaya, 3. No. 1—May
20, 1912; No. 5—June 28, 1,912 (still exists—up to July 29, 1912).

Anti-Liquidationist

3. Zvezda. St. Petersburg, Razyezzhaya, 10, Apt. 14. No. 1
(37)—January 6, 1912; No. 33 (69)—April 22, 1912 (suppressed).  

4. Nevskaya Zvezda. St. Petersburg, Nikolayevskaya, 33,
Apt. 57. No. 1—February 26, 1912; No. 2—May 3, 1912; No. 14—June 24,
1912 (still exists).  
 

5. Pravda. St. Petersburg. Nikolayevskaya, 37,
Apt. 18. No. 1—April 22, 1912; No. 53—June 30, 1912 (still exists).

CONCLUSION

The candidates of the R.S.D.L.P. in the forthcoming Duma
elections will be nominated by the local Party organisations without
distinction of views and trends. The minority of the worker
Social-Democrats will everywhere have to submit to the majority.  

The notorious duplication of candidates is simply non sense, serving
merely to frighten the foreign comrades and extort money.  

All that is wanting is for the notorious ten “trends” to raise the
bogey of ten candidates and for money to be begged from foreigners
for each of them.  

There will be no duplicate candidates. The liquidators are so weak that
they cannot put up duplicate candidates. We do not negotiate with a handful
of liquidators who have betrayed the Party. Neither the Central Commit tee
in Russia nor the local organisations take the liquidators seriously. Note,
for example, the latest events in St. Petersburg. The liquidators reported
in Nevsky Golos (No. 6) that meetings were held with them (the
liquidators) in St. Petersburg in connection with carrying out the election
campaign. Both Nevskaya Zvezda (No. 16) and Pravda
(No. 61) of July 21 and 23 reported that they had not sent
representatives to the meetings; moreover, one participant in the meetings
announced in Nevskaya Zvezda that the workers all over Russia
would carry out the decisions of the January Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.



   “Union of the various trends,” he said, referring to
   the liquidators, “is quite inconceivable in the Social-Democratic
   election campaign.” (Nevskaya Zvezda No. 16, July 8 [21],
   1912.)  


No financial assistance in the world can win the sympathies of the
Russian workers for the liquidators. But, of course, it is possible to put
up fictitious duplicate candidates in various places with the money of the
Executive Committee. In that case the responsibility for such candidates,
who will virtually be candidates of the German Executive

    

Committee, will also fall on the Executive Committee.

The money handed out to the liquidators, who have no daily
newspaper, will help them to found a competing organ. That money
will be used to bring about a split by those who during long years of
struggle have proved their insignificance; the money will be used
for trips, etc., with the aim of founding a new
party.  

If the Executive Committee now wants to help the liquidators in one way
or another, then, much as we respect the fraternal German Party, we shall
have to appeal to the International. Then we shall prove to the
Vienna International

Congress[8] by documents that the Executive Committee has
expressed its readiness by means of financial support to help in bringing
about a split in our Party, putting up duplicate candidates and galvanising
that corpse—the defeated liquidators. If the German comrades want to help
the R.S.D.L.P., they must transfer the money to the Central Committee of
the old Party, not to those who are organising a new party.  

Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. 

 

After the Executive Committee had called off the proposed meeting, it
informed us that it “cannot give money to any of the Party groups in
Russia for the election campaign until all of them jointly indicate to us
[the Executive Committee] a body enjoying universal confidence and
authorised to receive and distribute funds”.  

This pretended neutrality of the Executive Committee amounts in reality
to a refusal to support the workers’ Party in Russia because of the calumny
heaped upon it by the little groups abroad and by the “conference” of the
liquidators.  

Besides the comments made above, we regard it as our duty to add the
following.  

The Russian newspapers legally existing and published in a Marxist
spirit are at the present time the most important legal mouthpiece of the
mass of the Russian Social-Democratic workers in connection with the
Party’s agitation work.  

The newspapers appearing abroad, which are illegal in Russia, cannot
really claim to be as important as those

    

mentioned above, although their fundamental importance for
theoretically elucidating the movement is undoubtedly very great. For
everyone knows how easily, and sometimes frivolously, such papers are
founded by smell groups of Russian exiles scattered abroad. Those
newspapers have a precarious existence among the groups concerned, and
hardly ever reach the Russian members of the Party. That is why they cannot
really be said to exert any appreciable influence on Party life in Russia.


After six months’ struggle of the anti-liquidationist newspapers (from
January to June 1912) there is only one liquidationist
paper—Nevsky Golos. This paper has almost ceased to exist as a
political organ. During a month and a half (from June to mid-August), only
two issues appeared (Nos. 6 and 7). Obviously, no such newspaper
can withstand the police persecution that is raging in Russia against
all workers’ newspapers, and even against many quite moderate
liberal ones, unless it draws its vital energy from close contact with the
mass of the workers.  

The weekly Nevskaya Zvezda and the daily Pravda are
now workers’ newspapers of this kind; they carry great political weight and
are of immediate and topical importance. Both appear in St. Petersburg; our
political opponents among the Lettish Social-Democrats have
contemptuously dismissed them as organs of “Lenin’s group”. From the
objective data cited above, which can be openly verified at any
time. it should become obvious to our German comrades that this “Lenin’s
group” comprises, in fact, the overwhelming majority of the Russian worker
Social-Democrats.  

Hence it is quite understandable why the information coming from the
liquidators and groups, or tiny groups, sympathising with them, is not
to be trusted in the least. All the rumours spread by those little
groups together with the Jewish (Bund) and Lettish Social-Democrats, who
have no direct contact with the Russian movement, about the joint
conference of all

“trends”[9] that has been convened, or allegedly is about to be
convened, turn out to be pure inventions. No such conference, even if it
were to take place, could play any serious part in the struggle of
the Russian proletariat. Basically, therefore, it is, if we reluctantly are
to use a harsh word, a question of a swindle.  
 

To make the relevant facts, which are undoubtedly of great political
importance, still clearer to our German Party comrades, we shall quote in
conclusion some extracts from an article by Axelrod, one of the
liquidationist leaders, which appeared in the last issue of the monthly
Nasha Zarya.  

Axelrod wrote: 


   “The idea of a ‘non-factional’ Social-Democratic organ is utopian at
   present and, moreover, a utopia that ... runs counter to the interests of
   the Party’s political development.... We may be said to have no factions
   that have taken shape organisationally. Instead, we have various circles
   and small groups, of which some hold more or less definite political,
   tactical and organisational views, while the others waver in various
   directions, getting in the way of the former.... The focal point and main
   source of internal Party discord is, on the one hand, the difference in the
   attitude of the various Party circles to the new, open Social-Democratic
   and labour movement and, on the other hand, substantial differences over
   the immediate political tasks and the political tactics of the Russian
   Social-Democratic movement. The questions of both these categories ...

   are becoming particularly burning and topical issues just now....

   And it is over them that the Russian Social-Democrats have split into two
   main camps....

   The question arises whether the projected labour newspaper [proposed by
   some workers in St. Petersburg and by many intellectuals abroad) will be
   able to take a neutral position between these two opposed camps, and
   whether such a position is permissible on principle. Obviously not....

   Such being the situation in the Party, to talk about ‘non-factionalism’ as
   a panacea means ...

   deceiving oneself and others as to the real state of affairs in the
   Social-Democratic movement.... Factional organisation and consolidation
   are a direct duty and urgent task of the advocates of a Party reform, or
   rather revolution” (in the Party).  


Axelrod’s last words obviously refer to the liquidators. We can only
advise our German Party comrades, if they hear from various quarters about
“non-factionalism”, or about a non-factional conference with the
liquidators participating, to demand, for better orientation, a full
translation of Axelrod’s above-quoted article for the German
Social-Democratic press. Then they will see certain fables for what they
are, and will be able to judge them.  

Editorial Board of Sotsial-Demokrat, Central
Organ of the R.S.D.L.P. 


 

Confidential! Only for the organised members of Social-Democratic
parties!  
POSTSCRIPT
To the Pamphlet The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.

Today, September 15, 1912, we have received via Paris the
following letter from the Executive Committee, a letter which should make
it particularly clear to the German comrades how right we were in
protesting against the irresponsible private “informants” of the
Executive who are afraid to act openly.  

On the 10th inst., the Party Executive wrote: 


   Berlin, September 10, 1912 

Dear Comrade Kuznetsov, 

Will you be so kind as to inform us whether it is true
   that the constituencies in which all the Social-Democratic groups reached
   agreement during the elections to the State Duma include the following:
   

Yekaterinoslav, Kharkov, the city of Moscow and Moscow
   Gubernia, the Don region and Odessa. Kindly send your information as early
   as possible to H. M\"uller, Chemnitz.  

If we have no news from you by September 17, we shall
   consider the above statement to be true.  

   With Party greetings, H. M¨ller 


We answered the letter as follows: 


Executive Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of Germany.  

Dear Comrades, it goes without saying that all that has
   been re ported to the Executive Committee is based on an untruth and is an
   invention pure and simple of the liquidators. We can affirm with confidence
   that that fable could have been told to the Executive only by the Letts,
   the Bundists, or even by Trotsky’s adherents, who only a short time ago
   closed “their” conference, which they would have liked to call a “party
   conference”, but which was in fact a liquidationist conference. In order
   not to state anything that could not be confirmed and not to quote our
   organisational correspondence, we shall limit ourselves here to pointing to
   a document published in St. Petersburg.  

On August 28 (September 10, new style), 1912, the
   St. Petersburg Marxist daily, Pravda No. 102, carried a letter
   received from one of Kharkov’s biggest factories and devoted especially to
   the Duma elections. The letter said openly and plain that the names of the
   liquidators’ candidates have so far not been announced” and that
   the liquidators “deny the necessity for a workers’ party”
   (Pravda No. 102, p. 4, col. 1).  

 

From this alone the German comrades can see how shamelessly the Letts,
the Bundists, Trotsky’s adherents and all such private informants are
deceiving them. The point is, evidently, that all of them, probably
including the Caucasians, wanted to obtain money on behalf of pretended
“organisations”, whose existence cannot be confirmed or verified either
by the Party Executive or by anyone else.  

Is it possible that the German Party, which has ninety
Social-Democratic dailies, cannot—that is, if it does not want to
compromise itself by misinterpreting the state of affairs in the Russian
Party—open a discussion on the R.S.D.L.P., and openly compel all the
informants who are hiding from the light of day to present statements over
their signatures and produce documents?  

After all, Russia is not as far away as Central Africa, and it would
not take much effort on the part of the German worker Social-Democrats to
establish the truth and thereby also relieve the German members of the
Executive Committee of the need to hear unverifiable private
stories.  

On behalf of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.  

N. Lenin 

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 533–46.—Ed.  

[2]
The letter is quoted here with minor stylistic changes.  —Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 17, p. 545.—Ed.  

[4]
In spite of the gossip spread by the liquidators, it was these
collections, which exceeded 12,000 marks, and the aid rendered earlier by
the German comrades, that formed the basic fund of our Social-Democratic
press in Russia. The full translation, mentioned in the text, of all the
accounts of money collections published by the various Social-Democratic
newspapers over the six months was sent to the Executive Committee, the
Auditing Committee and Bebel.  —Lenin
 



[5]
The pamphlet The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P., written
by Lenin in Cracow, was first published in the German language in Leipzig
in September 1912. Its main point is the letter of the C.C. of the
R.S.D.L.P. written on July 16-17 (29-30). The letter was a reply to the
appeal of the Executive of the German Social-Democratic Party on the
convening of the R.S.D.L.P. “centres” and “groups” abroad to distribute
the funds which the leadership of the German Social-Democratic Party had
allotted for the Fourth Duma election campaign. The C.C. of the
R.S.D.L.P. refused to participate in the meeting, and the meeting did not
take place. The Executive of the German Social-Democrats assigned part of
the funds to the liquidators’ Organising Committee and Caucasian Regional
Committee, to the Bund and to the Central Committee of the Lettish
Social-Democratic Party, thereby backing the liquidators against the
Bolsheviks. The pamphlet Concerning the Present Situation in the
R.S.D.L.P. was circulated by the editors of Sotsial-Demokrat
to the regional and district centres of the German Social-Democratic Party,
the delegates of the Party Congress held in Chemnitz in September 1912, and
the editors of the major Social-Democratic newspapers of Germany.





[6]
The phrase “Potemkin villages” was coined in the first
quarter of the nineteenth century to denote a sham fa\c{c}ade of
prosperity. During Catherine II’s journey to the South in 1878
G. A. Potemkin, Governor-General of the Yekaterinoslav Vicegerency, created
an impression of exceptional prosperity by having decorative villages,
arches, etc., built and parks laid out along the route of the Empress.





[7]
The Spilka (Ukrainian Social-Democratic Union) arose late in
1904 having broken away from the petty-bourgeois, nationalist
Revolutionary-Ukrainian Party. It entered the R.S.D.L.P. as an autonomous
regional organisation. In the inner-Party struggle of the R.S.D.L.P. it
sided with the Mensheviks. It broke up in the period of reaction. In 1912
there were only small disconnected groups of the Spilka and by then most of
its members had become bourgeois nationalists. Trotsky’s liquidationist
Pravda (Vienna) was published as an organ of the Spilka only in
October and December 1908 (the first two issues).





[8]
The Ninth International Socialist Congress of the Second Inter national
was to meet in Vienna in the autumn of 1913, but the war which broke out in
the Balkans in 1912 and the threat of a world war prompted the
International Socialist Bureau to convene an extraordinary congress in
Basle on November 24–25, 1912.





[9]
This refers to the August conference of the liquidators, which
met in Vienna in August 1912 and formed the anti-Party August bloc.

   

The bloc was organised by Trotsky. The conference was attended by delegates
from the Bund, the Caucasian Regional Committee, the Social-Democratic
Party of the Lettish Territory and small liquidationist groups
abroad: the editors of Golos Sotsial-Demokrata, Trotsky’s Vienna
Pravda and the Vperyod group. Delegates from Russia were
sent by the St. Petersburg and Moscow “initiating groups” of the
liquidators and the editorial boards of the liquidationist Nasha
Zarya and Nevsky Golos. A representative of the Spilka
Committee Abroad was present too. The overwhelming majority of the
delegates were People who lived abroad and were out of touch with the
working class of Russia.  

The conference adopted anti-Party liquidationist decisions on all the
questions of Social-Democratic tactics and declared against the existence
of the illegal Party.  

Being composed of heterogeneous elements, the August bloc began to fall
apart even while the conference was meeting. The liquidators were unable to
elect a Central Committee and limited themselves to-setting up an
Organising Committee. The blows delivered by the Bolsheviks soon resulted
in the final disintegration of the bloc.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Original Postscript to the Pamphlet The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: Original Postscript to the Pamphlet The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Original Postscript to the Pamphlet The Present Situation in the R.S.D.L.P.[3]




Written: Written between August 20 and 24 (September 2 and 6), 1912 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 221-223.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

After the above lines had gone to press, we received
Nevsky Golos No. 7, published in St. Petersburg on August 17, old
style. Consequently, the liquidationist newspaper has resumed publication
after an interruption of one and a half months. (The previous
issue of this weekly—No. 6—appeared on July 5, old style.)  

The information published in Nevsky Golos No. 7 provides the
best confirmation of the appraisal of the actual significance of
the liquidators in Russia which was given in our Central Committee’s letter
to the

  Vorstand.[1]


Indeed, early in July the paper suspended publication. Needless to say,
the liquidators and their friends bent all their efforts to revive it. The
results of their efforts during one and a half months (July and
half August) are reported by Nevsky Golos itself (No. 7) as
follows: 

“This newspaper has received, for the replenishment of its
funds: 


July. From 14 persons, 25 rubles each (I. F., P., G.,

M. I., K., L., K. F., L., B., Vsh., Lv., Vl., V. P., B. of

Moscow); through R., 50 rubles; from M —i, 11 rubles;

Shkh., 11 rubles; from 8 persons, 10 rubles each (E., I.,

Is., S., Rf., Avg., Ob., P. 0.); from K. I., 8 rubles; from

S., 7 rubles; from K., 5 rubles; B. B., 5 rubles; from F.,

6 rubles; M. B., 5 rubles; from Lepaya 5 rubles; Gmp.,

3 rubles. Total, 546 rubles.

 

“August. From Wulfsohn (Zurich), 10 rubles; also

from him, 3.57 rubles; Benzia (Zurich), 15 rubles; G—ya

(Kishinev), 20 rubles; Az—v (Astrakhan), 3 rubles;

Sp—y (Bogorodsk), 15 rubles; V. V., 6 rubles; Y.Y.F., 59

rubles; from Dubbeln, through S., 20 rubles; from B.,

Moscow, 25 rubles; from Y. L., 10 rubles; L. L., 12 ru-

bles; M. Gr., 3 rubles; from Moscow init. group, 35 ru-

bles; B. B., 5 rubles; B., 5 rubles; from An. Konst., St.

Petersb., through L. L., 6 rubles; from a group of friends

in Paris, 8.54 rubles; from B., Paviograd, 20 rubles.

Total, 281.11 rubles.”  

Such is the account published by the liquidators themselves. Their work
and their links with the masses during the one and a half months
present the following picture: 

Collected in all .   .   .   .   .   .  
.   .

827.11 rubles






Including:


 
Initiating group, Moscow . . . . . . .
35 rubles


 
A group of friends in Paris . . . . . 
8.54 ”


 
Private contributions by individuals:


 
 
35 contributions amounting to . . . 
708 ”


 
15 ” ” ” . . . 
75.57 ”


 
 
Total . . . . . . . . . . 
827.11 rubles




Everyone knows, as Plekhanov stated in print (Dnevnik
Sotsial-Demokrata No. 16) as far back as April 1912, that the
“initiating groups” are groups of liquidators.  

And so, the liquidators were helped, at the most trying moment, when
their paper had suspended publication, by: 

one group of liquidators in Russia 

one group of friends in Paris 

35 well-to-do persons, each of whom contributed an average of 20 rubles
(over 40 marks each) 

15 private individuals, each of whom contributed an average of 5 rubles
(over 10 marks each).  

Was not our Central Committee justified in asserting that the
liquidators in the Russian working-class movement were of no account at
all?  

The liquidators refer to the “Caucasian Regional Committee”. Not
a single workers’ group in the Caucasus has sent

    

them a single contribution during those one and a half months.  

The liquidators would like to have the help of the Bund and the Lettish
Social-Democratic organisation. Not a single workers’ group,
either in the Bund or among the Letts, has sent them a single contribution
during one and a half months.  

During the same period (July to August 14) Pravda, the
St. Petersburg daily newspaper of the anti-liquidators, published accounts
of 41 group collections by workers in various parts of Russia,
including oil-field workers (Grozny fields, Terek Region) (Pravda
No. 60) and Jewish workers in Lepaya (Pravda No. 67). We venture
to think that this aid from workers means more than all the talk and
declamation of the “Caucasian Regional Committee”, the Letts and the
Bund.  

No aid in the world, and no “conferences” with the Letts, the Bund,
etc., can transform the liquidationist nothing in the Russian
working-class movement into a something.  

Let the German comrades undertake the not too arduous task of
collecting the documents on the position of the R.S.D.L.P. and verifying
them—after all, Russia is not Central Africa, about which any kind of
“tall stories” can be told. The German comrades probably want to end this
strange, gelinde

     gesagt,[2]

situation in which they get their information on the Italian, Swedish and
any other socialist movement from openly published documents, while their
information on the Russian socialist movement is obtained from privately
communicated fables and gossip.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Executive Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of
Germany.—Ed.  

[2]
To put it mildly—Ed.  
 



[3]
The manuscript bears no title; the title given here has been supplied
by the Institute of Marxism-Leninism under the C. C. of the C.P.S.U.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Capitalism and Popular Consumption









Lenin: Capitalism and Popular Consumption







V. I.  

      Lenin
Capitalism and Popular Consumption




Published:
Pravda No. 70, July 20, 1912.

      Signed: B.B..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 224-226.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Recently the French magazine La Revue

scientifique[1] published data on the production of
margarine in various countries. Those data were an additional
reminder of the fact noticed long ago that the diet of the people
deteriorates as capitalism develops.  

As everyone knows, margarine is fat (from which stearine has been
removed) processed by a special method. From it an artificial substance is
made, known as margarine butter.  

Margarine production in the principal European countries has assumed
very large proportions. Germany produces 12.5 million poods of it per year,
Britain, 7.5 million poods, and so on.  

Margarine is cheaper than real butter. Butter is too costly for the
vast majority of the population in the capitalist countries. The workers
earn so little that they have to buy cheap, low-grade, substitute food
products. And yet the workers are the chief consumers. There are millions
of workers, and only hundreds of capitalists. And so the output of cheap
substitutes is growing daily and hourly, along with the unheard-of luxury
of a handful of millionaires.  

The wealth of the bourgeoisie is growing. So are the poverty and want
of the proletariat and of the mass of small proprietors, peasants, artisans
and petty traders, who are being ruined.  

Remarkably enough, margarine consumption is highest in the very
countries which are particularly famous as producers of large quantities of
the finest natural butter. To find out how great the consumption of
margarine is, it is

    

necessary to divide the whole amount of margarine produced in the country
concerned (adding import and subtracting export) by the number of
inhabitants.  

It appears that the greatest consumer of margarine is Denmark—16,4 kilograms (about one pood) a year per in
habitant. Next comes Norway—15 pounds, Germany—7.5 pounds, etc.  

Denmark is the richest country for butter output. Danish butter—real
butter—ranks among the finest grades. The world’s biggest and richest
city, London (population, including that of the suburbs, about six
million), prefers Danish butter to any other, and pays the highest price
for it.  

Danish well-to-do peasants, but above all the Danish capitalists, make
a good deal of money from the butter trade. And yet Denmark is the world’s
biggest consumer of substitute butter, margarine!  

What is the explanation?  

It is very simple. The vast majority of the Danish population, like
that of any other capitalist country, consists of workers and propertyless
peasants. They cannot afford real butter. Even the middle peasants in
Denmark, being in need of money, sell abroad the butter they produce on
their farms and buy the cheap margarine for themselves. The wealth of the
Danish capitalists is growing, and so are the poverty and want of the
Danish workers and peasants.  

The same thing is happening here in Russia. Very long ago, some forty
years back, when it became fashionable to set up cheese dairies and artels
in the countryside, Engelhardt, a democratic writer, noted that the
peasants, being in need of money, sold their milk and butter while their
children starved to death.  

That fact has been noted many times since then. Cheese production is
growing, the production of milk for sale is growing, and the few well-to-do
peasants and the merchants are becoming rich, while the poor become poorer
still. The children of poor peasants, left without milk, die in enormous
numbers. Child mortality in Russia is incredibly high.  

Fairly often milk is sold to cheese dairies, from which the peasants
then get skimmed milk for their own consumption.  
 

The rich have the profits from growing production and trade, while the
workers and peasants have margarine and skimmed milk. Such is capitalist
reality, which liberal and official scholars are at such pains to
embellish.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Le Revue scientifique—a periodical founded in Paris in 1863.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberals and Clericals









Lenin: Liberals and Clericals







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberals and Clericals




Published:
Pravda No. 74, July 25, 1912.

      Signed: A Layman.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 227-228.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The priesthood is about to flood the Fourth Duma.  

How are we to react to this emergence of the priests on the political
scene?  

Democrats can never hold the view that priests should not participate
in political affairs. It is an arch-reactionary view. It leads only to
official hypocrisy and nothing more. In practice, all measures debarring a
particular group or section of the population from politics and the class
struggle are absolutely impossible and unrealisable.  

Let us recall that Bebel and the German Social-Democrats were for
freedom of Jesuit agitation in Germany. We are against liberal phrases
about “prohibiting” Jesuit agitation, said the Social-Democrats. We are
not afraid of the Jesuits. Let the Jesuits enjoy complete freedom
of agitation, but let the authorities guarantee that we Social-Democrats,
too, shall enjoy complete freedom of agitation. That is how Bebel and the
German Social-Democrats reasoned.  

The worker democrats in Russia are fighting against the falsification
of suffrage (and all other rights) in favour of the landlords or the
priesthood, etc., and not at all against freedom of the priesthood to
participate in political affairs. We stand for the class struggle, and we
demand complete freedom for any class or social-estate, for either sex, for
any people, any section or group of the population, to take part in
politics.  

The liberals’ reasoning on this question is wrong and
undemocratic. Prince Trubetskoi, for example, wrote not so long ago, to the
applause of Rech: 

“The transformation of the Church into a political instrument is
achieved at the price of its internal destruction.”

    

He described the plan of flooding the Duma with priests as “contrary to
Christianity and the Church”.  

That is not true. It is hypocrisy. It is a thoroughly reactionary point
of view.  

Trubetskoi and other liberals take an undemocratic stand in their
struggle against clericalism. Under the guise of opposing participation of
the priesthood in the political struggle, they advocate its more covert
(and hence much more harmful) participation.  

Worker democrats favour freedom of political struggle for all,
including the priests. We are opposed, not to the priests taking part in
the election campaign, in the Duma, etc., but solely to the
medieval privileges of the priesthood. We are not afraid of clericalism,
and will readily join issue with it—on a free platform on which all will
be on an equal footing. The priesthood has always participated in politics
covertly; the people stand to gain, and to gain a good deal, if
the priesthood begins to participate in politics overtly.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Cadets and Democrats









Lenin: Cadets and Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
Cadets and Democrats




Published:
Pravda No. 75, July 26, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 229-230.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“We are accustomed to think,” says the leading article in
Rech, “that Marxists admit the Cadets to be a democratic party,
although they affix the offensive label of ‘bourgeois’” (i.e.,
bourgeois-democratic).  

It would be hard to imagine crasser political ignorance on the part of
“educated people” who read Marxist literature. The question inevitably
arises: does not calculation sometimes make people simulate ignorance?


Since 1906 we have explained hundreds and thousands of times that the
Cadets are not democrats but a liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie. In
the spring of 1907 formal decisions adopted by Marxists from all parts of
Russia and familiar to every politically-educated person confirmed this and
stated for all to hear that the Cadets were a party of the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, that their democracy was “hypocrisy”, and
that the Cadets were followed by a section of the petty bourgeoisie “only
by force of tradition [a blind habit of clinging to the customary, to the
old ] and because it was simply deceived by the

liberals”[1] 

These ideas have since been reaffirmed and elaborated hundreds and
thousands of times.  

But the Cadets assert, as if nothing had happened, that they are “in
the habit of thinking” that Marxists consider them democrats! There is
none so deaf as he who will not hear.  

The liberals differ from the conservatives (Black Hundreds) in that
they represent the interests of the bourgeoisie, which needs
progress and a fairly well organised legal system, the observance of
legality, of the constitution, and a guarantee of some degree of political
liberty.  
 

But this progressive bourgeoisie dreads the democracy and the movement
of the masses even more than it dreads reaction. Hence the liberals’
perpetual tendency to make concessions to the old, to compromise with it,
to defend many fundamental mainstays of the old order. And all this makes
for the complete impotence of liberalism, for its timidity,
half-heartedness and eternal vacillations.  

Democrats represent the broad mass of the population. A democrat is not
afraid of the movement of the masses but believes in it. In Russia the
democrats are represented by the Trudoviks and Left “Narodniks” in
general. The Marxists call them bourgeois democrats, not at all
because they want to “offend” them, but because no redivision of the land
and no democratic changes in the state are sufficient to remove
the rule of capital, of the bourgeois system.  

The policy of the worker democrats is clear. We recognise agreements
with the liberals against the Rights only at the second stage of the
elections, and only where it is impossible together with the democrats to
defeat the liberals. We fight side by side with all bourgeois democrats as
long as they are true to their democratic principles.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is quoting the resolution of the Fifth (London) Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. “On the Attitude to Non-Proletarian Parties” (see The
C.P.S.U. in Resolutions and Decisions of Its Congresses, Conferences and
Plenary Meetings of the Central Committee, Part One, 1954, p. 164,
Russ. ed.).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liberal Campaign









Lenin: The Liberal Campaign







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liberal Campaign




Published:
Pravda No. 77, July 28, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 231-232.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The liberals have begun to get busy and have brought
concerted pressure to bear on Pravda. Leading articles in the
Cadet Rech, and the non-partisan progressive Mr. Prokopovich and
Mr. R. Blank in Zaprosy Zhizni opened fire on the workers’
newspaper for its decision to conduct an independent election campaign in
St. Petersburg.  


   “The efforts of Nevskaya Zvezda and
   Pravda are completely useless,” asserts Zaprosy
   Zhizni. “Surely they cannot seriously expect the candidate of the
   workers’ party to win in the St. Petersburg city curia, where the workers’
   participation is negligible.”  


There you have a sample of the liberal arguments, and a method of
intimidating the voter who has not yet risen above philistinism, has not
worked out an entirely conscious policy for himself.  

There was a time when the liberals tried to intimidate simply with the
prospect of a Black-Hundred victory in the elections. But crude lies no
longer “work”. Everyone knows that there is not the slightest danger of
the Black Hundreds winning in the St. Petersburg elections. So a different
kind of intimidation is resorted to: “there is no reason to expect the
workers to win”.  

Oh, no, liberal gentlemen, the democratic voter in general, and the
worker in particular, has lived through many things, he has thought over
and learned many things in the past difficult five years. That sort of
intimidation will get you nowhere.  

Nowhere in the world have the workers begun their election
campaign in a big city without being opposed by strong liberal
parties. Nowhere in the world have worker

    

democrats succeeded without a stubborn fight in wresting from the liberals
their influence on the mass of the lower-grade office workers,
shop-assistants, handicraftsmen, petty traders, etc.  

Whoever is against the St. Petersburg workers beginning that fight here
and now (or rather going on from where they left off in 1906, 1907 and
1909), assumes the name of democrat in vain, and remains in fact a slave of
the liberals.  

Thousands upon thousands of new democratic voters will now take part in
the St. Petersburg elections.  

The St. Petersburg workers’ great achievement in founding their own
workers’ daily newspaper fully entitles us to expect no lesser achievements
in the election campaign.  

Thousands of old voters are awakening to a new, more class-conscious
political activity. They are learning, with the help of their workers’
newspaper, to fight for a better life for themselves, developing the habit
of joint political action, and growing increasingly aware of the great
national problems which the worker democrats are solving.  

The liberals in St. Petersburg can be defeated. And from the liberals’
uneasiness and quarrelsome sallies, from their shouting and their attempts
at intimidation, democratic St. Petersburg will derive added confidence
that it is on the right path to victory.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Revolts in the Army and Navy









Lenin: Revolts in the Army and Navy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Revolts in the Army and Navy




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta No. 9, July 30 (August 12),[2] 1912.

      Published according to the text in Rabochaya Gazeta.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 233-236.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Recently a few reports have slipped even into our legal
press about revolutionary unrest in the armed forces. We shall mention
three chief reports.  

Black Sea Fleet. On June 27 a naval court in Sevastopol tried behind
closed doors Zelenin, an electrician of the battleship Ioann
Zlatoust. Together with Karpishin and Silyakov, he was charged with
writing and circulating an appeal for an armed revolt. Zelenin, Karpishin
and Silyakov were sentenced to death and were shot on July 10.  

On July 2 the same court tried the crew of the same battleship. It
charged sixteen sailors with incitement to seize the battleship. Ten of the
sailors were sentenced to death and five to penal servitude for six
years. On July 4 official telegrams reported that the ten men condemned to
death had appealed for pardon.  

Baltic Fleet. On July 16 the naval court in Kronstadt harbour is to try
sixty-five sailors of the training ship Dvina, the
cruiser Aurora and the battleship Slava. On July 3 the
Octobrist paper Golos Moskvy received a telephone report from
St. Petersburg saying that there was much talk in the city about that
sensational trial. The sixty-five sailors are said to be charged with
membership of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party and of “a secret
association which had planned an open revolt and the assassination of
superior officers”. The case goes back, according to the same report, to
the arrest of a Dvina sailor on January 22, 1912.  
 

It is known, furthermore, that during May arrests were made among the
sailors of the Baltic Fleet in Helsingfors.  

Lastly, on July 1, there was an attempt at revolt by engineering troops
in the village of Troyitskoye, near Tashkent. The insurgents bayoneted
Junior Captain Pokhvisnev. The telegram reporting the incident was not
released for publication. Not until July 10 did a reprint appear in
St. Petersburg from Turkestanskiye Vedomosti, an official paper,
which admitted that there had been a battle with the
insurgents. Riflemen and Cossacks had smashed the insurgent engineers,
alleged to have numbered in all 100 to 130 men. The revolt began in the
evening and was over, according to the official report, by the
morning. Some 380 engineers were arrested, of whom “more than
one-half [the government paper asserts ] undoubtedly [??] had no share” in
the revolt. The insurgents killed, besides Pokhvisnev, two second
lieutenants—Krasovsky and Koshchenets—and two privates, and wounded
five officers and twelve privates. The official paper says nothing about
the number of the insurgents killed.  

Such is the scant information, clearly incomplete and clearly distorted
and minimised by the police, that we now have at our disposal.  

But what do these facts mean?  

They fully confirm what was pointed out in the decisions of the
All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912 and explained in
greater detail in the Central Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat (No. .27), a month

 ago.[1]


A revolutionary upswing has begun in Russia. With the mass
strikes in April and May the Russian proletariat began to pass to the
offensive—against capital and against the tsarist monarchy, for
a better life for the workers, worn out by counter-revolutionary
persecution and tyranny in 1908–11, and for freedom for the whole
people, for a democratic republic.  

It is an idle tale the liberals are putting about (followed by the
Nevsky Golos liquidators) when they say that the

    

basis of the April-May movement was the struggle for freedom of
association. The facts belie that tale. One cannot fight for only one of
the political rights in enslaved Russia, nor can one fight for
constitutional reforms under the tsarist autocracy. The struggle of the
proletariat swept over Russia in a wave of strikes that were both
economic and political. The strength of the movement lay,
and lies, in the combination of the two types of strike. They are not
ordinary strikes, they mark a revolutionary upsurge of the masses,
the beginning of an offensive by the mass of the workers against
the tsarist monarchy.  

The mass strikes were bound to kindle the flames of revolution
everywhere. And the outbreaks of revolt among the armed forces are
a proof that those flames are flaring up—there is inflammable
material everywhere, and everywhere a revolutionary mood
is growing among the masses, including even those workers and peasants who
are held down by barrack drill.  

The mass strikes in Russia are inseparably linked with an armed
uprising. Where strikes grow, the uprising grows too.  

That is what the events mentioned at the beginning of this article have
shown.  

Those events provide a lesson which is pointed out in the Central
Organ, Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27. Appeals for an uprising are most
unwise now. An uprising would be premature. Only a
combined onslaught by the mass of the workers, by the peasantry
and the best section of the armed forces can create conditions for a
victorious, i.e., timely uprising.  

And the foremost workers must do their utmost to strengthen, restore
and develop the illegal party of the working class, the
R.S.D.L.P. Only a party such as this will be in a position, by
conducting revolutionary agitation and using every means of legal
propaganda through the working-class press and through the worker deputies
to the Duma, to keep the army of the proletariat from frittering away its
forces in hopeless petty revolts and to train it for the great victorious
uprising.  

Long live the revolutionary soldiers and sailors!  

Long live concerted, persevering, stubborn revolutionary

    

work to develop a wide revolutionary onslaught by the millions, to develop
workers’ strikes and peasant movements! It is only by being at the head of
the onslaught of the millions, and only in the closest inseparable alliance
with them, that the revolutionary section of Russia’s armed forces can and
will defeat the tsarist monarchy!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 102–09 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Rabochaya Gazeta No. 9 gave the wrong date of
publication—August 12 (30) instead of July 30 (August 12).  

Rabochaya Gazeta (The Workers’ Gazette)—a popular
Bolshevik newspaper published in Paris from October 30 (November 12), 1910,
to July 30 (August 12), 1912. In all nine issues appeared. Among those who
wrote for it were pro-Party Mensheviks. The newspaper was founded and led
by Lenin, who contributed more than ten articles. The Prague Conference of
the R.S.D.L.P. (January 1912) noted that Rabochaya Gazeta firmly
and consistently defend ed the Party and the Party principle, and made it
the official organ of the C.C. R.S.D.L.P.(B.).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Eve of the Elections to the Fourth Duma









Lenin: On the Eve of the Elections to the Fourth Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Eve of the Elections to the Fourth Duma




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta No. 9, July 30 (August 12), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Rabochaya Gazeta.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 237-241.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On the eve of the elections the Russian Social-Democratic
Labour Party has come forward, despite cruel persecution, despite wholesale
arrests, with a clearer, more distinct and more precise programme, tactics
and platform than any other party.  

In January 1912 the All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. summed up
the results of the ideological and political work carried out by the Party
in the grim years of the counter-revolution. The Conference decisions gave
answers to all the pressing questions of the movement. Thanks to those
decisions, the election platform was simply a final statement. The platform
was published by the Central Committee in Russia and was then reprinted by
a whole series of local
organisations.[1] The whole bourgeois press reported the Conference and
published some of its decisions.  

In the six months since the Conference, work has been going on through
the Party press and dozens of reports, in hundreds of speeches in factory
groups and at the meetings held in April and May, to explain the Conference
decisions and to put them into effect. The Party’s slogans—a republic, an
eight-hour working day, confiscation of the landed estates—have spread
throughout Russia and have been accepted by the foremost proletarians. The
revolutionary upsurge of the masses, its expression ranging from strikes
and meetings to revolts in the armed forces, has proved these slogans to be
correct and vital.  

Our Party has already made use of the elections, and very extensively
too. No amount of “interpretation” by the police, no amount of
falsification of the Fourth Duma (by the priesthood or otherwise) can
nullify this result. Propaganda,

    

organised strictly on Party lines, has already been carried out everywhere
and has set the tone for the entire election campaign of the
Social-Democrats.  

The bourgeois parties in a hasty, slapdash manner are writing
“platforms for the elections”, for promises, for hoodwinking the
voters: The liquidators, too, who are trailing behind the liberals, are now
devising a legal “platform for the elections”. The
liquidators are making a fuss about platforms in the legal, censored press
as they prepare to cover up their utter confusion, disorganisation, and
lack of ideological principle, with a respectable, law-abiding “platform
for the elections”.  

Not a platform “for the elections”, but elections to implement the
revolutionary Social-Democratic platform!—that is how the Party
of the working class sees it. We have already used the elections to this
end, and will use them to the hilt. We will use even the most reactionary
tsarist Duma to advocate the revolutionary platform, tactics and programme
of the Russian S.D. Labour Party. Truly valuable are only those platforms
that complete the long work of revolutionary agitation, which has
already given full answers to all the questions of the
movement, and not those platforms (particularly the legal ones!) that are
composed in all haste as a stop-gap and as a noisy advertisement, as in the
case of the liquidators.  

Six months have passed since the Party re-established
itself. Overcoming incredible difficulties, suffering from fierce
persecution and experiencing breaks in the work of this or that local
centre or of the common centre—the Central Committee—the Party is
definitely going forward, extending its work and its influence among the
masses. This extension of the work is taking place in a new form:
in addition to the illegal nuclei, which are secret and narrow, and better
disguised than before, there is broader legal Marxist propaganda. It is
just this distinctive character of the new preparations for revolution in
the new conditions that has long been noted and acknowledged by the Party.


And we can now give a full answer to the noisy utterances of the
liquidators, who threaten us with “duplicate candidates”. Empty threats
that scare no one! The liquidators are so badly beaten and impotent that
no amount of help
    

can revive them. They cannot so much as think of putting up “duplicate
candidates”; if they did so, they would win a pitiful, ludicrously
insignificant number of votes. They know this and will not try the
experiment. They are making a noise merely to divert attention and conceal
the truth.  

We said “no amount of help”. The liquidators are counting on help
from abroad. Their friends—particularly the Letts, the Bund, and
Trotsky—have announced the convocation of ten “centres,
organisations and factions”! Don’t laugh! The world abroad is rich, great
and bountiful. As many as “ten centres”!! The methods used in this case
are the same as with the government in the Fourth Duma: preparations for
setting up a representative body, and the conversion of a number of ciphers
into the semblance of “big numbers”. First of all, Trotsky (in Russia he
is a cipher, he is only a contributor to Zhivoye Dyelo, and his
agents are only defenders of the liquidators’ “initiating
groups”). Secondly, Golos Sotsial-Demokrata, i.e., the selfsame
impotent liquidators. Thirdly, the “Caucasian Regional Committee”, also a
cipher, in a third garb. Fourthly, the “Organising Committee”—a fourth
garb of the very same liquidators. Fifthly and sixthly, the Letts
and the Bund, which is wholly liquidationist today. But enough!  

Needless to say our Party is laughing at this game of non entities
abroad. They cannot resuscitate a corpse, for the liquidators in Russia are
a corpse.  

Here are the facts.  

For six months the liquidators and all their friends have been
waging a desperate struggle against the Party. There exists a legal
Marxist press. It is fearfully handicapped, and does not dare
utter a word about a republic, our Party, uprising, or the tsar’s gang. It
would be simply ridiculous to think of advocating the slogans of the
R.S.D.L.P. through that press.  

But the worker in Russia is no longer what he used to be. He has become
a force. He has paved a way for himself. He has his own press,
which is handicapped but belongs to him and defends Marxism
theoretically.  

In this open arena, everyone can see the “successes” of the
liquidators’ struggle against the anti-liquidators.
S. V.[2]
    

of Vperyod has already pointed out those successes in Trotsky’s
Vienna, liquidationist, Pravda. The fact is, he wrote, that the
workers’ collections go almost entirely to the
anti-liquidators. But he sought to comfort himself, saying that it is not
because the workers sympathise with the “Leninists”.  

Why, naturally “not because”, dear friend of the liquidators!  

But still, look at the facts.  

Six months of open struggle for a workers’ daily
newspaper.  

The liquidators have been shouting about it since 1910. What about
their success? In six months—from January 1 to July 1, 1912—their
papers, Zhivoye Dyelo and Nevsky Golos, carried the
accounts of 15 (fifteen) collections made by groups of workers for
a workers’ daily newspaper! Fifteen groups of workers in six months!  

Take the newspapers of the anti-liquidators. See their accounts of the
collections made for a workers’ daily during the same six-month period. Add
up the number of collections by groups of workers. You will find that there
were 504 contributions by workers’ groups!  

Here are exact monthly data for the various parts of Russia: 


Number of workers’ group contributions for a workers’ daily newspaper during the first hail of 1912


 
In anti- liquidationist newspapers
In liquidationist newspapers




January . . . . . . . . .  
14
0


February . . . . . . . . . 
18
0


March . . . . . . . . . .  
76
7


April . . . . . . . . . .  
227
8


May . . . . . . . . . . .  
135
0


June . . . . . . . . . . . 
34
0


Total . . . . . . 
504
15


St. Petersburg and vicinity . . . 
415
10


South . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
51
1


The rest of Russia . . . . . . .  
38
4


Total . . . . . . . . .  
504
15



 

The liquidators have been thoroughly beaten in the eyes of the workers’
groups in Russia. The liquidators are a corpse, and no number of terrible
(oh, how terrible!) “associations of groups, centres, factions, trends and
tendencies” abroad can revive this corpse.  

No shrill manifestos abroad and no fake conferences between
“initiating groups” and the liquidators can undo or alleviate this
complete defeat of the liquidators in the eyes of hundreds of
workers’ groups in Russia.  

The unity of the election campaign of the worker Social-Democrats in
Russia is assured. It is assured not through “agreements” with
the liquidators, but through the complete victory over the liquidators, who
have already been reduced to their true role, the role of liberal
intellectuals. See how well Savin, the Socialist-Revolutionary liquidator,
fits into Nasha Zarya. See how warmly
L. M.[3] praises, in Listok Golosa Sotsial-Demokrata, “the
initiative” of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, who repeatedly stray
(because of an otzovist hangover!) into liquidationism. Ponder on the
significance of the fact that the same sheet holds up the well-known
Socialist-Revolutionary “leader”, Avksentyev, as an example for
Plekhanov. Remember how all liquidators kiss the
non-Social-Democratic Left wing of the Polish Socialist Party. Liquidators
of all parties, unite!  

Everyone finds his niche in the end. Groups of intellectualist
liquidators from among former Marxists and former liberals with a bomb are
being welded together by the course of events.  

As for the Party of the working class, the R.S.D.L.P., it has, in the
six months since it regained its freedom from the bondage of those who had
liquidated it, made a huge stride forward, as can be seen from the facts
cited.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

“The Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.” was written by
Lenin in Paris at the beginning of March 1912. The election platform was
endorsed by the Central Committee and published in Russia (Tiflis) in
leaflet form on behalf of the C.C. The leaflet was delivered to eighteen
localities,, including the largest proletarian centres. The election
platform, reprinted from the leaflet published in Russia,

   

appeared as a supplement to Sotsial-Demokrat No. 26. It
constituted a militant policy document calling for a struggle for the
revolution. Lenin attached special importance to the election platform of
the Party and exposed the liquidators’ attempts to put forward a legal,
opportunist platform “for the elections”.  

In sending to Zvezda a copy made from the leaflet “The
Election Platform of the R.S.D.L.P.”, Lenin marked it as follows:

“This platform is being sent only for the information of all,
particularly the compilers of the platform. It is time to
cease writing platforms when there already exists one
confirmed and published by the Central Committee. (A leaflet has
already been issued about this in Russia, but as we possess only
one copy, we cannot, send it, but are sending you a hand-written
copy.)”





[2]
S. V.—Stanislav Volsky, pseudonym of A. V. Sokolov, one of
the organisers of the Vperyod group.





[3]
L. M.—L. Martov, one of the Menshevik leaders.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Can the Slogan “Freedom of Association” Serve as a Basis for the Working-Class Movement Today?









Lenin: Can the Slogan 'Freedom of Association' Serve as a Basis for the Working-Class Movement Today?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Can the Slogan “Freedom of Association” Serve as a Basis for the Working-Class Movement Today?




Published:
Rabochaya Gazeta No. 9, July 30 (August 12), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Rabochaya Gazeta.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 242-244.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In the legal press, the liquidators headed by Trotsky argue
that it can. They are doing all in their power to distort the true
character of the workers’ movement. But those are hopeless efforts. The
drowning liquidators are clutching at a straw to rescue their unjust cause.


In 1910 little groups of intellectuals began a campaign of
petitions for freedom of association. It was an
artificial campaign. The mass of the workers remained
indifferent. One cannot fire the proletariat with so futile an
undertaking. It was fitting for liberals to believe in political reforms
under the tsarist autocracy. The workers at once saw through the
falsity of the undertaking and remained aloof.  

The workers are not against the struggle for reforms—they fought for
the Insurance Bill. Through their deputies they used every opportunity in
the Third Duma to bring about at least slight improvements. But the point
is that the Third Duma and the Insurance Bill are not fiction, but
political facts, while “freedom of association” under the June
Third monarchy of Romanov is an empty promise from rotten liberals.  

The liberals are enemies of the revolution. Even now they are outspoken
in their opposition to it—the Black-Hundred Third Duma has not taught
them to throw off their fear of the revolution. Being afraid of the
revolution, the liberals comfort themselves with the hope of
constitutional reforms and advocate for the workers one of those
reforms, freedom of association.  

But the workers do not believe the fable about a “constitution” under
the conditions of the Third Duma, general

    

lack of rights, and unbridled tyranny. The workers demand freedom of
association in earnest and therefore they are fighting
for freedom for the whole people, for the overthrow of the
monarchy, for a republic.  

The strikes in April and May showed in point of fact that the
proletariat had risen in a revolutionary strike. The combination
of the economic and political strike, revolutionary meetings, and the
slogan of a republic advanced by the St. Petersburg workers on May
Day—all these facts were conclusive proof of the beginning of a
revolutionary upswing.  

The factual, objective situation in Russia is this: the proletariat has
begun a revolutionary struggle of the masses to overthrow the tsarist
monarchy, and unrest in the armed forces is growing—an indication that
they have joined in the struggle. As for the peasant democrats, the best
among them are turning away from the liberals to lend ear to the
working-class vanguard.  

Meanwhile the liberals, enemies of the revolution, up hold
only the “constitutional” path and put forward, against
the revolution, the promise (an empty and false promise) of “freedom of
association” under Russia’s tsarist monarchy!  

Such is the actual political situation. And these are the real social
forces:
(1) the tsarist monarchy, which flouts all “constitution”;
(2) the liberal-monarchist bourgeois, who out of fear of the revolution
pretend that they believe in a combination of “freedom” and the tsarist
regime, and
(3) the revolutionary democrats; from the midst of the latter a leader has
already risen—the mass of the workers, to whose appeal the sailors and
soldiers, from Helsingfors to Tashkent, are responding.  

How hopelessly stupid, under the circumstances, is the liquidators’
talk about “freedom of association”! Of all “reforms”, these sages of
liberal labour policy have chosen an impossible constitutional
reform, which is nothing but a promise, and they are amusing themselves by
playing at “European” constitutionalism.  

It won’t do! The workers are casting aside the liberals and liberal
labour policy. They will support, develop, and make an object of
their campaigns, every reform that really be comes an
immediate issue—both in the Third and in the

    

Fourth Duma—from insurance to increased salaries for those who slave in
offices.  

But the workers laugh contemptuously at the empty and absurd promise of
a constitutional political reform under the
autocracy. May the revolutionary struggle begun by the masses in order to
overthrow the monarchy and win a republic grow in scale and intensity! The
struggle will show what half-hearted constitutional reforms will result in
if the new revolution is defeated, but to suggest to the masses a
non-revolutionary road, a peaceful constitutional reform, now, at the
beginning of a revolutionary onslaught, is something that only the “man in
a

muffler”[1] can do.  

The revolutionary onslaught which has begun calls for revolutionary
slogans. Down with the monarchy! Long live the democratic republic, the
eight-hour working day, and the confiscation of all landed estates!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The man in a muffler—the chief character in Chekhov’s story
of that name, a man typifying the narrow-minded philistine who dreads all
initiative and all that is new.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Letter to the Swiss Workers









Lenin: Letter to the Swiss Workers







V. I.  

      Lenin
Letter to the Swiss Workers[2]




Written: Written in July 1912 

Published:

      Hectographed as a separate leaflet in German, August 1912.

      Translated from the German.

      Published according to the leaflet text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      page 245.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear Comrades,


On behalf of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party, I confirm
hereby for the benefit of all the Swiss comrades that the general
Conference of this Party, held in January 1912, disclaimed by a
special resolution all responsibility for individual Russian groups
abroad.  

I also confirm that the Central Committee of our Party has so far
recognised only one Russian Social-Democratic organisation abroad,
namely, the Committee of Organisations Abroad and its Zurich
section. I enclose a pamphlet published by the Central Organ of our
Party in German, which describes in detail the disorganising behaviour of
the petty groups of Russians

       abroad.[1]


With Party greetings, Lenin (V. Ulyanov) 

Representative of the Russian Social-Democratic Party in the
International Socialist
Bureau.[3] 

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 203–20 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]

“Letter to the Swiss Workers” was written by Lenin in
connection with the following events:

In July 1912 the Menshevik liquidators’ bureau of the united organisation
of the R.S.D.L.P. in Zurich sent a letter to the Executive of Die
Eintracht (a Social-Democratic organisation) and to the Swiss Workers’
League. In the letter the bureau declared itself to be the sole
representative of the R.S.D.L.P. groups in Zurich On July 27 (August 9) the
Bolshevik Swiss Section of the R.S.D.L.P. Organisation Abroad held a
meeting which was attended by representatives of the Zurich, Davos, Berne,
Lausanne and Geneva Bolshevik groups.  

The debate at the meeting ended in the adoption of resolutions

(1) on the situation in the Party,

(2) on the state of affairs abroad, and

(3) a protest resolution against the liquidators’ bureau. The three
resolutions were published in the form of hectographed leaflets, the first
and second being in the Russian language and the third, which was published
along with Lenin’s present letter, in German.





[3]
The International Socialist Bureau—the permanent executive
and information agency of the Second International. The decision on its
formation from representatives of the socialist parties of all countries
was adopted at the Paris Congress of the Second Inter national in
September 1900. G.V. Plekhanov and B. N. Krichevsky were elected to the
Bureau as representatives of the Russian Social-Democrats. Lenin was a
member of the Bureau representing the R.S.D.L.P. from 1905 on. In 1912 the
Sixth (Prague) All-Russia

   

Party Conference re-elected Lenin to the Bureau as representing the
R.S.D.L.P. On the Bureau Lenin fought resolutely against the opportunism of
the leaders of the Second International. The Bureau ceased to function in
1914.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Questions of Principle









Lenin: Questions of Principle







V. I.  

      Lenin
Questions of Principle




Published:
Pravda No. 79, July 31, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 246-247.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A slight increase in the election campaign activity, and
the official-Cadet Rech has begun to speak (it has done so at
last!) of the differences it has with the Lefts over questions of
principle.  


   “We never intended, nor do we intend, to make peace with
   the June Third regime,” writes Rech.  


That is not true. You did intend and you do intend to, Cadet
gentlemen. Evidence of it is your talk about a “responsible” opposition
and an opposition in the possessive case. That is not merely “intending”
peace, but a policy of “peace” with the June Third regime.  

And what about Karaulov’s pious speeches in the pious Third Duma? Or
the Cadets’ voting for the budget and for its more important items? Or the
speeches of Berezovsky the First on the agrarian question? Or Gredeskul’s
recent statements, repeated in Rech? Does not all that amount to a
policy of peace with the foundations of the June Third
regime? It certainly does.  


   “Over a period of five years,” writes Rech,
   “we have never seen any difference between the tactics of the
   Social-Democratic Party within the framework of the Duma and those
   of other opposition par ties. Yet in this case it is a question of
   elections to the Duma.”  


There you have a specimen of sophistry and distortion of the truth! Not
on a single question have Social-Democratic tactics in the Duma been akin
to Cadet tactics. They have been fundamentally different on all questions:
they have not been tactics of “peace” or of liberalism;
they have always been tactics of democracy and the
class struggle.  
 

Does Rech really maintain that mere “voting against” can be
described as kinship in tactics, instead of kinship in posing
questions from the standpoint of principle in the Duma speeches
and in the formulas of procedure?  

Does Rech really venture to say that it is permissible to say
one thing in the Duma and another outside it? But if it does, is it not
because it wants to hush up the issue of the undemocratic character of
Cadet propaganda outside the Duma?  


   “We cannot deny the ‘democratic’ movement, which we
   serve ourselves, the right to independent aims and actions,” writes
   Rech.  


That is not true, educated liberal gentlemen! See if you can state your
fundamental views on the distinction between liberalism and democracy. See
if you can illustrate your views with examples from English, French or
German his tory, even leaving out specifically working-class, proletarian,
Marxist democracy. You will not be able to deny the distinction between
bourgeois liberalism and bourgeois democracy as regards their attitude to
the old order. And we shall always prove to you that you are a party of the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie and not at all a democratic party.  

Bourgeois democracy in Russia is represented by the Trudoviks and
Narodniks of all types.  

“Once you have set your hand to the plough you can’t give up.”  You
have set out to discuss the principles of the Cadets and the Lefts, so you
must really explain those principles. That is the only way to raise
election agitation somewhat above the question of how many lawless acts
such-and-such a police officer, governor, or administrative body is guilty
of.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Last Valve









Lenin: The Last Valve







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Last Valve




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 20, August 5, 1912.

      Signed: R. S..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 248-253.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We concluded our previous article on the agrarian question
in Russia today (see Nevskaya Zvezda No. 15) as follows: 

“The real similarity between the Stolypin and the Narodnik agrarian
programmes lies in the fact that both advocate a radical break-up of the
old, medieval system of landownership. And that is very good. That system
deserves no better than to be broken up. The most reactionary of all are
those Cadets of Rech and Russkiye Vedomosti who reproach
Stolypin for causing a break-up, instead of proving the need for a still
more consistent and resolute break-up. We shall see in a following article
that the Stolypin type of break-up cannot do away with bondage and
labour service, while the Narodnik type can.  

“For the time being we shall note that the only entirely real result of the
Stolypin break-up is a famine among 30 million people. And it remains to be seen
whether the Stolypin break-up may not teach the Russian people how
they should carry out a more thorough break-up. It is no doubt teaching
that. But will it succeed in it? Time will

       tell.”[1]


And so, the question now confronting us is: why is it that the Stolypin
break-up of medieval landownership cannot, while the
peasant-Trudovik or Narodnik break-up can, do away with bondage
and labour service?  

In starting to analyse this question, we shall note first of all that
one of the fundamental defects of the most wide spread arguments concerning
this matter—arguments that are liberal, Narodnik and partly revisionist
(P. Maslov)—is

    

the abstract presentation of the question, ignoring the concrete
historical “replacement’s which is actually coming about. The replacement
coming about in Russia has long since occurred in the advanced countries of
the West: it is the replacement of a feudal by a capitalist economy.  

It is, and can only be, a question of the forms, conditions, rapidity
and circumstances of this replacement; all other considerations,
which are not infrequently put in the forefront, are no more than an
unwitting beating about the bush, the “bush” being precisely
this replacement.  

The predominant feudal form of modern Russian agriculture is bondage
and labour service. The preservation of natural economy to a comparatively
considerable degree, the existence of the small cultivator who cannot make
both ends meet and farms on a tiny patch of poor land, using old,
wretchedly inadequate implements and production methods, and the economic
dependence of this small cultivator on the owner of the neighbouring
latifundium, who exploits him not only as a wage-labourer (which marks the
beginning of capitalism), but as a small cultivator (which is a
continuation of the corvée system)—these are the conditions
engendering bondage and labour service, or rather, characterising both the
one and the other.  

For the 30,000 big landlords in European Russia there are 10,000,000
households of the peasant poor. The average result is roughly the
following: one landlord owning over 2,000 dessiatines is surrounded by some
300 peasant house holds, each owning approximately 7 dessiatines of poor
and exhausted land and equipped with implements that are incredibly
outdated and primitive (from the European point of view, to say nothing of
the American).  

Some of the well-to-do peasants “get on in the world”, i.e., become
petty bourgeois using wage-labour to cultivate their land. The landlords,
many of whom yesterday were serf-owning lords or are their sons, resort to
the same kind of labour on a certain part of their land and for certain
farming operations.  

But besides these capitalist relations, and pushing them into the
background in all the purely Russian gubernias of European Russia, there is
the cultivation of landlord land by peasants using their own implements and
livestock, that

    

is to say, labour service, a continuation of the former corvée, and
there is also the “utilisation” of the desperate want of the small
cultivator (precisely as a cultivator, as a small proprietor) for
“service” on the neighbouring landed estate, that is to say,
bondage. Money loans in exchange for work, grain loans, winter
hire, land lease, permission to use the road, watering-place, meadows,
pastures and woods, the lending of implements and livestock, and so on and
so forth, are all infinitely varied forms of modern bondage.  

Things are sometimes pushed to the length of obliging the peasant to
fertilise the landlord’s fields with manure from his own farm, while the
“housewife” is obliged to provide eggs—and this not in the eighteenth,
but in the twentieth century A.D.!  

One has only to pose clearly and precisely the problem of these
survivals of medievalism and feudalism in modern Russian agriculture to
appreciate the significance of the Stolypin “reform”. This “reform”, of
course, gave dying serfdom a new lease of life, just as the notorious,
so-called “peasant” (in reality landlord), Reform of 1861,
extolled by the liberals and Narodniks, gave a new lease of life
to the corvée system, perpetuating it in a different guise right up
to 1905.  

The “new lease of life” given by Stolypin to the old order and old
feudal agriculture lies in the fact that another valve was opened, the
last that could still be opened without expropriating all the
landed estates. That valve was opened to let off some of the steam—in the
sense that some of the thoroughly impoverished peasants acquired a title to
their allotments as personal property and sold them, thus being converted
from proletarians with an allotment into proletarians pure and simple, and
that, furthermore, some of the well-to-do peasants, having acquired their
allotments, and in some cases having settled on otrubs, built up
even more solid capitalist farms than before.  

Lastly, the valve was opened and some of the steam let off in the sense
that in some areas a particularly intolerable type of strip holding was
abolished and the mobilisation of peasant land required under capitalism
was made easier.  

But did this new lease of life decrease or increase the over all number
of contradictions in the countryside? Did it

    

decrease or increase the tyranny of the feudal latifundia, or the total
amount of “steam”? The answer to these questions can only be the second
alternative.  

The famine among 30 million peasants is factual proof that the only
answer which can be given at present is the second alternative. It is a
famine among small proprietors. It presents a picture of the crisis of
the same old poverty-ridden peasant farming, shackled by bondage
and crushed by the feudal latifundia. There are no such famines, nor can
there be, in the case of the big non-feudal estates, of the capitalist
latifundia, in Europe.  

The plight of the mass of the peasantry, apart from the proletarians
who have completely freed themselves from the land (who “acquired” their
land in order to sell it) and a negligible minority of well-to-do peasants,
is the same as before or has even become worse. No acquiring of holdings as
personal property, no measures against strip holdings, can make the mass of
the impoverished peasants—settled on poor, exhausted land and possessing
only antiquated, thoroughly worn-out implements and starved draught animals
and cattle—to any extent cultured, to any extent masters of their farms.


Around a landlord (of the Markov or Purishkevich type) owning 2,000
dessiatines of land, the owners of tiny seven dessiatine plots will
inevitably remain paupers in bondage, however much they may be resettled,
however much they may be freed from the village commune, however much their
paupers’ plots may be “acquired” as their personal property.  

The Stolypin reform cannot do away with the bondage and labour
service of the mass of the peasants or with famines among them. Decades
upon decades of similar periodical famines will be needed before the bulk
of the present-day households dies out painfully and the Stolypin reform
“succeeds”, i.e., before the established bourgeois system of the general
European type is introduced in our countryside. At present, however, after
a six-year trial of the Stolypin “reform” and six years of “brilliant”
progress in the number of those who have “acquired” their land, etc.,
there cannot be the slightest doubt that the reform has not removed the
crisis and cannot remove it.  
 

Both at the present time and for the immediate future, it is beyond all
question that Russia confronts us with the old crisis of an economy which
is feudal as regards a number of survivals, the old crisis of pauperised
small farming held in bondage by the latifundia of the Markov or
Purishkevich type.  

And this crisis, so graphically documented by the famine of 30 million
peasants, confronts us despite Stolypin having opened the last
valve that the Markovs and Purishkeviches have. They (and the Council of
the United Nobility along with them) could have thought up nothing

else,[2]

nor can anything else be thought up to enable the Purishkeviches to retain
land and power, than the pursuit of a bourgeois policy by these same
Purishkeviches.  

This is actually what the contradictions of the modern Russian
countryside amount to: the pursuit of a bourgeois agrarian policy by the
former serf-owners, who fully retain their land and their power. In the
agrarian sphere, this is also “a step towards transformation into a
bourgeois

     monarchy”.[3]


This step towards the new has been taken by the old, which has retained
its omnipotence, its land, its general appearance and conditions. This is
the last step that the old can still take. It is the last valve. There are
not, and cannot be, any other valves at the disposal of the Purishkeviches,
who are in command of a bourgeois country.  

And precisely because this step towards the new has been taken by the
old, which has retained its omnipotence, it could not produce, and will not
produce, any lasting result. On the contrary, it is leading—as shown
clearly by all the symptoms of the period we are passing through—to the
growth of the old crisis at a different and higher stage of Russia’s
capitalist development.  
 

The old crisis is growing in a new way, in a new situation, at a time
when the class relations have become much more definite; but it is
growing, and its social and economic (and not merely economic) nature
remains essentially unchanged.  

A negligible number of good, otrub farms of the peasant
bourgeoisie, while the number of proletarians bound to allotments is
declining, while the Purishkeviches retain their omnipotence, while the
vast mass of the pauperised and starving middle peasants are in bondage,
and while the number of proletarians not bound to allotments is
increasing—such is the picture of the Russian countryside today.  

Does it still have to be demonstrated that the Stolypin agrarian
programme cannot, while the Narodnik (in the historical and class sense of
the term) programme can, abolish bondage and labour service? Surely the
present situation in the countryside must suggest that given full freedom
of mobilisation of the land, good otrub farms would inevitably put
an end at once to all medieval famines, to all bondage and labour service,
if such farms were set up by the free choice of the peasants on all the
seventy million dessiatines of landed estates which for the time being are
outside the “land distribution system”? And will not the irony of history
compel us to say that Stolypin’s land surveyors have come in handy for a
Trudovik Russia?  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 148–49 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
It goes without saying that the phrase “thought up” should be taken
with a grain of salt: the imagination of the class in command was limited
and determined by the entire course of the capitalist development of Russia
and the world as a whole. With the given alignment of the classes in a
Russia developing along capitalist lines, the Council of the United
Nobility could not have acted otherwise if it wanted to retain its power.
—Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 15, p. 347.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Little Explanation









Lenin: A Little Explanation







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Little Explanation




Published:
Pravda No. 85, August 8, 1912.

      Signed: N. B..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 254-255.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question whether our Cadets are democrats or a party
of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie is of great scientific interest.


Let us recall that even the Trudovik (bourgeois democrat) Vodovozov
showed vacillation on this question.  

Concerning this question, Pravda referred to
Mr. Gredeskul’s recent statements, repeated in

      “Rech”.[1]


Rech answers: “We do not know what statements by Mr. Gredeskul
Pravda is talking about.”  

How very nice, isn’t it? Pravda said in clear and precise
terms that it was speaking of the statements repeated in
Rech. Well?  Can it be that Rech does not know what is
published in Rech??  Would it not be more natural to suppose that
the liberals want to forget certain things in their recent past
for the sake of their pre-election playing at democracy?  

Be that as it may, I shall quote, with a view to clarifying an
important scientific question, what Mr. Gredeskul said in a series of
public lectures and what he repeated in Rech No. 117
(2071), without the editors making a single reservation.  


   “At the very end of my lecture,” wrote Mr. Gredeskul,
   “in arguing against the contention of Vekhi that the Russian
   emancipation movement had failed (allegedly through the fault of the
   intelligentsia) and comparing it with the opinion of those who stand much
   further to the left than P. B. Struve but who likewise believe that the
   movement has brought us absolutely nothing, I upheld a thesis to the
   contrary, saying that a very great deal had been done, that the very
   foundations had been laid for the future constitutional edifice, and very
   deeply and solidly, too, in the very midst of the masses of

    

   the people. To provide a critical confrontation for these two assertions
   and at the same time to express an idea which I also consider of the utmost
   political importance for our time, I brought both of them into relation
   with the future and said that from the point of view of the former (if
   nothing had been done in 1905–06), everything had to be started from the
   beginning, or, in other words, a second movement had to be organised,
   whereas from the point of view of the latter assertion (that 1905–06 had
   seen the laying of the foundations for a Russian constitution), the
   opposite was true—no second popular movement was needed but merely quiet,
   persevering and confident constitutional work.  

   “It was at this point that I was interrupted by the
   Lepaya chief of police (it happened in Lepaya). In this manner there ensued
   in Lepaya a police demonstration against a public denial of the need for a
   new revolution in Russia” (Rech, 1912, No. 117 [2071 ]).  


Mr. Gredeskul has fully proved that the Lepaya chief of police made a
mistake. But besides this, Mr. Gredeskul has proved two important things:

(1) that the polemics of Mr. Gredeskul and Co. against Vekhi are
so much pretence and empty talk. Actually, in all essential respects, the
whole Cadet Party is a Vekhi party;
(2) that the Marxist characterisation of the Cadet Party according to its
scientific, economic and political features is perfectly correct.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 246 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Workers’ Earnings and Capitalist Profits in Russia









Lenin: Workers' Earnings and Capitalist Profits in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Workers’ Earnings and Capitalist Profits in Russia




Published:
Pravda No. 85, August 8, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 256-257.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A survey of factories in Russia was made in
1908.[2] There is no doubt that the survey gave exaggerated figures of
the workers’ earnings and understated the amount of production and the size
of the capitalists’ profits, for in our country all surveys of this kind
are carried out on purely bureaucratic lines, inquiries being addressed
only to the capitalists, while it is considered unnecessary to ask the
workers any questions.  

Let us see what these statistics, which are particularly advantageous
for the capitalists, have revealed.  

According to preliminary information—which is all that has been
published so far—there were altogether nearly 20,000 factories in Russia
(the exact figure is 19,983; we shall give the exact figures in parentheses
but shall round them off in the text to make it easier for the reader to
visualise and remember the principal data).  

The total number of workers of both sexes was 2,250,000 (2,253,787),
including mining workers and workers employed in the industries subject to
excise duty.  

The wages of all those workers totalled more than 500 million
(555,700,090) rubles.  

To find out the average pay per worker, we must divide the total of
wages by the number of workers. We get the figure 246 rubles.  

This means that in 1908 two and a quarter million Russian
factory workers earned a mere twenty rubles fifty kopeks a month
on the average!  

Considering that with this sum the worker has to support his family,
and this with the present high rents and high food prices, such pay must be
described as meagre.  
 

Let us now see what the profits of the capitalists are. To ascertain
them, we must subtract all the outlays of the capitalists from the sum
total of production, i.e., the gross receipts of all the factories.  

The sum total of production exceeds 4,500 million (4,651 million)
rubles, and all the outlays of the capitalists total 4,000 million (4,082
million) rubles.  

It follows that the capitalists’ profits exceed 500,000,000
rubles (568,700,000 rubles).  

These profits average 28,500 rubles per
establishment. Each worker brings the capitalist a profit of
252 rubles a year.  

Let us now compare the workers’ earnings and the capitalists’
profits. Each worker receives, on the average, 246 rubles a year, but he
brings the capitalist an average profit of 252 rubles a

year.[1]


It follows that the worker works the lesser part of the day
for himself, and the greater part of it for the capitalist. If,
for example, we take the working day to average 11 hours, we shall see that
the worker is paid only for five and a half hours and even somewhat less
than that. The other five and a half hours he works gratuitously, without
receiving any pay, and the entire sum earned by him during this half day
constitutes the capitalist’s profit.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Altogether the worker creates an annual 498 rubles’ worth of new
values.  —Lenin
 



[2]
This refers to the investigation of Russia’s factories carried out by
the Industrial Department of the Ministry of Finance in 1908. Preliminary
data on the results of the investigation were published by V. Y. Varzar in
an article “The Manufacturing Industry of the Empire at the Beginning of
1909” in Vestnik Finansov, Promyshlennosti i Torgovli No. 50, on
December 11 (24), 1911. Lenin cited data from the summary table in that
article.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Strike Movement and Wages









Lenin: The Strike Movement and Wages







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Strike Movement and Wages




Published:
Pravda No. 86, August 9, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 258-259.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Everyone knows that the famous strike movement of the
Russian workers in 1905 achieved very great successes not only in the
political, but in the economic sphere as well. The data furnished by the
reports of factory

inspectors[1] now enable us to form a fairly accurate idea of the
magnitude of those successes.  

According to those data, the average earnings of a factory worker were:






in 1901 . . . 
201 rubles
in 1906...
231 rubles


” 1902 . . .  
202 ”
” 1907
241 ”


” 1903 . . .  
208 ”
” 1908
242 ”


” 1904 . . .  
213 ”
” 1909
236 ”


” 1905 . . .  
205 ”
” 1910
242 ”


average for five years 
206 ”
average for five years
238 ”




This shows that the year 1905 was a turning-point. For it was after
1905 that wages rose abruptly from 205 to 231 rubles a year, i.e.,
by 26 rubles, or more than 10 per cent.  

With regard to 1905, which shows a drop of 8 rubies in wages compared
with 1904, the following must be borne in mind: firstly, 1905 was a year of
economic depression, i.e., a slump in industry; secondly, according to data
of the Ministry of Trade, the workers that year lost, through not receiving
wages during strikes, 17,500,000 rubles, or over 10 rubles per
worker on the average.  

Thus, we may assume that real wages in 1905 were 215 rubles a year, but
out of these 215 rubles the workers contributed 10 rubles each to the
strike movement, which in 1905 was distinguished by remarkable persistence
and breadth, unprecedented anywhere else in the world.  
 

The result is that as we now examine the data for a whole decade,
1901–10, we clearly see a striking difference between the
pre-revolutionary and post-revolutionary epoch.  

Until 1905 the Russian factory worker’s wages averaged 206
rubles. After 1905, they averaged 238 rubles, i.e., 32 rubles more per
year—an increase of 15.5 per cent.  

Within one year wages experienced such an upward leap that no
subsequent efforts by the capitalists (who, it will be recalled, took away
all the gains of 1905 one by one) were able to reduce the worker to his
former low standard of living. The year 1905 improved the worker’s living
standard to a degree that normally is attained during several decades.


Through the strikes in 1905 the workers lost, according to official
statistics, 17,500,000 rubles by not being paid wages during the
strikes. According to the same source, the capitalists’ drop in output in
1905 was 127,300,000 rubles.  

The rise in wages after 1905, however, brought the workers an average
gain of 32 rubles per worker in five years (1906–1910), i.e., a total of
57,600,000 rubles a year, or 286 million rubles in flue years,
considering the number of workers to be 1,800,000.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to A Summary of Factory Inspectors’ Reports for
1910, St. Petersburg, 1911. p. XXXVII.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working Day in the Factories of Moscow Gubernia









Lenin: The Working Day in the Factories of Moscow Gubernia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working Day in the Factories of Moscow Gubernia




Published:
Pravda No. 88, August 11, 1912.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 260-261.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

I. M. Kozminykh-Lanin, an engineer, has published a book on
the length of the working day and working year in the factories of Moscow
Gubernia.  

The data collected by the author relate to the end of 1908 and cover
219,869 workers, or a little over seven-tenths of the total number of
factory workers in Moscow Gubernia (307,773).  

On the basis of these data, the author finds the average working day to
be 9 \frac12 hours for adults and juveniles and 7\frac12 hours for
those under age.  

It should be noted that these data do not include overtime work (the
author has prepared for the press a special book on overtime work) and,
secondly, that the author’s data are based solely on “obligatory
regulations for employers and workers”.  

Whether these regulations are actually adhered to is a question our
engineer does not raise. Only workers’ unions, by compiling their own
statistics, could collect data on this question as well.  

This 9 \frac12-hour day varies greatly from one establishment to
another.  

The author’s tables show that 33,466 workers work over 10
hours a day! This covers more than 15 per cent of the total number of
workers surveyed.  

There are 13,189 workers who work over 11 hours a
day, and 75 workers who work over 12 hours a day. The bulk of the
workers crushed by this excessively long working day belongs to the textile
industry.  

If it is taken into account that approximately one-third of the workers
are not included in the author’s survey, the

    

conclusion can be drawn that the working day of more than 20,000
factory workers in Moscow Gubernia is monstrously long.  

Lastly, Kozminykh-Lanin’s data show that even the extremely obsolete
Russian law of 1897, which permits an 11\frac12-hour (!!!) day, is not
observed by the factory owners. Under that law, when working in two
shifts, no worker may work more than 9 hours a day, calculated over a
fortnight.  

In reality, however, out of the 83,990 two-shift workers surveyed by
the author, 14,376 worked over 9 hours. This comprises 17 per cent
of the total number of those working in two shifts. And of the 3,733
two-shift workers engaged in repair and auxiliary jobs, 2,173, or
nearly three-fifths, worked over 9 hours a day! A total of 16,500
workers who are compelled—even according to official data—to work
longer than allowed by the law!  

An eight-hour day existed in Moscow Gubernia in 1908 only for 4,398
workers—out of the 219,669 surveyed. This means that an eight-hour day is
perfectly feasible even today; it is only necessary for 215,000 workers to
overtake those 4,000.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working Day and Working Year in Moscow Gubernia









Lenin: The Working Day and Working Year in Moscow Gubernia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working Day and Working Year in Moscow Gubernia




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 21, August 12, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 262-269.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The work bearing this title, from the pen of Kozminykh
Lanin, an engineer (Moscow, 1912, published by the Standing Commission of
the Museum for the Promotion of Labour under the Moscow Branch of the
Imperial Russian Technical Society. Price, 1 ruble 75 kopeks), is a summary
of data relating to the end of 1908.  

The data cover 219,669 workers, or 71,37 per cent of the total number
of factory workers in the gubernia (307,773). The author says that he has
“carefully studied the data on each industrial establishment in
particular”, and has “included in the summary only that part of it which
left no room for doubt”.  

Such statistics would have been of outstanding interest, even though
they come very late, had the data been tabulated more
sensibly. Unfortunately, it is precisely this word that has to be used, for
while Mr. Kozminykh-Lanin has compiled his tables most carefully, putting a
very great deal of labour into the calculation of all sorts of totals and
percentages, he has expended this labour irrationally.  

The wealth of material seems to have overwhelmed the author. He has
made hundreds and thousands of calculations that are absolutely superfluous
and only encumbered his work, but he has not made some dozens of
calculations that are absolutely necessary, since no general picture can be
obtained without them.  

Indeed, the author’s principal tables, which almost fill the whole of
his book, contain detailed figures, such, for in stance, as that the
workers who work from 9 to 10 hours a day

    

are divided into 16 categories according to the number of working
hours in two successive weeks (from 109 to 120 hours), and the average
number of working hours is calculated for each category! And all this has
been done twice:
for the workers engaged in production and for the auxiliary workers.  

It has to be admitted that such detailing is, first of all, absolutely
unnecessary and that it looks like indulging in statistics for their own
sake, a kind of game with figures, to the detriment of a clear
picture and of material fit for study. Secondly, nine-tenths of these
“averages”, which the author has calculated to an accuracy of one per
cent, are simply a waste of labour, for out of a thousand readers of the
book (which will hardly find a thousand readers), only one reader will
perhaps think this sort of “average” necessary (moreover, that one reader
could have calculated it for himself if he had been so unfortunate
as to need it!).  

On the other hand, the book completely lacks absolutely
indispensable summaries that the author could have drawn up with
far less expenditure of labour and which one cannot do without if one wants
to make a sensible study of the data of the survey. There are no summaries

(1) giving totals, by production groups, of workers who work in one, two
and three shifts;
(2) classing workers according to production and auxiliary jobs;
(3) giving average working hours according to production groups;
(4) giving totals of working time of adults and juveniles;
(5) singling out factories with various numbers of workers.  

Let us dwell on this last point. The author seems so diligent—judging
by the list he gives of the works which he has published or prepared for
publication—and has such a wealth of interesting information at his
disposal that a critical analysis of his methods may be not only of
theoretical, but also of immediate practical use. We have already quoted
the author where he says that he has “carefully studied the data on
each industrial establishment in particular”.  

It follows that a summary of the material, if only by the factory
groups used even by our official statistics (up to 20 workers, 21–50,
51–100, 101–500, 501–1,000, and over 1,000), was perfectly possible. Was
it necessary?  
 

Undoubtedly. Statistics should not give arbitrary columns of figures
but should, by means of figures, throw light on those different social
types of the phenomenon under study that have fully emerged, or are
emerging, in reality. Can there be any doubt that establishments employing
50 and those employing 500 workers belong to essentially different
social types of the phenomenon we are interested in, or that the
entire social development of all the civilised countries increases the
difference between these types and leads to one of them
superseding the other?  

Let us take the data on the working day. From the author’s summary
table of totals it can be concluded—provided we ourselves do a
certain amount of necessary statistical work which we do not see in the
book—that 33,000 workers (out of the 220,000 surveyed) work longer
than 10 hours a day. The average duration of the working day of the
220,000 workers is 9\frac12 hours. The question arises: are not these
workers, crushed by an excessive working day, employed in small
establishments?  

This question arises naturally and necessarily. It is by no means
arbitrary. The political economy and statistics of all countries of the
world oblige us to put precisely this question, for the
prolongation of working hours by small establishments has been registered
only too often. Capitalist economic conditions necessitate this
prolongation in the case of small employers.  

It turns out that the material at the author’s disposal did contain
data for answering this highly important question, but they have
disappeared in his summary! In his summary, the author gives us very long
and worthless columns of detailed “averages” but does not give
the necessary division of factories according to the number of workers.


In the case of Moscow Gubernia, such a division is even more necessary
(if we may here use the comparative degree) than elsewhere, for in Moscow
Gubernia we see a comparatively large number of small establishments
alongside a huge concentration of production. According to statistics for
1910, there were altogether 1,440 establishments in the gubernia, employing
335,190 workers. One-half of this number of workers (i. e., 167,199) was
concentrated in 66 factories, while at the other pole there were
669 establishments

    

employing a total of 18,277 workers. It is clear that we have here entirely
different social types and that statistics which do not distinguish between
them are no good at all.  

The author was so absorbed in his columns of figures on the numbers of
workers who work 94, 95, etc., to 144, hours in two successive weeks, that
he left out altogether data on the number of establishments. The
number is given in the second part of his work, which deals with the length
of the working year; but the first part, which deals with the working day,
gives no information on the number of establishments, although this
information was no doubt available to the author.  

The largest factories in Moscow Gubernia represent not only distinctive
types of industrial establishment, but also distinctive types of
population, with specific living and cultural (or rather cultureless)
conditions. The singling out of these factories, and a detailed analysis of
the data for each class of establishment, according to the number of
workers, are a necessary condition for rational economic statistics.  


Let us cite the more important totals from Mr. Kozminykh Lanin’s work.


As we have said, his survey of the length of the working day covers
219,669 factory workers of Moscow Gubernia, or 71.37 per cent of their
total number, the textile workers being represented in his statistics more
widely than workers engaged in other industries. The survey covered 74.6
per cent of all the textile workers and only 49–71 per cent of the other
workers. Apparently, the survey was less extensive with regard to
small establishments; in any case, the data on the number of
working days in the year cover 58 per cent of the establishments (811 out
of the 1,394 existing in 1908) and 75 per cent of the workers (231,130 out
of 307,773). It is plainly the smaller establishments that have been left
out.  

The author gives summary data on the length of the working day only for
all the workers put together. The result is an average of 9\frac12 hours a
day for adults and 7\frac12

    

hours for juveniles. The number of juveniles, it should be noted, is not
great: 1,363 against 218,306 adults. This suggests that juvenile workers in
particular may have been “hidden” from the inspectors.  

Out of the total of 219,669 workers there were 128,628 (58.56 per cent)
working in one shift, 88,552 (40.31 per cent) working in two shifts and
2,489 (1.13 per cent) working in three shifts. Two-shift work predominates
over one-shift work in the textile industry, where there are 75,391 working
in two shifts (“in production”, i.e., exclusive of auxiliary workers)
against 68,604 working in one shift. The addition of repair and auxiliary
workers produces a total of 78,107 working in two shifts and 78,321 working
in one shift. In the case of metalworkers, on the other hand, one-shift
work predominates considerably (17,821 adult workers) over two-shift work
(7,673).  

Summing up the total of workers who work different numbers of hours a
day, we obtain the following data: 









Number of hours worked per day
Number of workers




Up to 8 hours . . .         
4,398



From 8 to 9 hours . . .     
87,402


9  ”  10  ”   . . .   
94,403


10  ”  11  ”  . . .   
20,202
} 33,466 


11  ”  12  ”  . . .   
13,189


12 or more hours  . . .     
75


Total . . .        
219,669




This shows how negligible still is the number of workers in Russia who
do not work more than 8 hours a day—a mere 4,398 out of 219,669. On the
other hand, the number of workers whose working day is excessively,
scandalously long is very great: 33,466 out of 220,000, or over 15
per cent, work more than 10 hours a day! And this without
considering overtime work.  

To proceed. The difference in the length of the working day of
one-shift and two-shift workers can be seen from the following data, which
refer only to adult “production workers”, i.e., exclusive of repair and
auxiliary workers, who make up 8 per cent of the total.  
    

    




Length of working day
Percentage of workers (working the indicated
    number of hours a day)


One-shift
Two-shift




Up to 8 hours . . .     
1.3
1.0


From 8 to 9 hours . . . 
13.3
81.9


9 ” 10 ” . . .        
60.7
14.7


10  ”  11 ” . . .   
15.2
1.4


11  ”  12 ” . . .   
9.5
1.0


12 or more hours . . .  
—
—


Total . . .    
100.0
100.0




This shows, among other things, that 17 per cent of the two-shift
workers work more than 9 hours a day, or more than is permitted
even by the law of 1897, which Mr. Lanin justly regards as exceedingly
outdated. Under this law, when work is carried on in two shifts, the number
of hours worked per day must not exceed nine, calculated over a
fortnight. And Mr. Lanin in all his calculations and tables takes precisely
a period of “two successive weeks”.  

Since a very definite and precise law is violated so openly, it is easy
to imagine the fate of the other provisions of our factory legislation.


The average number of hours worked per day by a one-shift worker (only
adult and only engaged in “production”) is 9.89. This implies prevalence
of a ten-hour day without any reduction even on Saturdays, and
exclusive of overtime work. Needless to say such a long working day is
certainly excessive and cannot be tolerated.  

The average number of hours worked per day by a two-shift worker is
8.97, i.e., there predominates in practice the nine-hour day which the law
requires in this case. Its reduction to eight hours is particularly
imperative because in the case of two-shift work the time from 10 p. m. to
4 (!!) a.m. is considered “night”, which means that in effect a very
substantial portion of the night is considered to be “day” for
the worker. A nine-hour day with night turned into day, and with
constant night work—that is the situation prevailing in Moscow Gubernia!


In conclusion of our review of Mr. Kozminykh-Lanin’s data, we wish to
point out that he finds the average duration of the working year to be 270
days. For textile workers,

    

however, the figure is somewhat smaller—268.8 days—and for
metalworkers, a little greater—272.3.  

The way in which Kozminykh-Lanin has analysed these data on the length
of the working year is also most unsatisfactory. On the one hand,
excessive, utterly senseless detailing: we find as many as 130 horizontal
rows in the overall table on the length of the working year! Data on the
numbers of establishments, workers, etc., are given here
separately for each number of working days (per year) that occurs,
beginning with 22 and ending with 366. Such “detailing” is more like
complete failure to “digest” the raw material.  

On the other hand, here too we do not find the necessary summaries
either on the numbers of workers in the factories or on the difference in
motive power (manual and mechanical factories). Hence one cannot obtain a
picture enabling one to understand how various conditions affect
the length of the working year. The wealth of data collected by the author
has gone to waste through very bad handling.  

We can ascertain—roughly and far from accurately—the significance
of the distinction between large-scale and small-scale production even from
the author’s data, provided we re-analyse them somewhat. Let us take the
four main groups of establishments according to length of the
working year:
(1) those working up to 200 days a year;
(2) from 200 to 250;
(3) from 250 to 270, and
(4) 270 days or longer.  

By summing up, for each of these categories, the number of factories
and that of the workers of both sexes, we obtain the following picture:






Length of working year
Average number of working days per
    year
Number of
Average number of workers per factory


factories
workers




Up to 200 days . . . . 
96
74
5,676
76


200 ” 250 ” . . . .  
236
91
14,400
158


250 ” 270 ” . . . .  
262
196
58,313
297


270 or more ” . . . . 
282
450
152,741
339


Total 
270
811
231,130
285




This shows clearly that the larger the factory, the longer (on the
whole) the working year. Consequently, the social and economic importance
of small undertakings is much less
    

in reality than appears from their share in, say, the total number of
workers. The working year in these undertakings is so much shorter than in
the large ones that their share in production must be quite
insignificant. Besides, with a short working year, these factories (the
small ones) are incapable of forming a permanent body of proletarians,
hence the workers here are more “bound” to the land, probably earn less,
are less cultured, etc.  

A large factory intensifies exploitation by prolonging the working year
to the utmost and thus bringing into existence a proletariat which has
completely severed its ties with the countryside.  

If we were to study the differences in length of the working year
depending on the technical organisation of factories (manual and mechanical
motive power, etc.), we could undoubtedly derive a whole series of highly
interesting indications of the living conditions of the population, the
position of the workers, the evolution of our capitalism, etc. But the
author, one can say, has not so much as touched on these questions.  

All he has done is to give figures on the average duration of the
working year in factories of the different groups of industries. The
variations of the general average are very small: from 246 days in Group IX
(processing of mineral substances) to 291 in Group XII (chemical industry).


These differences, as the reader will see, are far less than those in
the duration of the working year in small and large factories in general,
irrespective of the industry to which they belong.  

Differences in the type of industry are less characteristic,
and less important for social and economic statistics than differences in
the scale of production. This does not mean, of course, that the
former differences can be ignored. What it does mean is that sensible
statistics are absolutely impossible unless the latter differences are
taken into account.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Britain









Lenin: In Britain







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Britain




Published:
Pravda No. 89, August 12, 1912.

      Signed: P..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 270-271.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The British Liberals have been in power for six and a half
years. The working-class movement in Britain is becoming stronger and
stronger. Strikes are assuming a mass character; moreover, they are ceasing
to be purely economic and are developing into political strikes.  

Robert Smillie, the leader of the Scottish miners who recently showed
such strength in mass

struggle,[1] declares that in their next big fight the miners will
demand the transfer of the collieries to state ownership. And this next big
fight is approaching inexorably, because all the miners of Britain are
perfectly well aware that the notorious Minimum Wage Act cannot bring about
any appreciable improvement in their conditions.  

And so the British Liberals, who are losing ground, have invented a new
battle-cry in order once again to induce the mass of the electors to trust
the Liberals for a while. “You can’t sell without cheating” is the
commercial slogan of capitalism. “You can’t get seats in parliament
without cheating” is the slogan of capitalist politics in free countries.


The “fashionable” slogan invented by the Liberals for this purpose is
the demand for “land reform”. It is not clear what the Liberals and their
expert in humbugging the masses, Lloyd George, mean by that. Apparently, it
is a question of increasing the land tax, and no more. But the idea that
actually lies behind the resounding talk about “restoring the land to the
people”, etc., is to collect further millions for military adventures, for
the Navy.  

In Britain, agriculture is conducted wholly on capitalist lines. The
capitalist farmers rent medium-sized plots

    

of land from the landlords and cultivate them with the aid of wage-workers.


Under these circumstances, no “land reform” can in any way change the
conditions of the agricultural workers. In Britain the buying-out of landed
estates might even become a new method of fleecing the proletariat, since
the landlords and the capitalists, who would retain state power, would sell
their land at exorbitant prices. And the price would have to be paid by the
taxpayers, i.e., the workers again.  

The fuss made by the Liberals about the land question has done good in
one respect: it has roused interest in organising the agricultural workers.


When Britain’s agricultural workers wake up and join together in
unions, the Liberals will no longer be able to get away with charlatan
“promises of reform” or of allotments for farm-hands and day-labourers.


Recently a reporter of a British labour newspaper visited Joseph Arch,
the veteran agricultural workers’ leader who has done much to rouse the
labourers to a class-conscious life. This could not be done at one stroke,
and Arch’s slogan—“three acres and a cow” for every agricultural
worker—was a very naive one. The union he founded fell to pieces, but the
cause he fought for is not dead and the organisation of the agricultural
workers in Britain is once again becoming an immediate issue.  

Arch is now 83 years old. He lives in the same village and in the same
house in which he was born. He told his inter viewer that the agricultural
workers’ union had managed to raise wages to 15, 16 and 17 shillings a
week. And now the wages of agricultural workers in Britain have again
dropped—in Norfolk, where Arch lives—to 12 or 13 shillings a week.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the miners’ strike in the spring of 1912, which
involved about a million miners.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concentration of Production in Russia









Lenin: Concentration of Production in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concentration of Production in Russia




Published:
Pravda No. 89, August 12, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 272-273.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Russia, as in all capitalist countries, concentration of
production is going on, i.e., its concentration to an ever greater extent
in a small number of large and very large undertakings.  

Under the capitalist system, every undertaking is entirely dependent on
the market. In view of this dependence, the larger the undertaking, the
more cheaply it can sell its product. A big capitalist buys raw materials
more cheaply and expends them more economically; he uses better machinery,
etc. Small proprietors, on the other hand, are ruined and go
under. Production becomes more and more concentrated in the hands of a few
millionaires. Millionaires generally increase their power still more
through joint-stock companies, which put in their hands the capital of
middle proprietors and “small fry”.  

Here are data, for example, on the factory industry in Russia for 1910
compared with
1901:[1] 





Groups of establishments by number of workers
Number of establishments
Number of workers (thousands)


1901
1910
1901
1910




Up to 50 . . .          
12,740
9,909
244
220


51 to 101  . . . .      
2,428
2,201
171
159


101 ” 500 . . . .      
2,288
2,213
492
508


501 ”  1,000 . . . .   
403
433
269
303


Over 1,000 . . . .      
243
324
526
713


Total  . . . . 
18,102
15,080
1,702
1,903




Such is generally the situation in all capitalist countries.  The
number of small establishments is decreasing; the petty
bourgeoisie, the small proprietors, are ruined and go under;

    

they join the ranks of office employees, and sometimes of the proletariat.


The number of very large undertakings is growing fast, their share in
production as a whole increasing still more.  

From 1901 to 1910 the number of large factories employing over 1,000
workers each increased almost 50 per cent—from 243 to 324.  

In 1901 they had about half a million (528,000) workers, or less than
one-third of the total number, whereas in 1910 the figure exceeded
700,000, which is more than one-third of the total.  

The bigger factories choke the small ones and concentrate production
more and more. Ever greater numbers of workers are brought together in a
few undertakings, but the whole pro fit from the labour of the combined
millions of workers goes to a handful of millionaires.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin took the figures from A Summary of Factory Inspectors’
Reports for 1910, St. Petersburg, 1911, p. XV.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Career









Lenin: A Career







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Career




Published:
Pravda No. 94, August 18, 1912.

      Signed: I. V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 274-275.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The life story of the millionaire A. S. Suvorin, the
publisher of Novoye Vremya, who died not long ago, reflected and
expressed a very interesting period in the history of Russia’s bourgeois
society as a whole.  

At the start of his career he was a poor man, a liberal and even a
democrat; towards the end of his career, he was a millionaire, a
self-satisfied and brazen extoller of the bourgeoisie, who grovelled before
every turn in the policies of the powers that be. Is this not typical of
the bulk of the “educated” and “intellectual” members of
so-called society? It is true, of course, that not all practise renegacy
with such furious success as to become millionaires, but nine-tenths, or
perhaps ninety-nine out of a hundred, practise the very same renegacy,
beginning as radical students and ending up as holders of
“cushy jobs” in some office or other, in some swindle or other.  

A penniless student who could not enter university for lack of money; a
teacher in an uyezd school, who also held the office of secretary to the
Marshal of the Nobility or gave private lessons in the homes of
aristocratic and wealthy serf-owners; a budding liberal and even democratic
journalist sympathising with Belinsky and Chernyshevsky and hostile to
reaction—this is how Suvorin began in the fifties and sixties of
the last century.  

The landlord Katkov, a liberal who sympathised with the British
bourgeoisie and the British Constitution, turned during the first upsurge
of the democratic movement in Russia (in the early sixties of the
nineteenth century) to nationalism, chauvinism and rabid Black-Hundredism.

 

The liberal journalist Suvorin turned during the second upsurge of the
democratic movement in Russia (in the late seventies of the nineteenth
century) to nationalism, to chauvinism, to shameless fawning upon the
powers that be. The Russo-Turkish War helped this careerist to “find
himself”, and to find his path of a flunkey rewarded by the huge profits
of his newspaper At Your Service, Sir.  

Suvorin’s Novoye Vremya earned that nickname, At Your
Service, Sir, for many decades to come. The newspaper became
in Russia model example of the venal press. Novoye Vremya became
an expression synonymous with the concepts of apostasy, renegacy and
sycophancy. Suvorin’s Novoye Vremya is a specimen of brisk trade,
of how to sell stuff “for consumption off or on the premises”. It deals
in everything, from political convictions to pornographic advertisements.


And now, after the third upsurge of the democratic movement in Russia
(in the early twentieth century), how many more liberals have taken the
Vekhi path, turning to nationalism, to chauvinism, to the
defamation of democracy, to sycophancy to the reaction!  

Katkov—Suvorin—the Vekhi group are all historical stages
of the turn taken by the Russian liberal bourgeoisie from democracy
to the defence of reaction, to chauvinism and anti-Semitism.  

The class-conscious workers become steeled in their convictions,
realising the inevitability of this turn of the bourgeoisie, as well as of
the turn of the working masses to the ideas of working-class democracy.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau









Lenin: To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Secretariat of the International Socialist Bureau




Published:

      Published in Gazeta Robotnicza No. 19, November 21, 1912.

      Translated from the Polish.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 276-277.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

August 31, 1912 

Dear Comrade, 

I have received from you Circular No. 15 (July 1912) in which the
Executive Committee of the Social-Democracy of Poland and Lithuania gives
notice of a split in that organisation.  

In my quality of representative of the R.S.D.L.P. in the International
Socialist Bureau, I must emphatically pro test against the notice for the
following reasons: 

1. The Executive of the S.D.P. and L. declares that the Warsaw
Committee “is not affiliated to the R.S.D.L.P., of which the
S.D.P. and L. is an autonomous section”.  

But the Executive of the S.D.P. and L. has no authority whatsoever
either to decide or to declare who is affiliated to the R.S.D.L.P., which I
represent.  

Today the Executive of the S.D.P. and L. itself is not affiliated to
our Party, for it maintains no organisational relations either with the
Central Committee I represent, which was elected at the Conference in
January 1912, or with the opposed liquidationist centre (the so-called
“Organising Committee”).  

2. The assertion of the Executive of the S.D.P. and L. that the split
occurred “unexpectedly just before the Duma elections” is not in accord
with the facts.  

I happen to know that the very same Executive of the S.D.P. and L. must
have foreseen a split as early as two years ago, when it provoked a sharp
conflict with its former members, Malecki and Hanecki, and removed Hanecki
from the Board.  
 

3. It is hypocritical of the Executive to declare: 

firstly, that agents provocateurs have made their way into the
Warsaw organisation “as into all the other revolutionary organisations in
tsarist Russia”; 

secondly, that the split came about with “the active co-operation of
the secret police”, although the Executive cannot give a single name, and
does not dare to express any specific suspicion!  

How very hypocritical one has to be to make in public the dishonest
accusation of “co-operation of the secret police”, with the aim of
morally destroying one’s political opponents, even while lacking the
courage to give a single name or express any specific suspicion!  

I am confident that every member of the International will indignantly
reject these unheard-of methods of struggle.  

I have for a number of years known the two former members of the
Executive of the S.D.P. and L., Malecki and Hanecki, who openly march
shoulder to shoulder with the Warsaw Committee. I have received, precisely
from the Warsaw Committee, an official notification confirming this fact.


In the present situation I consider it my duty to convey to the
International Socialist Bureau the enclosed protest from the Warsaw
Committee of the S.D.P. and L.  

As the statement of the Executive Committee has been circulated to all
members of the International Socialist Bureau, I must ask you, dear
comrade, to circulate also this statement of mine, together with the
protest of the Warsaw Committee, to the representatives of all the parties
affiliated to the International.  

With Party greetings, N. Lenin 

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadets and the Agrarian Question









Lenin: The Cadets and the Agrarian Question







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadets and the Agrarian Question




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 22, August 19, 1912.

      Signed: W. Frey.

      Published according to the Nevskaya Zvezda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 278-287.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In their polemics against Pravda, the Cadets were
unable, much as they tried, to evade the question whether they are a
democratic or a liberal-monarchist party.  

This is a highly important question. Its importance goes beyond that of
a general question of principle which provides material for elucidating
basic political concepts. Moreover, the question of the nature of the Cadet
Party, which claims leadership of the entire opposition, is inseparably
bound up with all the fundamental questions of the Russian
emancipation movement in general. That is why anyone who takes an
intelligent interest in the election campaign, and appreciates its
significance for the political enlightenment of the masses, is hound to pay
the greatest attention to this controversy on the nature of the Cadet
Party.  

The Cadet Rech is now trying to stifle this controversy, to
shut out questions of principle by subterfuges and quarrelsome sallies (“a
lie”, “a distortion”, etc.), to rake up some abuse or other which the
liquidators flung at us when their personal annoyance, caused by sharp
organisational conflicts, was at its highest. All these are familiar and
battered methods used by people who realise their weakness in a controversy
over principles. And for this reason our reply to the Cadets must be a
repeated explanation of questions of principle.  

What are the distinctions between democracy and liberalism in general?
Both the bourgeois democrat and the liberal (all liberals are bourgeois
liberals, but not every democrat is a bourgeois democrat) are opposed to
the old order, to absolutism, serfdom, the privileges of the upper social
estate, etc; they are for political liberty and a constitutional “legal”
system. That is the resemblance between them.  
 

Now for the difference between them. The democrat represents the mass
of the population. He shares their petty-bourgeois prejudices, expecting,
for example, that a new, “equalised” redivision of all the land would not
only abolish all vestiges of serfdom (he would be justified in expecting
this), but would also undermine the foundations of capitalism (which is
entirely unjustified, for no redivision of the land can do away
either with the power of the market and of money, or with the power and
omnipotence of capital). But the democrat believes in the movement of the
masses, in its strength and justice, and has no fear at all of this
movement. He advocates the abolition of all medieval privileges
without exception.  

The liberal does not represent the mass of the population but a
minority of the latter, namely, the big and middle liberal bourgeoisie. The
liberal is more afraid of the movement of the masses and of
consistent democracy than of reaction. Far from seeking complete abolition
of all medieval privileges, he frankly defends some privileges
which are, moreover, very substantial ones, and strives to ensure that
these privileges are divided between the Purishkeviches and the Milyukovs
and not abolished altogether.  

The liberal defends political liberty and the constitution—invariably
in a curtailed form (such as the two-chamber system and many other things),
each curtailment amounting to the preservation of a privilege of the
serf-owners. Thus the liberal vacillates continuously between the
serf-owners and the democrats; hence the extreme, almost in credible
impotence of the liberals in all matters of any importance.  

Russia’s democrats are the working class (proletarian democrats) and
the Narodniks and Trudoviks of all shades (bourgeois democrats). Russia’s
liberals are the Cadet Party, as well as the “Progressists” and most of
the non-Russian groups in the Third Duma.  

Russian democrats have important victories to their credit, Russian
liberals none at all. The former have proved their ability to fight, and
their defeats have always been great, historic defeats of the whole of
Russia; moreover, even after a defeat some of the democrats’ demands have
invariably been met. The latter, i.e., the liberals, have proved

    

incapable of fighting, and they have nothing to show in Russian
history but a constant contemptuous treatment of the liberals by the
serf-owners, comparable to the treatment of the serfs by their lords.  

Let us test these general considerations and basic theoretical
postulates by the Cadets’ agrarian programme. Pravda told the
Cadets that their undemocratic nature was evident from the speeches on the
agrarian question made by the Cadet Berezovsky the Second in the Third

Duma.[1]


The Cadet Reek answered, in its issue No. 208: “The speech of
Berezovsky the Second was, as we know, a reaffirmation of the Cadet
agrarian programme.”  

See how evasive this answer is! We said that the speech of Berezovsky
the

First[2]

was a specimen of undemocratic treatment of the question. Rech
knows very well what we consider an indication of liberalism as distinct
from democracy. But it has no intention of analysing the question
seriously, of stating which precisely are the signs of the distinction
between liberalism and democracy that it, i.e., Rech, considers
correct, and of ascertaining whether these signs are evident in the speech
of Berezovsky the First. Rech does nothing of the kind. It dodges
the issue, thus betraying a fundamental weakness and a guilty conscience.


But even Rech could not bring itself to disclaim the
responsibility of the entire Cadet Party for the speech delivered
by Berezovsky the First. It admitted—it had to admit—this
responsibility by describing the speech as a “reaffirmation of the Cadet
agrarian programme”.  

Splendid. And now we shall quote the main passages from that
indisputably and officially Cadet speech by a member of the Third Duma, the
Simbirsk landlord A. Y. Berezovsky. We shall see, in analysing the
speaker’s arguments, whether his point of view is democratic or
liberal. And we shall also see whether the Cadet gentlemen succeed in
refuting us in their vast press or at their meetings.  
 


   “It is my deep conviction, said A. Y. Berezovsky in the Third Duma in
   October 1908 (we are quoting from the verbatim report published in

   Rossiya[5]), “that this Bill [the Cadets’ land Bill] is far
   more beneficial to the landowners as well [and not to the peasants alone],
   and I say this, gentlemen, because I am familiar with agriculture, having
   engaged in it all my life and being a landowner myself. For a cultured
   farming system, the Bill of the party of people’s freedom would undoubtedly
   be more useful than the present system. One should not seize on the bare
   fact of compulsory alienation, be come indignant about it, and say that it
   is violence, but should see and appreciate what the things proposed in
   our Bill will amount to and how this compulsory alienation is to be
   effected....”  


We have emphasised these truly precious words of Mr.
A. Y. Berezovsky’s—precious because of their rare veracity. Anyone who
recalls the speeches and articles of the Marxist Bolsheviks against the
Cadets at the time of the First Duma, or who takes the trouble to read
those articles now, will have to agree that in 1908 Mr. A. Y. Berezovsky
brilliantly confirmed the Bolsheviks of 1906. And we venture to predict
that any history that is at all impartial will confirm their
policy three times over.  

In 1906 we said: “Don’t trust the round of that
phrase—‘compulsory alienation’.” The point is, who will compel
whom. If the landlords compel the peasants to pay for poor lands
three times their worth, in the fashion of the notorious compensation of
1861, then this kind of “compulsory alienation” will be a
landlord reform beneficial to the landlords and ruinous to the

      peasants.[3]


The liberals, the Cadets, in raising the question of compulsory
alienation, manoeuvred between the landlords and the peasants,
between the Black Hundreds and the democrats. In 1906, they addressed
themselves to the democrats, trying to make their “compulsory alienation”
pass for something democratic. In 1908, they addressed themselves to the
diehards in the Third Duma, arguing that one should see “what this
compulsory alienation will amount to and how it is to be effected”.  

Let us listen then to the official spokesman of the Cadet Party.  
 


“Take the Bill of the forty-two members of the First State Duma,” said
A. Y. Berezovsky. “It contained only [exactly, Mr. Berezovsky!] the
recognition of the necessity of alienating first of all those lands which are
not exploited by their owners themselves. Furthermore, the party of
people’s freedom favoured the establishment of local committees which
would have to ascertain at a certain time which lands are or are not subject to
alienation and how much land the peasants require to meet their needs. The
committees were to be constituted in such a manner as to ensure that half of the
members were peasants and the other half non-peasants.”



Mr. A. Y. Berezovsky omitted a trifle from his statement. Anyone who wishes to
look into the agrarian Bill prepared by Kutler (the Cadet Party’s
recognised authority on the agrarian question) and published in Volume II of the
Cadet publication, The Agrarian Question, will see that, by the terms
of the Bill, the chairmen of the committees were to be appointed by the
government, i.e., they too were to be representatives of the landlords.


But let us assume even that A. Y. Berezovsky expressed the Cadet views more
accurately than Kutler. Let us assume that A. Y. Berezovsky said
everything and that the Cadets actually want committees made up of
equal numbers of peasants and “non-peasants”, without
representatives of the class government. What then? Will anyone dare to assert
that such a Bill is democratic?


Democracy is the rule of the majority. Only universal, direct and equal
elections can be called democratic. Only such committees are democratic as have
been elected by the entire population on the basis of universal
suffrage. This follows from the general, basic, elementary truths of democracy
so indisputably that it even seems strange to have to explain it to the Cadet
gentlemen.


On paper, the Cadets recognise universal suffrage. But in reality, with
regard to one of the most important questions of the Russian emancipation
movement, the agrarian question, they do not recognise universal
suffrage! No subterfuges or reservations remove this fact, which is of prime
importance.


And do not imagine that the Cadets merely depart here from the principle of
universal suffrage, from the principle of democracy. No. They take as a basis a
different principle, the principle of “agreement”
between the old and the new,

    

between the landlord and the peasant, between the Black Hundreds and the
democrats. What the Cadets proclaim is:

half to one side and half to the other.


This is a typical principle of the vacillating liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie. What this bourgeoisie wants is not the abolition of
medieval privileges, but their division between the landlords and the
bourgeoisie. Indeed, how can anyone deny that to grant the
“non-peasants” (i.e., the land lords, to put it bluntly)
equality with the peasants, who make up seven-tenths of the population,
means preserving and reaffirming medieval privileges? What
else did medieval privileges amount to but that the landlord meant as much in
politics as hundreds and thousands of peasants?


From equality of the landlords and the peasants there can be no other
outcome but a division of privileges between the landlords and the
bourgeoisie. That was precisely the case in 1801, when the landlords ceded
one-thousandth of their privileges to the nascent bourgeoisie, while the peas
ant masses were doomed to half a century (1861+50=1911) of the
agony of disfranchisement, humiliation, slow starvation, extortion of taxes,
etc. Besides, it should not be for gotten that in 1861 the landlords, ceding
one-thousandth of their political privileges to the bourgeoisie (the Zemstvo,
urban and judicial reforms, etc.), began themselves to develop economically into
a bourgeoisie by setting up distilleries and sugar refineries, joining the
boards of joint-stock companies, and so on.


We shall see in a moment the final outcome of this “equality” of a
negligible number of landlords and a huge number of peasants, as pointed out by
Mr. A. Y. Berezovsky himself. But first we must stress the great significance of
Berezovsky’s statement that the vaunted committees would have to
“ascertain which lands are or are not subject to
alienation and how much land the peasants require to meet their
needs”.


All the talk about various “norms” of allotment for the peasants,
etc., is nothing but empty words with which, incidentally, our Narodnik
intellectuals, including the most “Left” of them, often lull
themselves and the peasants. The only important question is: will all
the lands be subject to alienation or not? And, in the latter case, who
is to decide “which are not subject”? (I do not speak of
who is to determine

    

the amount of the compensation, for the very idea of compensation for
medieval privileges is a liberal-bourgeois principle, one that is
radically, at bottom, absolutely un-democratic and anti-democratic).  

All the clauses of the Cadets’ land Bills—clauses which have been
drafted in detail and bureaucratically polished—are a useless
bureaucratic undertaking. The only important question is: who is
to determine which lands are to be alienated and on what
terms? The most ideal Bill is no more than chicanery if it evades this
question.  

But how does Mr. Berezovsky decide this sole important question? For
it, should be clear that, given equality of the peasants and
“non-peasants”, there will be no agreement in most cases, nor, indeed, is
it necessary to draft Bills for an amicable settlement between the
serf-owners and the serfs of yesterday. The serf-owners are always
agreeable to an “amicable settlement” with them, even without
any laws.  

And Mr. Berezovsky gave a clear answer to the burning question, in
speaking to the Third Duma diehards. Listen to what he said next: 


   “In view of this, that general concrete work on the spot would, of
   course, bring to light both the amount of land ‘available’ [listen
   to this!]  for alienation and the amount of land required for the peas ants
   [required for what? Would it be for performing services? But that is
   something the serf-owners have always agreed to! I, and finally, the
   peasants themselves would see to what extent it was possible to meet their
   fair [ahem! God save us from lordly anger, lordly love and the landlord’s
   “fairness”] demands. Then it would all go through the Duma and [mark this
   well!] the Council of State and, after being recast [ahem!], would be
   sanctioned in final form [i.e., made law]. This methodical work [it
   certainly could not be more “methodical”!] would no doubt result in
   really meeting the true needs of the population and thereby in pacifying
   and preserving the cultural farms, which the party of people’s freedom
   has never wanted to demolish unless strictly necessary.”
   


This was said by a spokesman of the “party of people’s freedom”,
which it would be fair to call the party of landlord pacification.  

It is perfectly clear from this that the “compulsory alienation”
proposed by the Cadets implies compulsion of the peasants by the
landlords. Whoever sets out to deny this must prove that in the
Council of State the peasants predominate

    

over the landlords! “Equality” of the landlords and the peasants to begin
with, and in the end—unless an amicable settlement is reached—a
“recasting” of the draft by the Council of State.  

“The party of people’s freedom has never wanted to demolish the
cultural farms unless strictly necessary,” said the landlord
A. Y. Berezovsky, who probably considers his farm “cultural”. But we will
ask: who is to decide whose farm is “cultural” and in
what sense, and where does “strict necessity” begin?  Answer: this will
be decided, first by a committee made up of equal numbers of
landlords and peasants, and then by the Council of State.  

Well then? Are the Cadets a democratic party or a counter revolutionary
party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie? Are they a party of “people’s
freedom” or of landlord pacification?  

Russia’s bourgeois democrats, i.e., the Trudoviks and Narodniks of all
shades, have grievously erred in expecting the transfer of the landed
estates to the peasants to bring about “equalisation”, the spread of
“labour principles”, and so on; they have also erred by obscuring, with
empty talk about various “standards” of landownership, the question
whether there is to be medieval land tenure or not, but these democrats
have helped the new to force out the old and have not drafted Bills to
enable the old to retain a number of privileges.  

Really, to deny that the Cadets are not a democratic party but a party
of the counter-revolutionary, liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, means simply
flying in the face of well-known facts.  


In conclusion we shall briefly examine a question which might well be
asked by certain naïve Cadets. If the “compulsory alienation”
suggested by the Cadets implied compulsion of the peasants by the
landlords, why did the majority of the landlords reject it?  

This question was answered unintentionally by Mr. Milyukov, in his
speech in the Third Duma on October 31, 1908, when he spoke as a
historian. Milyukov the historian had to admit that until the
end of 1905 both the government and the landlords had regarded the
peasantry as a conservative
    

force. At the Peterhof meeting on July 19–26, 1905—that meeting
paved the way for the Bulygin

Duma[6]—A. A. Bobrinsky, Naryshkin and other pillars of the future
Council of the United Nobility were in favour of giving the peasants a
predominant position in the Duma. At that time Witte held that the
mainstay of the autocracy should be (and could be) the “peasant
democrats”, not the nobility or the

     bourgeoisie.[4]



   “Gentlemen,” said Mr. Milyukov, “this is an
   interesting moment because it is at this moment that the government has
   conceived the idea of compulsory alienation. (Voices: “It’s
   Kutler’s idea.”) Yes, Kutler’s, gentlemen.... Kutler is drafting a
   Bill on compulsory alienation....  

   “He has been working on it, gentlemen; his work
   continued for a month or two—I cannot say exactly—until the
   end of 1905. It went on unhampered until the well-known Moscow events
   took place, after which there was a noticeable change in sentiment.”  


On January 4, 1906, the Marshals of the Nobility met in congress. The
congress rejected Kutler’s draft, which it knew from hearsay and private
reports. It adopted an agrarian programme of its own (the future
“Stolypin” programme). In February 1906 Minister Kutler resigned. On
March 30, 1906, the Witte Cabinet (with its “peasant” programme) was
succeeded by the Gurko-Goremykin Cabinet (with its “Stolypin” programme,
a programme of the nobility and the bourgeoisie).  

These are the facts which Milyukov the historian had to admit.


The inference from them is obvious. The “Cadet” Bill on compulsory
alienation was a Bill prepared by Kutler, Minister in the Witte
Cabinet, who dreamed of an autocracy supported by the peasantry! When the
peasants’ democratic movement was on the rise, attempts were made to bribe
the movement, to corrupt it, to deceive it with a Bill for “peaceful”,
“compulsory alienation”, a “second emancipation”, a Bill for a
bureaucratic “compulsion of the peasants by the landlords”.  
 

This is what the facts of history tell us. The Cadets’ agrarian Bill is
a Witte Minister’s plan for “playing” at peasant Caesarism.  

The peasant democrats did not live up to expectations. They
showed—probably more clearly in the First Duma than in 1905—that since
1861 they had become politically conscious. With a peasantry
such as this, the Kutler-Cadet Bill became an absurdity: the
peasants, far from letting themselves be hoodwinked in the old fashion,
would have used even the Cadets’ local land committees to organise a new
onslaught.  

On January 4, 1906, the Marshals of the Nobility correctly decided that
the Bill prepared by the liberal landlords (Kutler and Co.) was a hopeless
affair, and cast it aside. The civil war had outgrown
liberal-bureaucratic scheme-making. The class struggle had dispelled the
vision of “social peace” and raised the issue squarely: “either the
Stolypin way or the Trudovik way”.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See p. 246 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
Both Pravda and Rech were mistaken in speaking of
Berezovsky the Second. The Cadet is Berezovsky the First,
Alexander Yeleazarovich, a Simbirsk landlord.  —Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 414–47.—Ed.  

[4]
See Report of the People’s Freedom Group on the Second Session
of the Third Duma (St. Petersburg, 1909), p. 43. It is unfortunate—very
unfortunate—that the Cadets did not publish Berezovsky’s speech.
—Lenin
 



[5]
Rossiya (Russia)—a reactionary, Black-Hundred daily
published in St. Petersburg from 1905 to 1914. From 1906 it was the
official organ of the Ministry of the Interior.





[6]
The Bulygin Duma—an advisory “representative institution”
which the tsarist government promised to convene in 1905. The Bill to
establish an advisory Duma, and the Regulations on elections to the Duma
were drafted by a commission under Bulygin, Minister of the Interior, and
made public on August 6 (19), 1905. The Bolsheviks proclaimed and carried
out an active boycott of the Bulygin Duma. The government was unable to
convene it, and the October general political strike swept it out of
existence.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Poor Defence









Lenin: A Poor Defence







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Poor Defence




Published:
Pravda No. 96, August 21, 1912.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 288-289.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In “The Strike Movement and Wages”, an article published
in Pravda No. 86 on

      August 9,[1]

we cited official statistical data on the average wages of Russian factory
workers in the first decade of the twentieth century.  

It appeared that by their famous strike movement in 1905 the workers
had raised their wages from 206 rubles (the annual average per worker) to
238 rubles, i.e., by 32 rubles, or 15.5 per cent.  

Our conclusion did not please the official newspaper
Rossiya. It devoted the leading article in its August 15 issue to
a detailed restatement of the data cited by us (withholding for some reason
the name of the newspaper from which it had borrowed the data), and tried
to refute our conclusions.  

“It is true, of course, that wages rose abruptly in 1908,” wrote
Rossiya. “But it is just as true that the prices of all
commodities and food rose simultaneously with them....” And
Rossiya went on to present its calculations, according to which
wages have risen by 20 per cent, while the cost of living has gone up by 24
per cent. Rossiya’s calculations are inaccurate in every
respect. In reality the rise in wages is not so large, while the rise in
the cost of living is more considerable.  

But we shall not now correct the mistakes of Rossiya. Let us
take its figures.  


   “They do not at all suggest that, the workers have
   gained anything,” wrote Rossiya. “Indeed, judging by their
   frequent complaints of hard times, one could rather draw the reverse
   conclusion, namely, that they have scarcely gained anything.”  

 

A strange way to reason, isn’t it? If wages have risen to a lesser
extent than prices of the prime necessities of life, it is necessary to
raise wages to a still greater extent! Surely this is obvious.


But how can the workers achieve a rise in wages without an economic
struggle and without strikes? Has Rossiya ever seen capitalists
offer the workers a pay rise of their own accord, in view of the
rising prices of the prime necessities of life?  

Rossiya admits that wages rose abruptly in 1908—thanks to a
widespread mass strike movement unprecedented in the world for
tenacity. But food prices began to climb before 1905. The price of
bread, for example, has never dropped in Russia since 1903 but has
only risen. The prices of live stock products have never dropped since 1901
but have only risen.  

It follows that solely by their strike movement did the workers ensure
that wages, too, began to rise following the rise in the prices of
bread and other foodstuffs. Since the wage rise is inadequate, as is
admitted even by Rossiya, it is necessary to raise wages
further.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 258–59 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Liquidators and “Unity”









Lenin: The Liquidators and 'Unity'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Liquidators and “Unity”[2]




Published:
Pravda No. 99, August 24, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 290-291.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The seventh issue of Nevsky Golos, which appeared
a few days ago, can only be described as hysterical. Instead of a labour
chronicle, nearly two pages of it contain choice abuse against
Pravda and Nevskaya Zvezda. Curiously enough, this abuse
is offered under the slogan of “unity” of the working class, of “unity”
in the election campaign.  

Gentlemen—we shall reply to the liquidators—unity of the working
class is a great principle. But, really, you make yourselves ridiculous if,
while shouting about “unity”, you try to impose on the working class the
platform and the candidates of a group of liberal liquidationist
intellectuals.  

Pravda has proved by means of accurate figures that
“liquidationism is nothing in the working-class movement, and that it is
strong only among the liberal intelligentsia” (Pravda No. 80,
August 1,

 1912[1]

).

Nevsky Golos No. 7, of August 17, now reviles those articles of
Pravda, calling them “feuilleton-like”, “Khlestakovian”, and
so on. And yet it does not even try to question the simple fact that in the
course of six months Pravda drew 504 contributions from
groups of workers, while the liquidationist papers drew only 15.


What is the conclusion to be drawn from this but that all the shouting
and noise and abuse and clamour about unity are merely intended to cover up
the extreme and total impotence of the liquidators within the working
class?  

No matter how much Nevsky Golos may abuse us, we shall calmly
point out the incontrovertible facts to the workers. Look at the
collections listed in Nevsky Golos No. 7, and at those made in
July and August “to replenish the funds

    

of the newspaper” (i.e., in plain language, to restore the liquidationist
paper suspended for lack of support from the mass of the workers). The
report on those collections lists 52 contributions totalling 827.11
rubles. Of these, only two were group collections: one by “the Moscow
initiating group”, amounting to 35 rubles, and the other by a
“group of friends in Paris”—8.54 rubles. Of the remaining 50
individual contributions, 35 added up to 708 rubles, i.e., over 20
rubles per contribution on the average.  

Nevsky Golos may fume and abuse—the facts will be no less
true for that. It is common knowledge that the “initiating groups” are
groups of liquidators who have broken away from the working-class
party. Even Plekhanov admitted this openly and plainly as long ago as
April 1912.  

A group of break-away liquidators has resumed—with the donations of
bourgeois liberal intellectuals—the publication of its newspaper to fight
the working-class press! And yet this group is shouting about
“unity”. Now how can anyone help laughing at that?  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 196–200 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Pravda appended to the article “The Liquidators and
‘Unity’\thinspace” a critical survey of the charges made against the
newspaper by the liquidators. This section of the article was written by
M.S. Olminsky.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Talk on “Cadet-Eating”









Lenin: A Talk on 'Cadet-Eating'







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Talk on “Cadet-Eating”




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 23, August 26, 1912.

      Signed: K.S.—y.

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 292-298.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Pravda and Nevskaya Zvezda have
administered a stern but well-deserved rebuttal to Messrs. Blank, Korobka,
Kuskova and Co. for their foul liberal attacks against the working-class
press.  

Nevertheless, however good the answers given to “the gentlemen
boycotting the workers” may have been, there is still a most important
question of principle to be examined. The Blanks and Kuskovas sought by
their crude lies to hush it up, to obscure it. But we must not allow
questions of principle to be obscured; we must reveal their full
significance, bringing to light the roots of the differences, which are of
interest to every class-conscious worker, from beneath the heap of
Blank-Kuskova distortions, calumnies and abuse.  

One of these roots may be described by the term “Cadet
eating”. Listen to the solitary but persistent voices of the liquidators,
to the remarks of people whose party views are somewhat indefinite, and you
will often encounter, if not an accusation against Pravda and
Nevskaya Zvezda, at least head-shaking on account of their
“Cadet-eating”.  

Let us, therefore, examine the question of “Cadet-eating”, which is a
question of principle.  

There are two circumstances which explain first of all, and most of
all, the occurrence of such an accusation against Pravda:
(1) failure to understand the essence of the question of “two and three
camps” in the election campaign and in present-day politics in general;
(2) lack of consideration for the special conditions in which the Marxist
press—the newspapers of the worker democrats—has now been placed.  

Let us begin with the first question.  
 

All the liberals adhere to the theory of two camps: for a
constitution and against a constitution. They are all agreed on
this, from Milyukov to Izgoyev, and from Prokopovich to
M. M. Kovalevsky. Nor must we forget that the theory of two camps
necessarily follows from the class nature of our liberals.  

What is this nature from the economic point of view? It is the fact
that the liberals are a party of the bourgeoisie, which is afraid of the
movement of the peasant masses, and still more of the workers’ movement,
for this movement is capable of limiting (at present, in the
immediate future, without changing the capitalist system as a whole) the
extent and forms of the bourgeoisie’s economic privileges. And the
economic privilege of the bourgeoisie is ownership of capital, an ownership
which in Russia yields twice or three times as much profit as in Europe.


To uphold this “Russian” superprofit, it is necessary to prevent the
third camp from gaining independence.  

For example, the bourgeoisie can rule quite well even if the working
day is eight hours. In fact, its rule will then be fuller, purer, wider and
freer than with a ten- or eleven-hour day. But the dialectics of the class
struggle are such that, unless there is an extreme need, unless it is the
last remedy, the bourgeoisie will never replace the tranquil, habitual,
profitable (from an

Oblomov[4] point of view) ten-hour day by an eight-hour one.  

What we have said about an eight-hour day applies to the upper chamber,
to landlordism and many other things.  

The bourgeoisie will not relinquish the tranquil, convenient,
profitable, old-Russian forms of exploitation to replace them only
by European, only by democratic forms (for democracy, let it be
said without offence to the ardent heroes of Zavety, is
also a form of bourgeois rule); it will not do so, we say, unless
there is an extreme need, and unless it is the last remedy.  

This need can arise only from the movement of the masses achieving a
certain system and strength. And the bourgeoisie, which upholds its
economic interests, is fighting against this movement, that is to
say, against the independence of the third camp.  
 

What is the class nature of liberalism from the political point of
view? It is fear of the movement of these same social elements, for that
movement is capable of undermining political privileges which the
bourgeoisie values. Liberalism dreads democracy more than reaction. This
was proved in 1905, 1906 and 1907.  

To retain any part of the political privileges, it is
necessary to prevent the independence of the third camp, to keep
all opposition in none but the position expressed by the
formula “for or against a constitution”.  

This formula expresses an exclusively constitutional
position. It does not go beyond constitutional reforms. The
essence of this formula was excellently and accurately expressed by
Mr. Gredeskul—who inadvertently blurted out more than he had meant
to—in those statements of his which Rech repeated without a
single reservation and which Pravda reproduced not long

 ago.[1]


The essence of this formula is quite in the spirit of Vekhi,
for Vekhi wants nothing better and has, in fact, never preached
anything else. Vekhi is not at all against a constitution or
constitutional reforms. It is “only” against the democrats, with
their criticism of any sort of constitutional illusions.  

The Russian liberals have proved to be sufficiently “adroit”
politicians to call themselves “democratic” with a view to fighting the
democrats and suppressing the latter’s independence. Such is the usual and
normal method used by every liberal bourgeoisie in all capitalist
countries: deceiving the masses with a democratic façade in order to
deflect them from a truly democratic theory and truly democratic
practice.  

But the experience of all countries, including Russia, has shown beyond
question that only such practice is capable of ensuring real progress,
whereas liberalism inevitably dooms itself to impotence by its fear of
democracy, and its Vekhi-Gredeskul theories: the impotence of Russian
liberalism in 1861–1904, and of German liberalism in 1849–1912.  

The third camp, that of democracy, which understands the narrowness of
liberalism and is free from its half-heartedness

    

and flabbiness, from its vacillation and timid back ward looks, cannot take
shape, cannot exist, without systematic, undeviating, day-by-day criticism
of liberalism.  

Those who scornfully or with ill-will dub this criticism
“Cadet-eating” are thereby advocating precisely liberal
views—deliberately or unwittingly. For, in practice, all
criticism of Cadetism is thereby, by its very presentation of
questions, a criticism of reaction, of the Rights. Our polemic against the
liberals, said Nevskaya Zvezda

       (No. 12)[2]

very justly, “is more profound and richer in content than the
fight against the

      Rights”.[3]


In reality there is hardly one Marxist newspaper for every hundred
liberal papers in Russia, so that it is simply ridiculous to talk about our
“exaggerated” criticism of the Cadets: we are not yet doing even
one-hundredth of what is necessary in order that the sentiment of “general
opposition” prevailing in society and among the people may be replaced by
an anti-liberal, definitely and consciously democratic sentiment.  

Without such a “replacement”, nothing sensible and useful has ever
come about, or will come about in Russia.  

Accusations of “Cadet-eating”, or scornful smiles at “Cadet
eating”, are no more than a falcon de parler, a way of advocating
liberal views, or the views of a liberal labour policy when there is a
discussion before or about workers.  

From the standpoint of liquidationism that is at all consistent and
thought out, accusations of “Cadet-eating” are understandable and
necessary. They express the essence of liquidationism.  
 

Look at the liquidationist views as a whole—at their inner logic, at
their interconnection and the interdependence of the various theses:
“freedom of association” is a constitutional reform; economic strikes are
supplemented with a “political revival”, no more; a far-reaching
election platform is declared to be “lunacy”; the task is formulated as
one of fighting for the open existence of the Party, i.e., is also
formulated as a constitutional reform; the regime in Russia is declared to
be bourgeois already (Larin); the commercial and industrial
bourgeoisie is declared to be already a ruling class; the workers are told
that it is “sufficient” to seize on the contradiction between absolutism
and constitutionalism (Martov).  

Taken as a whole, this is reformism, it is the system of views
of a liberal labour policy. It makes no difference at all that some Ivan or
Pyotr, in defending these views (some part or other of them, for
liquidationism is going through a “process of growth of growing tasks”),
himself thinks he is a Marxist.  

The point at issue is not their good intentions (of those who have
any), but the objective significance of their policy, i.e., what its
results are, cui prodest—whom it benefits, to whose mill it
actually brings grist.  

This is defence of the workers’ interests on the basis
provided by the “struggle” (or is it bickering?) between the
liberals and the Rights; it is not a struggle for a
democratic, anti-liberal basis of sapping the strength of the
Rights. The liquidators are supporters of the workers, there is no doubt of
that. But they understand the interests of the workers in such a
way that they uphold these interests within the frame work of
the 
Russia which the liberals promise to build, not of the Russia which the
democrats were building yesterday, and will be building tomorrow
(and which they are invisibly building even today), in spite of
the liberals.  

That is the crux of the matter. So far there is no new Russia. It has
yet to be built. Should the workers build themselves a nest of a “class”
(in effect a craft) nature in the Russia of the kind which the Milyukovs
are building in common with the Purishkeviches, or should the workers
themselves, in their own way, build a new Russia entirely without
the Purishkeviches and in spite of the Milyukovs?  
 

That new Russia will in any case be bourgeois, but there is quite a big
difference between the bourgeois (agrarian and non-agrarian) policy of
Stolypin and the bourgeois policy of Sun Yat-sen.  

The chief feature of the present epoch in Russia is determination of
the size of that difference.  

“In spite of the Milyukovs”, we said. It is this “in spite of” that
is “Cadet-eating”. That is why, being unafraid of words, we remain, and
shall remain, “Cadet-eaters” as a matter of principle,
without forgetting for one moment the special tasks of the working class,
both against Milyukov and against Sun Yat-sen.  

The accusation of “Cadet-eating” is merely a longing (whether
conscious or unconscious, makes no difference) to see the workers, in
building a new Russia, trail after the Milyukovs and not show the way to
our own little Sun Yat-sens in spite of the Milyukovs.  

It remains for us to say a few words about a second circumstance, which
those who talk about “Cadet-eating” overlook.  

It is said: why cannot we develop our views constructively?
Why engage in excessive polemics? Those who say that argue, as it
were, in the following way: we are not against a special line entirely
different from the Cadet line, nor are we against three camps; we are only
against the “substitution of polemics for politics”, to use the biting
phrase of a friend of the liquidators.  

It is easy to answer those who talk like that: in the first place, one
cannot develop new views other than through polemics (and Marxist views are
new, both as regards the time of their emergence and the extent to which
they have spread, in comparison with liberal views). Secondly, the arena in
which Nevskaya Zvezda and Pravda are operating, is an
arena of purely theoretical Marxist propaganda. It would be wrong
to regard this arena as something more:

it is only a theoretical ABC, a theoretical first step, an
indication of the direction of the work, but not yet the work itself.  

In this arena, Marxists cannot present their practical conclusions in a
constructive” form, for “reasons beyond our control”. It would therefore
be a liquidationist error to

    

exaggerate the importance of this arena. The most that can be done here is
to indicate the direction, and that only in the form of a
criticism of the Cadets.  

Novoye Vremya and

Zemshchina[5] in teasing the Cadets, draw a picture
of the Cadets being eaten, and that is all. Rech, for
obvious reasons, pretends to accept this “interpretation”. The
Korobkas and Kuskovas make the same pretence—some from sheer stupidity,
and others from sheer “pro-Cadet flunkeyism”.  

But every politically literate person sees very well that Marxist
“Cadet-eating”, on absolutely every point of its criticism of
the Cadets, indicates the direction of a different
“opposition”, if I may use this unsuitable term.  

When “eating” a Cadet because of Karaulov’s “pious” speeches, a
Marxist is not in a position to develop his point of view
constructively. But any literate person understands that democracy cannot
remain true to the name if it is pious.  

When “eating” a Cadet because of Gredeskul’s speeches, a Marxist is
not in a position to develop his point of view constructively. But any
literate person realises that democracy cannot remain true to the name if
it shares Gredeskul’s views.  

When a Marxist—but we should never finish if we under took to list in
this manner all the questions and points of our “Cadet-eating”. The two
examples are enough to make our thesis on the second circumstance
perfectly clear: accusations of Cadet-eating are a form of expressing
the philistine, harmful, bad prejudice that a certain arena is an adequate
arena.  

We shall remain “Cadet-eaters”, incidentally with the very aim of
combating that harmful prejudice.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 254–55 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 124–26 of this volume.—Ed.  

[3]
Rech objects to this, saying: if that is so, why do the Rights
sympathetically quote Pravda against Rech? Rech
makes an overstatement here: if the Rights were to give Pravda
more freedom than to Rech, it would be a forcible
argument against the Social-Democrats. But everyone knows that the reverse
is the case. Our press has a hundred times less freedom than Rech;
it is a thousand times less firmly established and enjoys 10,000 times less
“constitutional” protection. Any literate person realises that
Rossiya and Novoye Vremya are teasing
Rech with Pravda and that, moreover, they are strangling
Pravda while merely grumbling at or chiding Rech. These
are two entirely different things.  —Lenin
 



[4]
Oblomov—the chief character in Ivan Goncharov’s novel of
that name. He was a personification of routine, stagnation and inertia.





[5]
Zemshchhina (Land Affairs)—a Black-Hundred daily
news a or, the organ of the Right-wing members of the Duma, published in
St. Petersburg from 1909 to 1917.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Workers and Pravda









Lenin: The Workers and Pravda







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Workers and Pravda




Published:
Pravda No. 103, August 29, 1912.

      Signed: St.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 299-301.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Pravda has already summed up some of the results of
its six months’ work.  

These results showed first of all and above all that only
through the efforts of the workers themselves, only through the
tremendous upsurge of their enthusiasm, their resolve and stubbornness in
the struggle, and only after the April–May movement, was it
possible for the St. Petersburg workers’ newspaper, Pravda, to
appear.  

In its summing up, Pravda confined itself for a start to the
data on group donations made by workers to their daily newspaper. These
data reveal to us only a small part of the workers’ support; they
do not tell us about the much more valuable and difficult direct
support—moral support, sup port through personal participation, support
for the policy of the newspaper, support through contributing materials,
discussing and circulating the paper, etc.  

But even the limited data at the disposal of Pravda showed
that a very impressive number of workers’ groups had directly
linked themselves with it. Let us cast a general glance at the results.



Number of contributions to Pravda made by groups of workers


January 1912 . . .              
14


February . . .                  
18


March . . .                     
76


April . . .                     
227


May . . .                       
135


June . . .                      
34


July  . . .                     
26


August (up to 19th) 1912 . . .  
21


Total  . . .                  
551



 

Altogether five hundred and fifty-one groups of workers
supported Pravda by their donations.  

It would be interesting to sum up the results of a whole number of
other collections and donations by workers. We have constantly seen in
Pravda reports on contributions in support of various strikes. We
have also seen reports on collections for the victims of repressions, for
the Lena goldfields victims, for individual Pravda editors,
collections for the election campaign, for relief of the famine-stricken,
and so on and so forth.  

The varied nature of these collections makes it much more difficult to
assess the results here, and we are not yet in a position to say whether a
statistical summary can give a satisfactory picture of the matter. But it
is obvious in any case that these varied collections take up a very
substantial part of the workers’ life.  

As they look through the reports on workers’ collections in
connection with letters from factory and office workers in all parts
of Russia, Pravda readers, most of whom are dispersed and
separated from one another by the severe external conditions of Russian
life, gain some idea how the proletarians of various trades and
various localities are fighting, how they are awakening to the defence of
working-class democracy.  

The chronicle of workers’ life is only just beginning to
develop into a permanent feature of Pravda. There can be no doubt
that subsequently, in addition to letters about abuses in factories, about
the awakening of a new section of the proletariat, about collections for
one or another field of the workers’ cause, the workers’ newspaper will
receive reports about the views and sentiments of the workers, election
campaigns, the election of workers’ delegates, what the workers read, the
questions of particular interest to them, and so on.  

The workers’ newspaper is a workers’ forum. Before the whole of Russia
the workers should raise here, one after another, the various questions of
workers’ life in general and of working-class democracy in particular. The
workers of St. Petersburg have made a beginning. It is to their energy that
the proletariat of Russia owes the workers’ first daily newspaper after the
grim years of social stagnation. Let us,

    

then, carry their cause forward, unitedly supporting and developing the
workers’ paper of the capital, the harbinger of the spring to come, when
the whole of Russia will be covered by a network of workers’ organisations
with workers’ newspapers.  

We, the workers, have yet to build this Russia, and
we shall build it.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Before and Now









Lenin: Before and Now







V. I.  

      Lenin
Before and Now




Published:
Pravda No. 104, August 30, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 302-303.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Eighteen years ago, in 1894, the working-class movement in
St. Petersburg was just being born in its modern, mass form illumined by
the light of the Marxist teaching.  

The seventies had affected a quite insignificant top section of the
working class. The foremost representatives of the working class revealed
themselves even then as great leaders of the workers’ democratic movement,
but the masses were still slumbering. Only in the early nineties did
they begin to awaken, and at the same time there began a new and
more glorious period in the history of the entire democratic movement in
Russia.  

Unfortunately, we must confine ourselves here, in our small parallel,
to one aspect of one manifestation of the working-class movement, namely,
the economic struggle and economic “exposures”.  

At that time, in 1894, a very few circles of the foremost workers were
heatedly discussing plans for organising factory exposures. A weighty
statement by the workers them selves, addressed to their fellow-workers and
pointing out the more glaring abuses of power by capital, was an
exceedingly rare occurrence at the time. Speaking of such things publicly
was out of the question.  

But the awakening mass of the workers was able to take up the factory
exposures addressed to it, despite all difficulties and in the face of all
obstacles. The strike movement was growing, and the connection
between the economic struggle of the working class and other, higher forms
of struggle was developing irresistibly. The vanguard of Russia’s
democratic movement was awakening, and ten years

    

later it showed itself in its full stature. It is to this force alone that
Russia owes the rupture of the old shell.  

Those who recall the first factory exposures which the advanced workers
of St. Petersburg addressed to the masses in 1894 will find it most
interesting and instructive to compare them with the factory exposures made
by Pravda. This little comparison of one manifestation of the
workers’ struggle clearly shows the growth of its entire scope,
its breadth and depth, its strength, etc.  

At that time there were a mere five or six factory exposures, secretly
circulated by workers in several dozen copies.  

Today there are tens of thousands of copies of the daily
Pravda, each making several exposures relating to the most diverse
fields of labour.  

At that time there were a mere five or six so-called “circles”, which
discussed—in secret, of course—the state of affairs in the factories,
with some Marxist intellectual or other participating, and decided on the
subject of the points to be “published”.  

Today there are hundreds and thousands of workers’ groups springing up
spontaneously, discussing their vital needs and taking their letters, their
exposures, their appeals for resistance and unity, to Pravda of
their own accord.  

In a matter of eighteen years, the workers have advanced from the first
signs of activity, from a most timid beginning, to a movement that is a
mass movement in the most exact sense of the term.  

We must unfortunately limit ourselves only to parallels of
factory exposures. But they, too, show the great path travelled, and the
goal to which this path leads.  

Eighteen years are a short span in the history of a whole class which
is destined to accomplish the greatest task in the world—the emancipation
of mankind.  

The greater part of this path has been travelled in the dark. But now
the road has been reached. Forward with courage and determination!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The International Congress of Judges









Lenin: The International Congress of Judges







V. I.  

      Lenin
The International Congress of Judges




Published:
Pravda No. 104, August 30, 1912.

      Signed: I. V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 304-306.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The First World Congress of Judges is now in session in
Vienna, and so is the Thirty-First Congress of German Lawyers.  

The speeches of the high-ranking delegates are dominated by an
extremely reactionary spirit. The bourgeois lawyers and judges have
launched a campaign against the participation of the people in legal
procedure.  

Two principal forms of such participation are customary in the modern
states:
(1) the jury, which decides only the question of culpability, while the
punishment to be meted out is determined and the procedure directed only by
judges of the crown;
(2) the court of assessors, who, like our own “social-estate
representatives”, participate in the decision of all questions on
a par with the judges of the crown.  

And so, the “enlightened” judges of constitutional states are
fulminating against all participation of people’s representatives in legal
procedure. One of the delegates, Elsner, inveighing against the jury and
the court of assessors, which he said led to “anarchy in the application
of laws”, defended instead the principle of the irremovability of
judges.  

We shall remark in this connection that a liberal demand is being put
forward here instead of a democratic one and as a disguise for a complete
departure from democracy. The participation of people’s representatives in
a court of justice is undoubtedly a democratic principle. The consistent
application of this principle requires, in the first place, that the
election of jurors should not be made conditional on
qualifications, i.e., the right to be chosen should not be
restricted by educational, property, residential or any other conditions.

 

At present, because of the exclusion of workers, most of the jurors are
often particularly reactionary petty bourgeois. This evil should be
remedied by developing democracy to its consistent and integral form, and
not by basely repudiating democracy. It is well known that the election of
judges by the people is recognised in all civilised countries as the second
condition for consistent democracy in the judicial system.  

The irremovability of judges, however, which the liberal bourgeois in
general and those of Russia in particular make so much of, is no more than
a division of medieval privileges between the Purishkeviches and
the Milyukovs, between the feudal lords and the bourgeoisie. In
reality it is impossible fully to put irremovability into
practice, and indeed, it is absurd to defend it with regard to unfit,
careless, bad judges. In the Middle Ages, judges were appointed exclusively
by feudal lords and absolute monarchs. The bourgeoisie, which has now
obtained ample access to the judiciary, is defending itself
against the feudal lords by means of the “principle of irremovability”
(for most of the appointed judges will necessarily be—since most of the
“educated” lawyers belong to the bourgeoisie—people of bourgeois
origin). By defending itself in this way against the feudal lords,
the bourgeoisie at the same time defends itself against the
democrats by upholding the principle of the appointment of judges.


It is interesting to note, furthermore, the following passages in a
speech by Dr. Ginsberg, a judge from Dresden. He enlarged on class
justice, i.e., on the manifestations of class oppression and the class
struggle in modern legal procedure.  


   “Anyone who imagines that the participation of people’s
   representatives in legal proceedings removes class justice is sorely
   mistaken,” exclaimed Dr. Ginsberg.  


Quite so, Your Honour! Democracy in general does not remove the class
struggle but merely makes it more conscious, freer and more open. But this
is no argument against democracy. It is an argument in favour of its
consistent development all the way through.  
 


   “Class justice no doubt exists in reality,” continued
   the judge from Saxony (and Saxon judges have made a name for themselves in
   Germany by their ferocious sentences against workers), “but not at all in
   the Social-Democratic sense, not in the sense of preference given to the
   rich as against the poor. On the contrary, class justice exists precisely
   in the reverse sense. Once I had the following case. There were three of us
   judging—two assessors and myself. One of them was an overt
   Social-Democrat and the other something of the sort. The defendant was a
   striker who had thrashed a blackleg [‘a worker willing to work’—to quote
   the exact words used by the Saxon judge], seized him by the throat and
   shouted: ‘We’ve got you at last, you damned scoundrel!’  

   “Normally this entails from four to six months
   imprisonment, which is the least punishment that should be meted out for
   deeds as savage as that. And yet I had the greatest difficulty in
   preventing the acquittal of the defendant. One assessor, the
   Social-Democrat, said that I didn’t understand the psychology of the
   workers. But I told him that I understood very well the psychology of the
   beaten man.”  


The German papers which carried the text of Judge Ginsberg’s speech
inserted “Laughter” at the end of the above passage. The lawyers
and judges laughed. To tell the truth, had we chanced to hear that Saxon
judge, we, too, should have burst out laughing.  

The doctrine of the class struggle is something against which one can
conceivably make an effort to argue in terms of (would-be) science. But one
has only to approach the matter from a practical standpoint, to look
closely at every day realities, and behold! the most violent opponent of
this doctrine can prove to be as gifted an advocate of the class struggle
as the Saxon judge, Herr Ginsberg.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Switzerland (August 31, 1912)









Lenin: In Switzerland (August 31, 1912)







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Switzerland (August 31, 1912)




Published:
Pravda No. 105, August 31, 1912.

      Signed: P. P..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 307-309.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Pravda No. 63, on

       July 12,[1]

we told the reader about the general strike in Zurich on June 29 (July 12,
new style). It may be recalled that the strike was decided in defiance
of the leaders of political organisations. The meeting of 425
representatives of all the workers’ organisations of Zurich, which declared
for the strike, greeted the statement of the printers, who were against the
strike, with shouts of

“Shame!” 


By now the press has published data exposing that opportunism.  

It appears that the political leaders of the Swiss workers in their
opportunism have gone so far as direct betrayal of the Party. It
is this scathing but justified phrase that the best organs of the Swiss and
German working-class press use in describing the conduct of the
Social-Democratic members of the Zurich Magistracy (Town Council). The
Zurich Town Council, defending the capitalists, prohibited strike
picketing (and then the workers decided to protest by a one-day general
strike).  

There are nine members on the Zurich Magistracy, including four
Social-Democrats—Erismann, Pfl¨ger, Fogelsanger and Kl\"oti.  

And now it has become known that the prohibition of picketing was
decided on by the Town Council unanimously, that is to say,
Erismann and his three Social-Democratic colleagues voted for
it!!! The Zurich Cantonal Government

    

had insisted that the Town Council should prohibit all picketing,
but the four sapient

minnows,[2] that is, Zurich Social-Democrats, made a
“compromise” proposal to prohibit picketing only in the area of
the two mechanical shops where work had been stopped.  

Of course, it was just this partial prohibition of picketing that the
bourgeoisie was demanding, and the “Social-Democrats’” (?!)
proposal was adopted by the bourgeois majority of the Town Council!  

What is more, the Zurich Town Council recently published an account of
the events occasioned by the general strike. The capitalists declared a
three-day lock-out by way of revenge. The Zurich Town Council decided
unanimously, with all its four Social-Democratic members
participating, that it was necessary to call in troops to
reinforce the police in maintaining public order.  

Nor is that all. The bourgeois Town Council of Zurich furiously
attacked, by a series of repressive measures, those manual and office
workers in the town’s establishments who had joined in the strike. It
sacked 13 workers and imposed disciplinary punishments (demotion, pay cuts)
on another 116. These decisions of the Town Council were likewise adopted
unanimously, with Erismann and his two colleagues participating.


The conduct of Erismann and Co. can only be described as betrayal of
the Party.  

It is not surprising that the anarcho-syndicalists enjoy a certain
success in Switzerland, since it falls to them to criticise before the
workers a socialist party which tolerates such opportunist traitors in its
ranks. The reason why the treachery of Erismann and Co. is of major
international significance is that it shows us clearly from what
quarter and in what manner the working-class movement is
threatened with internal corruption.  

Erismann and Co. are by no means common deserters to the enemy camp;
they are simply peaceful petty bourgeois, opportunists who are accustomed
to parliamentary “vermicelli” and who have succumbed to constitutional
democratic illusions. The moment the class struggle took a sharp turn, all
illusions about constitutional “order” and a “democratic republic” were
dispelled at once, and our philistines holding

    

the office of Social-Democratic members of the Town Council lost their
heads and slid into the marsh.  

Class-conscious workers can see from this sad example the consequences
which the spread of opportunism in a workers’ party is bound to
have.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 160–62 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The sapient minnow personifies the craven philistine in
M. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s fairy-tale of that name.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Priesthood and Politics









Lenin: The Priesthood and Politics







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Priesthood and Politics




Published:
Pravda No. 106, September 1, 1912.

      Signed: I. V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 310-311.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

As is known, the most desperate efforts are being made at
present to arouse the entire priesthood for the elections to the
Fourth Duma and to organise it as a solid Black-Hundred force.  

It is most instructive to see that the whole Russian
bourgeoisie—governmental, Octobrist, and oppositional Cadet alike—with
equal zeal and agitation is exposing and condemning these plans of the
government.  

The Russian merchant and the Russian liberal landlord (or rather the
landlord playing the liberal) fear the strengthening of an irresponsible
government which desires to “cull” for itself the votes of obedient
priests. It goes without saying that the democrats’ opposition (to use a
mild and inexact term) on this point is far more resolute than that of the
liberals.  

We have already pointed out in Pravda the undemocratic
approach to the question of the priesthood by the liberals, who either
frankly defend the arch-reactionary theory of “non-interference” of the
priesthood in politics, or reconcile themselves to this

       theory.[1]


A democrat is absolutely hostile to the slightest
falsification of suffrage and elections, but he is absolutely
in favour of the widest masses of any priesthood being directly
and openly drawn into politics. Non-participation of the priest hood in the
political struggle is the most harmful hypocrisy. In reality the priesthood
has always participated in politics covertly, and the people would
only benefit if it were to pass to overt politics.  
 

Of outstanding interest in this respect is the article published in
Rech a few days ago by Bishop Mikhail, an adherent of the old

rites.[2] That writer’s views are very naïve. He is under the
impression, for example, that “clericalism is unknown [to us] in Russia”,
that prior to the revolution it (the priesthood) concerned itself only with
heavenly matters, and so on.  

But the instructive thing is the actual appraisal of events by this
apparently informed man.  


   “It seems indisputable to me that the triumph of the
   elections will not be a triumph of clericalism,” wrote Bishop
   Mikhail. “United, if artificially, and at the same time, of course,
   offended by this lording it over their votes and their conscience, the
   priesthood will see themselves standing between two forces.\dots Hence the
   need of a radical change, a crisis, a return to a natural alliance with the
   people. If the clerical and reactionary trend ... succeeded in growing
   strong and maturing by itself, this perhaps would not come about. Now that
   the priesthood has been roused from its quiescence while still with
   remnants of its former confusion, it will continue its history. And the
   democracy of the priesthood is the inevitable and closing stage of this
   history, which will be linked to the priesthood’s struggle in its own
   behalf.”  


Actually it should be a question of a distribution between the
contending classes, and not of “a return to a natural alliance”, as the
author na\"ively believes. If the priesthood is drawn into politics, this
distribution will certainly gain in clarity, breadth and political
consciousness.  

As for the fact that informed observers acknowledge the existence,
vitality and force of the “remnants of the former confusion” even in such
a social stratum of Russia as the priesthood, it is well worth putting on
record.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 227–28 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Adherents of the old rites—followers of a Russian religious
movement against the official Orthodox Church. The movement arose in the
mid-seventeenth century following the alteration of church rites by
Patriarch Nicon. In tsarist times it was subjected to persecution.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Yet Another Anti-Democratic Campaign









Lenin: Yet Another Anti-Democratic Campaign







V. I.  

      Lenin
Yet Another Anti-Democratic Campaign




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda Nos. 24 and 25, September 2 and 9, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 312-322.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

That ill-famed publication, Vekhi, which was a
tremendous success in liberal-bourgeois society, a society thoroughly
imbued with renegade tendencies, was not adequately countered, nor
appraised deeply enough, in the democratic camp.  

This was partly due to the fact that the success of Vekhi
occurred at a time of almost complete suppression of the “open”
democratic press.  

Now Mr. Shchepetev comes forward in Russkaya

Mysl[5] (August) with a refurbished edition of Vekhi
ideas. This is perfectly natural on the part of a Vekhi organ
edited by Mr. P. B. Struve, leader of the renegades. But it will be just as
natural for the democrats, particularly the worker democrats, to make up
now for at least a little of what they owe the Vekhi people.  
I

Mr. Shchepetev’s utterances take the form of a modest
“Letter from France”—about the Russians in Paris. But behind
this modest form there is actually a very definite “discussion” of the
Russian revolution of 1905 and the Russian democracy.  

“That disturbing [Oh! Disturbing to whom, esteemed liberal?],
troubled and thoroughly confused year 1905 is fresh in everyone’s
memory.\dots” 

“Troubled and thoroughly confused”! What dirt and dregs a person must
have in his soul to he able to write like that! The German opponents of the
revolution of 1848 called that year the “crazy” year. The same idea, or
rather the same

    

dull, base fright, is expressed by the Russian Cadet writing in
Russkaya Mysl.  

We shall counter him only with a few facts, the most objective and most
“unpretentious” ones. That year wages were rising as they had never done
before. Land rent was dropping. All forms of association of workers,
including even domestic servants, were making unprecedented
progress. Millions of inexpensive publications on political subjects were
being read by the people, the masses, the crowd, the “lower ranks”, as
avidly as no one had ever read in Russia until then.  

Nekrasov exclaimed, in times long past: 


Ah, will there ever be a time 
   (Come soon, come soon, 0 longed-for day!) 
   When people will not buy the books 
   Of Blücher or some silly lord, 
   But Gogol and Belinsky’s works 
   From market stalls bring 
   home.[6] 


The “time” longed for by one of the old Russian democrats
came. Merchants stopped dealing in oats and engaged in more profitable
business—the sale of inexpensive democratic pamphlets. Democratic books
became goods for the market. The ideas of Belinsky and
Gogol—which endeared these authors to Nekrasov, as indeed to any decent
person in Russia—ran through the whole of that new market literature.


How “troublesome”! cried the liberal pig, which deems itself
educated, but in fact is dirty, repulsive, overfat and smug, when in
actual fact it saw the “people” bringing home from the
market—Belinsky’s letter to

Gogol.[7] 

And, strictly speaking, it is, after all, a letter from an
“intellectual”, announced Vekhi, to thunderous applause from
Rozanov of Novoye Vremya and from Anthony, Bishop of Volhynia.


What a disgraceful sight! a democrat from among the best Narodniks will
say. What an instructive sight! we will add. How it sobers up those who
took a sentimental view of democratic issues, how it
steels all the living and strong democratic elements, mercilessly
sweeping aside the rotten illusions of the Oblomov-minded!  
 

It is very useful for anyone who has ever been enchanted with
liberalism to be disenchanted with it. And he who wishes to recall the
early history of Russian liberalism will certainly see in the liberal
Kavelin’s attitude towards the democrat Chernyshevsky the exact prototype
of the attitude adopted by the Cadet Party of the liberal
bourgeoisie towards the Russian democratic movement of the
masses. The liberal bourgeoisie in Russia has “found itself”, or
rather its tail. Is it not time the democrats in Russia found their head?


It is particularly intolerable to see individuals like Shchepetev,
Struve, Gredeskul, Izgoyev and the rest of the Cadet fraternity clutching
at the coat-tails of Nekrasov, Shchedrin and others. Nekrasov, who was weak
as a person, wavered between Chernyshevsky and the liberals, but all his
sympathy went to Chernyshevsky. Out of the very same personal weakness,
Nekrasov occasionally sounded the false note of liberal servility, but he
himself bitterly deplored his “falsity” and repented of it in
public: 


I never sold my lyre, although at times, 
   When pressed by unrelenting fate, 
   False notes would sound among my rhymes.  


“False notes” is what Nekrasov himself called the liberal
servility he was occasionally guilty of. As for Shchedrin, he mocked
mercilessly at the liberals, whom he branded for ever by the formula
“conformably to

villainy”.[8] 

How outdated this formula is as applied to Shchepetev, Gredeskul and
the

other[1]
Vekhi people! The point now is by no means that these gentlemen
must conform to villainy. Not by a long shot! They have created
their own theory of villainy” on their own initiative and in
their own fashion, proceeding from Neo-Kantianism and other fashionable
“European” theories.  
    

II

“The thoroughly confused year 1905,” writes
Mr. Shchepetev. “Everything was mixed up and tangled in the general
confusion and muddle.”  

On this point, too, we can raise only a few theoretical objections. We
believe that historical events should be judged by the movements of the
masses and of classes as a whole, not by the moods of individuals
or small groups.  

The overwhelming majority of Russia’s population consists of peasants
and workers. What indication is there of a “general confusion and muddle”
among this majority of the population? Quite On the contrary, the objective
facts testify irrefutably that it was among the mass of the population that
a sorting out unprecedented in breadth and effectiveness was going on, a
sorting out which for ever did away with “confusion and muddle”.


Until then, the elements of patriarchal oppression and those of
democracy had really been “confused and mixed tip” among the “common
people”, making up a “general muddle”. Evidence of this is to be found
in such objective facts as that

Zubatovism[9] and the “Gaponiad” proved possible.  

It was the year 1905 that for ever put an end to that “muddle”. No
previous epoch in Russian history had untangled with such extreme
clarity, by deeds not by words, relations tangled by age-long stagnation
and age-old survivals of serfdom. In no other epoch had so distinctly and
“efficiently” the classes become demarcated, the attitude of the
mass of the population defined, and the theories and programmes of
the “intellectuals” tested by the actions of millions.  

How was it, then, that indisputable historical facts could be so
greatly distorted in the mind of the educated and liberal writer of
Russkaya Mysl? The explanation is very simple: this Vekhi
spokesman seeks to impose his subjective sentiments on the whole people. He
himself and his entire group—the liberal-bourgeois intelligentsia—found
them selves at that tint in a particularly “muddled”, “thoroughly
confused”, position. And the liberal shifts his discontent—a natural
result of this muddle and of the fact that the masses had exposed the utter
worthlessness of liberalism—to

    

the masses, thus laying his own fault at someone else’s door.


Indeed, was not the liberals’ position a muddled one in June 1905? Or
after August 6, when they called for participation in the Bulygin Duma but
the people went in fact past and beyond the Duma? Or in
October 1905, when the liberals had to “trail along behind” and call the
strike “glorious” although only the day before they had fought against
it? Or in November 1905, when the pitiful impotence of liberalism fully
came to light, being demonstrated by so striking a fact as Struve’s visit
to Witte?  

If the Vekhist Shchepetev cares to read the Vekhist Izgoyev’s little
book about Stolypin, he will see that Izgoyev had to admit that
“muddle” in the Cadets’ position “between two fires” in the First and
Second Dumas. And this “muddle” and impotence of liberalism were an
inevitable development, for the liberals had no mass support
either among the bourgeoisie above or among the peasantry below.  

Mr. Shchepetev closes his argument on the history of the Russian
revolution with the following gem: 


   “However, all that muddle was very short-lived. The
   upper ranks freed themselves little by little from the almost panic terror
   that had gripped them and, having arrived at the fairly simple conclusion
   that a good company of soldiers was more effective than all revolutionary
   verbiage, equipped ‘punitive expeditions’ and set rapid-firing justice into
   motion. The results exceeded all expectations. In a matter of two or three
   years, the revolution was destroyed and eradicated to such an extent that
   certain security institutions were compelled to stage it in some
   places.\dots” 


While we could provide at least some theoretical commentary for the
author’s previous discourses, now we have not even this possibility. We
must confine ourselves to fastening this glorious discourse to the pillory
in as high a position as possible, so that it can be seen for as long a
time and from as far off as possible.  

However, we can also ask the reader: is it surprising that the
Octobrist Golos Moskvy, as well as the nationalist,

Judas-like[10] Novoye Vremya, quoted Shchepetev with the
greatest delight? In fact, what is the difference between the
“historical” appraisal given by the “Constitutional Democratic”
magazine and that given by the above-mentioned two publications?  
    

III

Mr. Shchepetev devotes most space to sketches of life in
exile. To find an analogy of these sketches, one would have to dig up
Russky

Vestnik[11] of Katkov’s day and take from it novels portraying
high-minded Marshals of the Nobility, good-natured and contented muzhiks,
and disgruntled brutes, scoundrels and monsters called revolutionaries.


Mr. Shchepetev has observed Paris (assuming that he has) with the eyes
of a philistine embittered against the democratic movement, who could see
nothing but “unrest” in the appearance in Russia of the first democratic
pamphlets for the masses.  

It is known that everyone sees abroad what he chooses to. Or, in other
words, everyone sees in new conditions his own sell. A member of
the Black Hundreds sees abroad splendid landlords, generals and
diplomats. A secret police agent sees there the noblest policemen. A
liberal Russian renegade sees in Paris well-meaning concierges and

    “efficient”[2]

shopkeepers who teach the Russian revolutionary that among them
“humanitarian and altruistic sentiments had too much suppressed personal
requirements, often to the detriment of the general progress and cultural
advancement of the whole of our

     country”.[3]


A lackey in spirit is naturally keen above all else on the gossip and
petty scandals prevailing in the servants’ room. It goes without saying
that a shopkeeper or a lackey-minded concierge takes no notice of the
ideological issues discussed at Paris meetings and in the Paris
Russian-language press. How can he see, indeed, that this press raised, as
early as 1908, for example, the very same questions concerning the social
nature of the June Third regime, the class roots of the new trends among
the democrats, and so

on,[4]

as found their way much later, and in much narrower and more distorted (and
curtailed) form, into the press “protected” by reinforced security
measures?  

Shopkeepers and lackeys, however “intellectual” the garb in which
people with such a mentality array themselves,

    

cannot notice and grasp these questions. If a particular lackey is called a
“publicist” contributing to a liberal magazine, he, that “publicist”,
will pass over in complete silence the great ideological questions which
are posed openly and clearly nowhere but in Paris. On the other hand, this
“publicist” will tell you in detail all that is well known in the
servants’ rooms.  

He, this noble Cadet, will tell you in the magazine of the most noble
Mr. Struve, that a hapless emigrant-prostitute was evicted from “the flat
of a very well-known woman revolutionary in Paris”, “not without help
from the police”; that the “unemployed” again made a row at a charity
ball; that a copyist in a house familiar to Mr. Shchepetev “had rather a
considerable sum of money advanced to him and then began to absent
himself”; that the exiles “rise at noon and go to bed after I or 2 a.m.,
and there are visitors and noise and arguments and disorder all day long”.


All this the lackey magazine of the Cadet Mr. Struve will tell you in
detail and with illustrations, with gusto and spiced with pepper—just as
well as Menshikov and Rozanov of Novoye Vremya do it.  


   “Give me money or I’ll punch you on the jaw—this is
   the unambiguously hostile form which the relations between the upper and
   lower ranks of the exiles have taken. True, this formula has not be come
   widespread, and ‘the extreme trend among the lower ranks’ has become
   represented [this is how the educated Cadet writes in Mr. Struve’s
   magazine!] by a mere couple of dozens of very doubtful elements that are
   perhaps even guided by a skilful hand from outside.”  


Pause at this statement, reader, and think of the difference between an
ordinary lackey and a lackey-minded publicist. Ordinary lackeys—meaning
the bulk, of course, which does not include those politically-conscious
elements that have already adopted a class point of view arid are seeking a
way out of their lackey’s position—are unsophisticated, uneducated, and
often illiterate and ignorant; it is pardon able for them to have a naive
passion for relating whatever reaches them more easily than anything else,
and is closest and clearest to them. Lackey-minded publicists, on the other
hand, are “educated” persons who are well received in all the finest
drawing-rooms. They are aware that the number of common blackmailers among
the exiles is very insignificant

    

(“a couple of dozens” for thousands of exiles). They even
realise that these blackmailers “are perhaps guided” by a
“skilful hand”—from the tea-room of the Union of the Russian
People.  

And because he realises all this, the lackey-minded publicist operates
as befits the “educated”. He certainly knows how to cover up his tracks
and make the most of his goods! He is not a venal hack of the Black
Hundreds—nothing of the kind. He “himself” has even pointed
out that perhaps someone is guiding the dozen or two of
blackmailers, but at the same time it is precisely and
solely those blackmailers rows and the absenteeism of copyists
that he tells about!  

The Novoye Vremya school for “writers” of
Russkaya Mysl has not gone to waste. Suvorin of Novoye
Vremya boasted that he had never received any subsidies—he
merely “knew himself” how to hit the right tone.  

Russkaya Mysl receives no subsidies—-God forfend! It
merely “knows itself” how to hit the right tone, a tone pleasing
to the ear of the Novoye Vremya people and Guchkov’s
“stalwarts”.  
IV

Yes, there is much that is painful in the life of the
exiles. It is exiles, and they alone, who in the years of social stag
nation and lull raised major questions of principle concerning all Russian
democrats. There is more poverty and want among them than elsewhere. The
proportion of suicides is particularly great among them, and the proportion
of those among them whose whole being is one bundle of sick nerves is
incredibly, monstrously great. Indeed, how could things be different with
tormented people?  

Different people will take interest in different things when they find
themselves among exiles. Some of them will be interested in the open
discussion of major political questions of principle. Others will be
interested in stories about a row at a ball, about an unscrupulous copyist,
or about the distaste which concierges and shopkeepers have for the exiles’
way of life. Everyone to his taste.  

Nevertheless, when you experience all the hardships of a tormented,
drab, morbidly nervous life in exile and think

    

of the life of the Shchepetevs, Struves, Golovins, Izgoyevs and Co., you
cannot help saying: what an immense happiness not to belong to this society
of “respectable people”, to the society where these individuals are
received and where people shake hands with them!  

Probably, rows do not occur in this “respectable
society”. Prostitutes do not find themselves in the position of all but
room-mates of these gentlemen. Oh, no. They stay in other quarters.  

The unemployed raise no rows at dances arranged by these people. For
those dances are perfectly decorous. They keep these things apart: the
prostitutes (from among the unemployed) live in one flat, while the dances
are held in another. And if they take on a copyist, they never allow any
depravity, such as letting the copyist take his pay in advance and then
dare to absent himself.  

Rows over money are out of the question with them. Near them are no
starving, tormented, unnerved people, ready to commit suicide. And if “the
millions fraternise—today with “science” in the persons of
Messrs. Struve and Co., tomorrow with the title of deputy in the persons of
Messrs. Golovin and Co., and the day after with the titles of deputy and
lawyer in the persons of Messrs. Maklakov and

Co.[12]—where do rows come in here?  

Those are all noble acts. If the writings of the Struves, Gredeskuls,
Shchepetevs and Co. against the democrats give pleasure to the
Ryabushinskys, etc., what is wrong with that? After all, Struve receives no
subsidies—he “himself” hits the right tone! No one can say that
Russkaya Mysl is a kept woman of the Ryabushinskys. It will occur
to no one to compare the pleasure which the Ryabushinskys derive from
certain “publicists” with the pleasure which serf girls gave the
landlords in the old days by scratching their heels for them.  

Indeed, what blame attaches to Mr. Struve or Mr. Gredeskul or
Shchepetev, etc., because their writings and speeches, which express their
own convictions, are a sort of heel-scratching for the Russian merchants
and landlords, who are embittered against the revolution?  

What is so shocking about the fact that Mr. Golovin, an ex-deputy, has
got himself a profitable concession? After

    

all, he has relinquished the title of deputy!! That means that when he was
a deputy there was no concession as yet—it was only just in the
making. And when he obtained a con cession, he ceased to be a deputy. Is it
not clear that there is no dirty business here?  

Is it not obvious that only slanderers can point a finger at Maklakov?
Did he not defend Taglyev—as he himself stated in a letter published in
Rech—“according to his convictions”? There can be no doubt whatever
that no Paris concierge or shopkeeper will find anything—anything at
all—reprehensible, awkward or shocking in the way of life or in the
actions of all these respectable Cadet people.  
V

Mr. Shchepetev’s general statement of principle is worth
reproducing in full: 


   “Hitherto, and above all in the circles taking part in
   the revolution, humanitarian and altruistic sentiments have suppressed
   personal requirements to an excessive degree, often to the detriment of the
   general progress and cultural advancement of the whole of our country. Too
   often the desire for the ‘public good’ and for the ‘welfare of the whole
   people’ made people forget about themselves, about their personal needs and
   requirements, so much so that the social sentiments and aspirations
   themselves could not be translated into reality in the form of positive
   [!!], creative, entirely conscious work, and fatally led to passive forms
   of self-sacrifice. Indeed, not only in this particular sphere, but also in
   the sphere of the most ordinary relations, the requirements of the
   individual were constantly sup pressed in every manner—by a ‘guilty
   conscience’ which often swelled this thirst for heroism and self-sacrifice
   to hypertrophic proportions, on the one hand, and by an inadequate
   appraisal of life itself due to the low standard of our culture, on the
   other hand The result is a constant split personality, a constant sense of
   the wrongness and even ‘sinfulness’ of one’s life, a constant desire to
   sacrifice oneself, to come to the aid of the propertyless and disinherited,
   and, finally, to go into ‘the camp of the perishing’—a fact which has
   found so full and vivid an expression in our literature.  

   “Nothing of the kind is met with in the views and moral
   principles of the French people.”  


This is a commentary on Mr. Gredeskul’s political and programmatic
statements which Rech published without a single reservation and
which Pravda (No. 85) recalled when Rech chose to forget
them.  
 

This is a continuation and repetition of Vekhi. Once again we
can and must see from the example of this discourse that Vekhi is
merely making a show of fighting against the “intelligentsia” and that it
is in fact fighting against democracy, which it completely
renounces.  

It is particularly necessary to stress the unity of Vekhi,
Gredeskul and Rech today, during the elections, when the Cadets,
playing at democracy, are doing their utmost to obscure and side-track all
the truly important and vital political questions of principle. One of the
urgent practical tasks facing the democrats is to raise these questions at
election meetings, to explain to as large an audience as possible the
meaning and significance of the talk of the Shchepetevs and all the
Vekhists, and to expose the hypocrisy of Rech and the Milyukovs
when they try to disclaim responsibility for Russkaya Mysl,
although those who write for it are Cadet Party members.  

The “arguments” with the Vekhists, the “polemics” of the
Gredeskuls, Milyukovs and other such gentlemen against them, are no more
than eyewash, nothing but a hypocritical disguise for the deep fundamental
solidarity between the entire Cadet Party and Vekhi. Indeed, how
can anyone “argue” against the basic propositions of the passage quoted
above? How can he remain in the same party with people who hold such views,
without bearing full responsibility for this advocacy of an
emphatic repudiation of the elementary principles of all democracy?  

The issue is obscured by those who are willing to present it
à la Vekhi, in terms of contrasting “individualism” with
“altruism”, and so on. The political meaning of these phrases could not
be clearer—they are a volte-face against democracy, a
volte-face in favour of counter-revolutionary liberalism.


We must realise that this volte-face is no accident, but a
result of the class position of the bourgeoisie. And we must draw from this
the necessary political conclusions as regards the clear demarcation of
democracy from liberalism. Unless we are aware of these realities, and
unless we bring them home to the mass of the population, there can be no
question of any real step forward.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
The objection will probably be raised that Gredeskul, as well as
Milyukov and Co., argued with Vekhi. So they did, but
they remained Vekhists for all that. See, inter alia,
Pravda No. 85.

—Lenin

[2]
See Mr. Shchepetev’s article, p. 139 (Russkaya Mysl No. 8,
1912).  —Lenin

[3]
Ibid., p. 153.  —Lenin

[4]
See present edition, Vol. 15, pp. 266–79.—Ed.  
 



[5]
Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought)—a liberal bourgeois
monthly published in Moscow from 1880 to the middle of 1918. After the
revolution of 1905 it became the organ of the Right wing of the Cadet
Party. At that time Lenin called it Chernosotennaya Mysl
(Black-Hundred Thought).





[6]
Lenin is quoting from Nekrasov’s poem, Who Can Be Happy in
Russia?  

The quatrain quoted in the text further on is taken from Nekrasov’s
“To the Unknown Friend Who has Sent Me the Poem ‘It Cannot
Be’\thinspace”.





[7]
This refers to the “Letter to Gogol”, dated July 3, 1847, in which
V. G. Belinsky most vividly expressed his revolutionary-democratic
ideas. Lenin described the “Letter” as “one of the finest productions of
the illegal, democratic press”





[8]
Lenin borrowed the phrase “conformably to villainy” from
“The Liberal”, a satirical fairy-tale by M. Saltykov-Shchedrin.





[9]
Zubatovism—the policy of “police socialism”, so named
after Colonel Zubatov, chief of the Moscow Secret Police, on whose
initiative legal workers’ organisations were formed in 1901–03 to divert
the workers from the political struggle against the autocracy. Zubatov’s
activity in this field was supported by V.K. Plehve, Minister of the
Interior. The Zubatovists sought to direct the working-class movement into
the narrow channel of purely economic demands, and suggested to the workers
that the government was willing to meet those demands. The first Zubatovist
organisation—the Society for Mutual Assistance of Mechanical Industry
Workers—was set up in Moscow in May 1901. Similar organisations were
founded in Minsk, Odessa, Vilna, Kiev and other cities.  

The revolutionary Social-Democrats, in exposing the reactionary
character of Zubatovism, used legal workers’ organisations to draw large
sections of the working class into the struggle against the autocracy. The
growing revolutionary movement in 1903 compelled the tsarist government to
abolish the Zubatovist organisations.





[10]
Judas Golovlyov—a sanctimonious, hypocritical, serf-owning
land lord portrayed in M. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s The Golovlyov
Family.





[11]
Russky Vestnik (The Russian Herald)—a political and
literary periodical published between 1856 and 1906. From 1856 to 1887

   

it was issued in Moscow, with M. N. Katkov as its editor and
publisher. Originally it had a liberal trend but in the 1860s it became an
organ of feudal reaction. After Katkov’s death it was issued in
St. Petersburg from 1888 to 1896, in Moscow from 1896 to 1902, and again in
St. Petersburg from 1902 to 1906.





[12]
See Note 87.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Unity of the Cadets and Novoye Vremya









Lenin: The Unity of the Cadets and Novoye Vremya







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Unity of the Cadets and Novoye Vremya




Published:
Pravda No. 109, September 5, 1912.

      Signed: I. V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 323-325.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

People in our country are only too often prone to regard
the election campaign as a struggle for mandates, i.e., for cosy seats in
the Duma.  

As far as the class-conscious workers are concerned, this campaign is
primarily, and more than anything else, a struggle for principles, i.e.,
for fundamental views, for political convictions. This struggle, which is
being waged before the masses and which draws the masses into politics, is
one of the principal advantages of the representative system.  

Our Cadets, in reply to our posing fundamental questions about
liberalism and democracy, about the policy of “peace” and that of the
class struggle, dodge all polemics on the substance of the matter, merely
hissing right and left over our alleged “Cadet-eating”.  

And yet facts indicating a touching unity between the Cadets and the
Novoye Vremya people in the appraisal of the cardinal issues of
life in Russia strike the eye.  

The eighth issue of Russkaya Mysl has appeared. This magazine
is edited by the Cadet Struve, and contributors to it are Izgoyev,
Severyanin, Galich and many other Cadets.  

In that issue Mr. A. Shchepetev printed, under the title “Russians in
Paris”, a foul Black-Hundred lampoon against the revolution and
revolutionaries. Novoye Vremya immediately caught up the
tune struck up by Russkaya Mysl; it quoted a whole series of
“gems” from it, and exclaimed

    

gleefully: “To think that those wretched representatives of mankind [i.e.,
the revolutionaries as portrayed by Russkaya Mysl] claimed the
role of renovators of Russian life.”  

What will the official Cadet Rech say to that? Will it be that
that “has no bearing” on the elections, i.e., on the struggle for cosy
seats? Or that Rech “cannot be held responsible” for
Russkaya Mysl, i.e., the party cannot be held responsible for its
members whom no Cadet conference has ever so much as condemned?


Let Rech twist and turn, and let unprincipled and spineless
people shrug their shoulders at our “Cadet-eating”—we shall never tire
of saying to the citizens of Russia: look into the principles of
the Cadets and don’t remain disgracefully indifferent when the
“Constitutional-Democrats” are slinging mud at the democrats.  

Here are a few passages from the article of Mr. Shchepetev, the
Black-Hundred Cadet; although few, they are the most prominent and,
moreover, are concerned with questions of principle, not gossip.  

“Hitherto, and above all in the circles taking part in the revolution,
humanitarian [i.e., man-loving] and altruistic sentiments [i.e.,
disinterested sentiments not limited to the effort to keep one’s skin
whole] have suppressed personal requirements to an excessive
degree, often to the detriment of the general progress and cultural
advancement of the whole of our country. Too often the desire for the
‘public good’ and for the ‘welfare of the whole people’ [the ironical
inverted commas were put in by Russkaya Mysl] made people forget
about themselves, about their personal needs and requirements.... The
result is a constant split personality, a constant sense of the wrongness
and even ‘sinfulness’ of one’s life, a constant desire to sacrifice
oneself, to come to the aid of the propertyless and disinherited,
and, finally, to go into ‘the camp of the perishing’—a fact which has
found so full and vivid an expression in our literature” (Russkaya
Mysl No. 8, pp. 152–53).  

How contemptible is a party pretending to be democratic that tolerates
in its ranks these gentlemen who sling mud at the most rudimentary, the
most elementary premises, convictions and principles of the whole of
democracy!  
 

The liberal bourgeoisie has developed a hatred for democracy, as has
been proved by the issue of Vekhi, as is proved monthly by
Russkaya Mysl, and as has been proved by the Karaulovs and
Gredeskuls.  

The liberals themselves are placing a bar between them selves and the
democrats.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concerning N. S. Polyansky's Letter









Lenin: Concerning N. S. Polyansky's Letter







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning N. S. Polyansky’s Letter




Published:
Pravda No. 118, September 15, 1912.

      Signed: Fr..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 326-327.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

N. S. Polyansky’s letter from the countryside, published in
this issue of Pravda, poses a very interesting question. It would
be desirable for the peasants themselves to comment on this question as
often as possible.  

For our part, we consider it necessary to point out the following.


N. S. Polyansky is perfectly right in saying that only an “idle
parasite” would regard the volost meeting as a gathering of fools. Only
the peasants themselves can decide which form of land tenure and
landownership is to be preferred in a particular locality. All interference
on the part of the law or the administration in the unfettered use of the
land by the peasants is a survival of the serf-owning system. Such
interference can only do harm; it can only humiliate and insult the
peasant.  

A worker-peasant vividly showed, in his letter published in
Pravda No. 38, the absurd red tape resulting from such
interference.  

Let us now see what view the tens of millions of people who are for
ever working and are for ever being exploited should take of the question:
khutor or village commune?  

What these people have to worry about is not at all the choice between
the khutor and the village commune. They must worry about who is
exploiting them and how they can lighten or do away with this exploitation.


In European Russia, for example, 30,000 of the big land lords own
70,000,000 dessiatines of land, and 10,000,000 poor peasants own as
much. Whether these peasants are settled on khutors or in
communes, their paupers’ living conditions will not be changed in the
slightest. If you have

    

seven dessiatines of bad land for your whole family, while your landlord
neighbour has 2,000 dessiatines of excellent land, the result will be
almost the same as under serfdom, no matter whether you live on a
khutor or in a commune.  

Hungry people are being deluded with talk about khutors or
communes, about a buckwheat pie or a cabbage pie. Mean while they have to
eat turnip tops and live on marshy or sandy land; they have to do
corvée for using the watering-place, the pastures and ploughlands.


By means of khutors attempts are being made to create “small
landlords” to defend the big ones. But millions and tens of millions of
peasants will starve even more in consequence.  

In Western Europe, a really rapid and successful development of
agriculture occurred only where all survivals of feudal oppression
had been completely abolished.  

In the genuinely free countries, where agriculture is well organised,
there remains only one force that is crushing the peasant and the worker:
the force of capital. There is only one way of countering this force—a
free alliance of the wage-workers and ruined peasants. Such alliances will
develop into a new social system under which cultivated lands, efficient
machinery, steam and electricity will serve to improve the life of the
working people themselves, and not to enrich a handful of millionaires.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Political Line









Lenin: The Political Line







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Political Line




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 26, September 16, 1912.

      Signed: M. M..

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 328-334.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is beyond doubt that the character of Nevskaya
Zvezda and Pravda has been fully established, and is familiar
not only to the workers, but also to all the political parties of
Russia—thanks to the attacks made on Pravda and Nevskaya
Zvezda by the Black Hundreds and the Octobrists (Rossiya,
Novoye Vremya, Golos Moskvy, etc.), as well as by the
liberals (Rech, Zaprosy Zhizni, etc.).  

An appraisal of the political line followed by the two newspapers is of
particular interest in the light of the election campaign, for this
appraisal is the inevitable touch stone of views on basic questions of
principle. That is why we propose to dwell on N. Nikolin’s article in
Nevsky Golos No. 9, about the line of Pravda and
Nevskaya Zvezda. The article contains not a few exceedingly angry
words, as the reader will see; but we can (and must) disregard that in view
of the author’s attempt to touch on the essence of important questions.



   “I must admit,” wrote N. Nikolin, “that in many
   respects Pravda fulfils rather satisfactorily its task of being an
   exponent of the desires, needs, requirements and interests of the Russian
   proletariat. Unfortunately, it considerably depreciates this useful work of
   its by a perfectly absurd presentation of political realities that is far
   from the truth and extremely harmful in its consequences.”  


We shall leave the angry words aside and take the important thing: the
presentation of political realities. We readily forgive the writer his
annoyance for this straightforward approach to the question, which is
really fundamental. Let us argue on the substance of the matter. It is, in
fact, impossible

    

to take a single step in the field of practical work unless one has firm
views as to what our “political realities” actually are.  

N. Nikolin answers his straight question as follows: 


   “Pravda—which in this case follows the
   example of Nevskaya Zvezda—assures its readers that the working
   class must build a new Russia despite the liberals. This sounds proud, of
   course, but it contains nothing but nonsense. Nobody is building a new
   Russia—she is being built [italics by N. Nikolin himself] in the
   complicated process of the struggle of different interests, and the task of
   the working class is not to make chimerical plans for building a new Russia
   for others and in spite of all these others, but to create, within
   the latter, the most favourable conditions for its further development.”
   


Here, too, we readily forgive the writer his “spleen”, his extreme
irritation, because he tries to take the bull by the horns. N. Nikolin is
more frank, sincere and thoughtful than many liquidators in touching here
on one of the deepest sources of our deep differences.  

“Nobody is building a new Russia—she is being built in the
process—”
Anyone will recognise in this wonderful argument the basic and invariable
keynote of the entire liquidationist (or broader still, entire opportunist)
music.  

Let us, therefore, analyse this argument carefully.  

If a new Russia is being built in the process of the struggle of
different interests, this means that the classes which have
different interests are building a new Russia in
different ways. This is as clear as daylight. What sense is there, then, in
N. Nikolin’s contrast: “nobody is building a new Russia—she is
being built, etc.”?  

No sense whatever. It is nonsense from the point of view of the most
elementary logic.  

But this nonsense has a logic of its own, the logic of opportunism,
which inevitably, and not accidentally, slips into Nikolinist errors as it
tries to defend its position “in Marxist fashion”. It is on this “logic
of opportunism” that we must dwell.  

Whoever says that a new Russia is being built by such-and-such
classes stands so firmly on the basis of Marxism that not only N. Nikolin’s
angry words, but even—even “unity-liquidationist” conferences and all
their verbal “thunderbolts” cannot shake him.  
 

Whoever says that “nobody is building a new Russia—she is being
built, etc.”, slips from the objectivism of the class struggle (i.e.,
from Marxism) to the “objectivism” of a bourgeois justification of
reality. Herein lies the source of that sinful fall from Marxism into
opportunism which Nikolin (unwittingly) commits.  

If I say: a new Russia has to be built in
such-and-such a way from the standpoint of, say, truth,
justice, equalised labour, and so on, it will be a subjectivist approach
that will land me in the sphere of chimeras. In practice, it is the class
struggle, and not my very best wishes, that will determine the building of
a new Russia. My ideals of building a new Russia will not be chimerical
only if they express the interests of an actually existing class, whose
living conditions compel it to act in a particular sense. By thus adopting
a stand for the objectivism of the class struggle, I do not in the least
justify reality, but, on the contrary, indicate in this reality
itself the deepest sources (though they are invisible at first
sight) and the forces that can transform it.  

But if I say: “nobody is building a new Russia—she is being
built in the struggle of interests”, I at once throw a certain veil
over the clear picture of the struggle of such-and-such classes,
and make a concession to those who see only those actions of the ruling
classes, i.e., particularly the bourgeoisie, that are on the surface. I
slip involuntarily into justifying the bourgeoisie; instead of the
objectivism of the class struggle, I adopt as a criterion the bourgeois
trend that is most conspicuous, or that is successful for the time being.


We shall illustrate this by an example from history. New Germany (the
Germany of the second half of the nineteenth century) was “built” in the
process of the struggle of different interests. No educated bourgeois will
question this, nor will he go farther than that.  

But here is how Marx reasoned during the most “critical” period of
the building of new Germany.  

“The upper bourgeoisie,” wrote Marx in 1848, “ever
anti-revolutionary, concluded a defensive and offensive alliance with the
reactionaries for fear of the people, that is to say, the workers and the
democratic bourgeoisie.”  
 

“The French bourgeoisie of 1789 did not for a moment leave its allies,
the peasants, in the lurch. It knew that its rule was grounded in the
destruction of feudalism in the countryside, the creation of a free
landowning peasant class.  

“The German bourgeoisie of 1848 is, without the least compunction,
betraying the peasants, who are its most natural allies, the flesh of its
flesh and without whom it is powerless against the aristocracy.  

“The continuance of feudal rights ... such is the result of the German
revolution of 1848. The mountain brought forth a

mouse.[1] 

In Marx, the classes which built new Germany stand
out at once as if they were living.  

A bourgeois scholar who justifies reality in the name of
“objectivism” says: Bismarck defeated Marx, Bismarck took into account
how “new Germany was built in the complicated process of the
struggle between different interests”. Marx, however, “made chimerical
plans for building” a Great-German democratic republic in spite of the
liberals, with the aid of the workers and the democratic bourgeoisie (that
bourgeoisie which does not enter into alliance with reaction).  

That is what bourgeois scholars say in a thousand variations. In
examining this question from a purely theoretical standpoint, let us ask
ourselves what their mistake is. It is that they cover up and obscure the
class struggle. It is that (by means of the would-be profound turn of
speech, “Germany was built in the process, etc.”) they gloss
over the circumstance that Bismarck Germany was built by the bourgeoisie,
who by its own “betrayals and treachery” made itself “powerless against
the nobility”.  

Marx, however, was enabled by the objectivism of the class struggle to
understand political reality a hundred times more deeply and
accurately, without justifying it at all but, on the contrary, indicating
and singling out in it the classes which were building a democratic
Germany, and were able to become the bulwark of democracy and socialism
even when events had taken a turn exceptionally favourable to Bismarck.


Marx understood political reality so correctly and so deeply that he
was able in 1848, half a century in advance,

    

to appraise the essence of Bismarck Germany as the Germany of a
bourgeoisie “powerless against the nobility”. At the elections in 1912,
sixty-four years after Marx had made his appraisal, the liberals fully
confirmed it by their behaviour.  

Marx and the Marxists, who had been waging a ruthless struggle against
the liberals since 1848—a struggle that was unprecedented in acuteness
and evoked a universal howl from the liberals (excuse me for using this
sharp phrase, esteemed Nikolin!)—were by no means advocates of a
“chimera” when they upheld the “plan” for a Great-German democratic
state.  

On the contrary, by upholding their “plan”, propagating it
steadfastly and lashing the liberals and democrats who were betraying it,
Marx and the Marxists were educating the very class which embodied the
vital forces of “new Germany” and which, thanks to Marx’s
consistent and whole-heartedly resolute propaganda, now stands fully armed,
ready to fulfil its historic role of grave-digger, not only of the
Bismarckian bourgeoisie, but of all bourgeoisie in general.  
 *     *  * 

The example from German history reveals to us the logic of
opportunism in the views of Nikolin, who angrily abuses us for our
“violent Cadet-eating” precisely because he is unaware
that he himself is drifting to the liquidationist ideas of a liberal labour
policy.  

The more N. Nikolin (who is not alone!) flies into a rage and tries to
brush us aside, the more explicitly and circumstantially will we, who are
publicists, repeat to him that our struggle against the Cadets and the
liquidators is prompted by considerations which have been deeply thought
out and which for more than five years (for more than ten years, to be
exact) have been reaffirmed many times by the official decisions of all
Marxists. The trouble with N. Nikolin, as well as with the liquidators whom
he defends, is that they have nothing even approximately
formulated, definite and clear with which to counter these numerous,
precise, formal tactical decisions adopted long ago.  

It is not just a “proud” phrase to say that “the workers must build
a new Russia in spite of the liberals”. N. Nikolin

    

knows very well that this idea is expressed in a number of tactical
decisions recognised by most Marxists. This is, in effect, a simple
summing up of Russia’s political experience during at least the
past decade. It is an absolutely indisputable historical fact that during
the last ten years the Russian working class has been building a
new Russia in spite of the liberals”. Such “building” work is
never wasted, whatever the temporary “successes” of the Russian
pretenders to the role of a Bismarck.  

Russian opportunism—vague, indistinct, and eel-like, as it is in
other countries—is unable to express its views definitely and clearly, to
state formally that the working class must not build a new Russia
in spite of the liberals but must do this, that and the other. Opportunism
would not be opportunism if it were capable of giving clear and
straightforward answers. But it expresses its discontent over the workers’
policy, and the fact that it gravitates towards the bourgeoisie, by saying:
“Nobody is building a new Russia—she is being built in the
process of the struggle of interests.”  

And of what is being built, it is the “building” which the
nobility and the bourgeoisie are doing, with the liberals
correcting it, that is most conspicuous and striking, and enjoys
momentary success and the admiration of the “crowd” more than anything
else. “Why try to analyse which classes are building and how—that is all
a chimera; we must take what is being built”—this is the true
meaning of Nikolin’s argument, and the “logic of opportunism”.  

This is indeed forgetting the class struggle. This is what constitutes
the main principle of a liberal labour policy. It is through this sort of
“logic” that the role of the working class is reduced from leadership of
a genuine, consistent, whole-hearted democratic movement to spade-work for
the liberals.  

Hence the fact, only too familiar to us Russians, that in
words the opportunists acknowledge that the party of the proletariat,
too, should have an “independent” line, which, of course, is acknowledged
by Nikolin as well. But in fact he defends a line that is not
independent, but is the line of a liberal labour policy.  

Nikolin tries to explain and to show us how very

    

immaterial it is to proclaim the independence of the working
class.  

The liquidators’ platform, reported in Nevsky Golos No. 8,
also proclaimed it as did Nikolin himself. But even as he
proclaims “independence”, he is advocating a
non-independent policy.  

By rejecting the idea of the working class pursuing a line of its own
in present-day politics and in all questions of democracy (or, in other
words, the idea of the working class “building a new Russia”) in
spite of the liberals, Nikolin virtually calls on the working class to
trail behind the liberals.  

That is the crux of the matter. That is the “logic of opportunism”.
As regards arguments to the effect that the working class should not be
“isolated”, that “the brunt of the struggle for political liberty should
not be borne by the workers”, that what is needed is “co-ordination and
not division of forces”, and so on, all that is meaningless rhetoric. In
fact, they are all descriptions and paraphrases of one and the same thing:
don’t isolate yourselves (from the liberals), “co-ordinate your
forces” (with liberal policy), recognise liberal policy to be an
effective struggle for political liberty and not for a deal with the
Purishkeviches, and so on and so forth.  

We did not dwell on that rhetoric because one who wants to argue on the
substance of the matter should take the real starting-points, the roots of
the differences, and not the rhetorical flourishes of a basically wrong
line.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The first quotation is taken from Frederick Engels’s The Berlin
Debates on the Revolution and the second from Karl Marx’s The Bill
for the Abolition of Feudal Labour Services (see Karl Marx) Friedrich
Engels, Werke, Band 5, Berlin. Dietz Verlag, 1959).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Successes of the American Workers









Lenin: The Successes of the American Workers







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Successes of the American Workers




Published:
Pravda No. 120, September 18, 1912.

      Signed M. N..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 335-336.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The latest issue of the American labour weekly, Appeal
to Reason, received in Europe reports that its circulation has
increased to 984,000 copies. The letters and demands coming in—writes the
editor (No. 875, September 7, new style)—indicate beyond doubt that we
shall exceed one million copies in the next few weeks.  

This figure—a million copies of a socialist weekly which American
courts harass and persecute shamelessly and which is growing and gaining
strength under the fire of persecution—-shows more clearly than long
arguments the kind of revolution that is approaching in America.  

Not long ago the sycophantic Novoye Vremya, a mouth piece of
venal hacks, wrote about the “power of money” in America, relating with
malicious joy the facts about the monstrous venality of Taft, Roosevelt,
Wilson and, indeed, all Presidential candidates put up by the
bourgeois parties. Here is a free, democratic republic for you, hissed the
venal Russian newspaper.  

The class-conscious workers will reply to that calmly and proudly: we
have no illusions about the significance of broad democracy. No democracy
in the world can eliminate the class struggle and the omnipotence of
money. It is not this that makes democracy important and useful. The
importance of democracy is that it makes the class struggle broad, open and
conscious. And this is not a conjecture or a wish, but a fact.  
 

At a time when the membership of the German Social-Democratic Party has
grown to 970,000 and when the circulation of an American socialist daily
has climbed to 984,000 copies, anyone who has eyes to see must acknowledge
that a proletarian is powerless when alone but that millions of
proletarians are all-powerful.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The End of the Italo-Turkish War









Lenin: The End of the Italo-Turkish War







V. I.  

      Lenin
The End of the Italo-Turkish War




Published:
Pravda No. 129, September 28, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 337-338.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Representatives of Italy and Turkey have signed preliminary
terms of peace, according to telegraphic reports.  

Italy has “won” the war, which she launched a year ago to seize
Turkish possessions in Africa. From now on, Tripoli will belong to
Italy. It is worth while taking a look at this typical colonial war, waged
by a “civilised” twentieth-century nation.  

What caused the war? The greed of the Italian money bags and
capitalists, who need new markets and new achievements for Italian
imperialism.  

What kind of war was it? A perfected, civilised blood bath, the
massacre of Arabs with the help of the “latest” weapons.  

The Arabs put up a desperate resistance. When, at the beginning of the
war, the Italian admirals were incautious enough to land 1,200 marines, the
Arabs attacked them and killed some 600. By way of “retaliation”, about
3,000 Arabs were butchered, whole families were plundered and done to
death, with women and children massacred in cold blood. The Italians are a
civilised, constitutional nation.  

About 1,000 Arabs were hanged.  

The Italian casualties exceeded 20,000, including 17,429 sick, 600
missing and 1,405 killed.  

The war cost the Italians over 800 million lire, or over 320 million
rubles. It resulted in terrible unemployment and industrial stagnation.


The Arabs lost about 14,800 lives. Despite the “peace”, the war will
actually go on, for the Arab tribes in the heart

    

of Africa, in areas far away from the coast, will refuse to submit. And for
a long time to come they will be “civilised” by bayonet, bullet, noose,
fire and rape.  

Italy, of course, is no better and no worse than the other capitalist
countries. All of them alike are governed by the bourgeoisie, which stops
at no carnage in its quest for new sources of profit.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Game of Chance









Lenin: A Game of Chance







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Game of Chance




Published:
Pravda No. 134, October 4, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 339-340.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Novoye Vremya fully discloses the plans of the
Russian nationalists. When reading this newspaper, which is “influential”
in nationalist quarters, as well as among the Octobrists, the plan that
they are firmly pursuing for robbing Turkey becomes obvious.  

As usual, the policy of chauvinism and seizure of foreign territory is
being carried out first and foremost by inciting the general public against
Austria. “The Balkan peoples,” writes Novoye Vremya, “have
rallied together for a holy war of independence. The Austrian diplomat is
on the look-out for the moment when they can be plundered.”  

Austria has torn off a chunk (Bosnia and Herzegovina) and Italy has
torn off another (Tripoli); it is now our turn to enrich ourselves—such
is the policy of Novoye Vremya. “A holy war of independence” is
merely a phrase to deceive simpletons, for no one in our own Russia has so
flouted the truly democratic principles of genuine independence of
all peoples as have the nationalists and the Octobrists.  

But why do the nationalists consider the time favourable for a policy
of plunder? This, too, can be clearly seen from Novoye
Vremya. Italy will not fight—it says in effect; as for Austria, it
would be risky for her to start a war against the Balkan Slays because she
has a kindred population of many millions, and Germany would not venture a
European war to defeat Turkey.  

The nationalists’ calculation is frank and shameless to the last
degree. While mouthing pompous words about “a holy war of independence”
of the peoples, they gamble with the lives of millions in the most
cold-blooded way by in citing the peoples to a carnage for the profit of a
handful of merchants and industrialists.  
 

The Triple Alliance (Germany, Austria and Italy) is weak at the moment,
for Italy has spent 800 million francs on the war against the Turks, and
the “interests” of Italy and Austria do not coincide in the
Balkans. Italy wants to snatch another morsel—Albania—but Austria will
not let her. Our nationalists, who count on this, are playing a reckless
game of chance, relying on the strength and wealth of two powers in the
Triple Entente (Britain and France) and on the fact that “Europe” will
not want a general war over the Straits or over the “rounding off” of
“our” territories at the expense of Asiatic Turkey.  

In a society of wage slavery, every merchant and every proprietor plays
a game of chance, saying as it were: “I shall either be ruined or make a
profit and ruin others.” Every year hundreds of capitalists go bankrupt
and millions of peasants, handicraftsmen and artisans are ruined. The
capitalist countries play a similar game of chance with the blood of
millions, whom they send into a carnage now here, now there with the aim of
seizing foreign territory and plundering their weaker neighbours.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Priesthood in the Elections, and Elections with the Priesthood









Lenin: The Priesthood in the Elections, and Elections with the Priesthood







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Priesthood in the Elections, and Elections with the Priesthood




Published:
Nevskaya Zvezda No. 27, October 5, 1912.

      Published according to the text in Nevskaya Zvezda.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 341-344.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

According to reports in the press, the congresses of small landowners
and deans of churches in 48 gubernias of European Russia have elected 7,990
delegates, including 8,516 priests. The latter make up 82 per cent.  

The complete returns for the fifty gubernias cannot much alter this
result.  

Let us, therefore, see what these elections signify.  

The law provides that the small landowners and the parishes shall elect
one delegate per electoral category established for participation
in the landowners’ congress. This means that the number of delegates must
be proportional to the amount of land owned by the electorate.  

Statistics for 1905 give the following data for the fifty gubernias of
European Russia: 





Church estates . . .              
1,900,000dessiatines


Lands privately owned by priests 
300,000 ”


Total owned by the priesthood 
2,200,000 ”


Lands privately owned by towns- people . . .
3,700,000 ”


Lands privately owned by peas- ants . . .
13,200,000 ”


Lands privately by other categories . . .
2,200,000 ”


Total of small holdings owned by “laymen” . . . 
19,100,000 ”




These data probably take account of small holdings to a lesser extent
than of the lands owned by the priesthood, Nevertheless, it follows that
the small private holdings

    

total 21,300,000 dessiatines, of which priests own 2,200,000 dessiatines,
or a little over one-tenth. Yet the priesthood has elected upwards
of eight-tenths of the total number of delegates!!  

How could that come about? It was simple enough. The fact is that small
landowners seldom go to elections—they lack the means and take little
interest in the matter; be sides, the police put a thousand obstacles in
the way of free elections. The priests, however, have all been “induced”
to attend.  

The priests will vote for the candidates who suit the government. This
explains why even the landlords are murmuring, to say nothing of
the bourgeoisie. The Octobrists and the nationalists are murmuring
too. They all accuse the government of “engineering” the
elections. But the landlords and the big bourgeoisie themselves
would like to engineer the elections.  

Thus there is a clash between absolutism, on the one hand, and the
landlords and the bourgeois bigwigs, on the other. The government wanted to
secure the backing of the landlords and the top strata of the bourgeoisie;
as is known, this idea underlies the whole law of June 3, 1907.  

As it happens, however, the government cannot get along even
with the Octobrists. It has not succeeded in organising
even a feudal-bourgeois monarchy of a kind “satisfactory” to
these classes.  

Unquestionably, this failure has in fact been acknowledged by the
government, which has set about organising its own officials in
the shape of the subordinate, dependent priesthood!  

In the science of history, this device of a government which retains
the essential features of absolutism is called Bonapartism. In this case,
it is not definite classes that serve as a support, or not they alone, and
not chiefly, but hand-picked elements, mostly from among various dependent
sections of the population.  

How is the possibility of this phenomenon to be explained in
“sociological” terms, i.e., from the standpoint of the class struggle?


It is due to a balance between the forces of the hostile or rival
classes. If, for example, the Purishkeviches are

    

competing with the Guchkovs and Ryabushinskys, the government
may—provided there is a certain balance between the forces of these
rivals—gain greater independence (within certain, rather narrow
limits, of course) than when either of these classes has a decisive
superiority. If, on the other hand, this government is historically linked
by continuity and so on with especially “vivid” forms of absolutism, and
if militarist and bureaucratic traditions in the sense of non-electivity of
judges and officials are strong in the country, then the limits of that
independence will be still greater, its manifestations still more open, the
methods used in “picking” voters, and electors voting on orders from
above, still more crude, and tyranny still more tangible.  

It is something like this that contemporary Russia is passing
through. The “step towards transformation into a bourgeois

      monarchy”[1]

is made more difficult by the borrowing of Bonapartist methods. Whereas in
France the bourgeois monarchy and the Bonapartist empire differed clearly
and sharply from each other, in Germany Bismarck gave models of a
“combination” of the two types, with those features which Marx called
“military

despotism”[2]—to say nothing of Bonapartism—obviously
predominating.  

It is said that the carp likes to be fried in sour cream. We don’t know
whether the philistine likes to be “fried” in a bourgeois monarchy, in
old feudal absolutism, in the “latest” type of Bonapartism or in military
despotism, or, lastly, in a certain blend of all these “methods”. But
while the distinction may seem very small from the point of view of the
philistine and so-called “legal order”, i.e., from a purely
juridical, formally constitutional point of view, it is substantial from
the point of view of the class struggle.  

It won’t make things easier for the philistine to know that he is being
beaten not only in the old way but in the new as well. But the
stability of a regime pressing down the philistine, the
conditions of development and disintegration of this regime, and
its capacity to suffer a rapid fiasco

    

all depend to a large degree on whether we are confronted with more or less
evident, open, solid and direct forms of rule of definite classes, or with
various indirect, unstable forms of their rule.  

The rule of classes is harder to eliminate than the unstable
forms of the superstructure steeped in the shabby spirit of old times and
supported by a picked “electorate”.  

The experiment of Sabler and Makarov in “organising” the priesthood
for the Fourth Duma elections should be of considerable interest to
everyone, both “sociologically” and in terms of practical politics.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 15, p. 347.—Ed.  
 



[2]
See Karl Marx, Critique of the Gotha Programme (Marx and
Engels, Selected Works, Moscow, 1958, Vol. II, p. 33).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Mr. Milyukov's “Position”









Lenin: Mr. Milyukov's 'Position'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Mr. Milyukov’s “Position”




Published:
Pravda No. 136, October 6, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 345-346.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The leader of the Cadet Party has lost his way in a wood of
three trees. He has been writing articles as long as Menshikov’s about
“three positions” and “one position”. The more he writes, the more
evident it becomes that he is trying to fool the reader with his
talk, to cover up the point at issue with his dull and empty
verbiage.  

Poor learned historian! He has to pretend that he does not see
the difference between liberalism and democracy. For the whole point is
this difference, gentlemen! The Duma votes in general, the attitude towards
“reforms”, the votes on the budget, and the issue of
“extra-parliamentary tactics” all bring out in different forms
one and the same point, the profound difference between the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie and the democrats.  

For the thousand and first time, we shall briefly repeat what this
difference is, for the benefit of the Milyukovs who “don’t understand”.


The liberals are defending a number of feudal-absolutist privileges (an
upper chamber, etc.). The democrats are waging an uncompromising struggle
against all privileges.  

The liberals are for agreement with the forces of the old in social
life: the democrats’ tactics are to eliminate these forces.  

The liberals are afraid of the independent activity of the masses, they
do not trust it, they reject it; the democrats sympathise with it, believe
in it, support and encourage it.  

That is enough for the moment.  

Does Mr. Milyukov really “not understand” this difference, which is
familiar even from textbooks of history?  
 

Does he really “not understand” that the very programme of
the Cadets is a programme of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie,
not of the democrats, and that only liberals (and bad ones at that) could
have voted for the budget in the Third Duma, could have declared themselves
a loyal opposition, etc.?  

Mr. Milyukov understands this perfectly well, and he is trying to fool
people with his talk, pretending that he has forgotten the ABC of the
difference between liberalism and democracy.  

To register in print this pitiful dodging of the Cadets, we shall
remark to Mr. Milyukov that in all the official Social-Democratic
press (except, of course, that of the liquidators, whom we will gladly give
up to Mr. Milyukov), in all the resolutions of the guiding
Social-Democratic bodies, and in the whole policy of the Social-Democrats
in the Third Duma, we always and invariably meet, in thousands of forms,
with the defence of the old tactics which Mr. Milyukov says the
Social-Democrats have abandoned.  

It is an indisputable historical fact, esteemed learned historian!


We must register in print how low the Cadets must have fallen if they
try to deceive the public on questions which are so elementary and have
been made perfectly clear by the history of the political parties in
Russia.  

In conclusion, a little question to Mr. Milyukov—to sum up and
recapitulate what we have said: when you Cadet gentlemen agreed to bar
Voiloshnikov from five
sessions,[1] were you acting as liberals or as democrats?  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
This refers to the following fact: 

A. A. Voiloshnikov, a member of the Social-Democratic group in the
Third Duma, speaking on December 2 (15), 1911, at the Thirty-Fifth Sitting
of the Duma in the debate on tile Bill to amend the Rules on Military
Service, described the tsarist army as a police force and called for the
standing army to be replaced by the arming of the whole people. On account
of this speech the Chair man of the Duma moved that Voiloshnikov be
excluded from the next five sittings. Following Voiloshnikov’s second
speech at the same sitting the period of exclusion was increased to fifteen
sittings. The Cadets voted for the original motion of the Chairman.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Deputy of the St. Petersburg Workers









Lenin: Deputy of the St. Petersburg Workers







V. I.  

      Lenin
Deputy of the St. Petersburg Workers




Published:
Pravda No. 144, October 16, 1912.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 347-348.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The proletariat of the capital is sending one of its
elected representatives into the reactionary Duma of the landlords and
priests. It is a glorious position this representative will hold. He will
have to speak and act on behalf of millions; he will have to unfurl a great
banner; he will have to voice the views that for years have been expressed
in formal, specific, precise terms by the responsible spokesmen of Marxism
and working-class democracy.  

The election of someone to that position is a matter of such vast
importance that it would be petty, cowardly and disgraceful to be afraid to
speak of it straightforwardly, without beating about the bush, to be afraid
of “offending” a particular individual, a particular circle, etc.  

The election should accord with the will of the majority of the
class-conscious, Marxist workers. That is obvious. Nobody would venture to
deny this outright.  

Everyone knows that from 1908 to 1912 a fight was waged among the
St. Petersburg workers between the opponents of liquidationism and the
liquidators at hundreds and thou sands of meetings, discussions and talks,
and in various press organs. It would be unseemly for anyone to bury his
head in the sand like an ostrich and try to “forget” this fact.  

Things are being muddled up by those who today are shouting about
“unity” over the election of one deputy, for they are raising
the wrong issue and obscuring the essential point by their
shouting.  

What has “unity” to do with it when it is necessary to elect
one person and all are agreed that he must express the will of the
majority of the class-conscious worker Marxists??  
 

The liquidators are afraid to say plainly that they would like the
choice to be a liquidator or a “non-factionalist” (i.e., a waverer). And
since they are afraid to defend their views openly, they are
trying to smuggle them through by deceit, by shouting about
“unity”.  

It is our duty to expose this confusion. If the liquidators are in a
majority among the class-conscious workers, no one on earth can prevent
them from electing a liquidator. We must establish as accurately, calmly,
firmly, prudently and certainly as possible which side has the majority,
with out bothering about the outcries of people who, after five years
of struggle, are advocating “unity” (a few days before the
elections!) in order to conceal their views.  

The workers are not children to believe a fairy-tale like that. Only
one of three possible decisions can be adopted:
(1) to choose a liquidator;
(2) to choose an opponent of liquidationism;
(3) to choose a waverer. There have been no others among the
Social-Democrats during the five years between 1908 and 1912, nor are there
any today!  

Workers who want to act as adult and independent people must not
tolerate political strike-breakers in their midst. They must see to it that
the will of the majority of class-conscious workers is respected and
executed.  

The workers need a deputy who will express the will of the majority and
will know for certain what work he will carry out in and outside
the Duma.  

The will of the majority has been stated, and the deputy for
St. Petersburg should be a determined opponent of liquidationism and a
supporter of consistent working-class democracy.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Balkan Peoples and European Diplomacy









Lenin: The Balkan Peoples and European Diplomacy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Balkan Peoples and European Diplomacy




Published:
Pravda No. 144, October 16, 1912.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 349-350.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Public attention is fixed on the Balkans just now, and understandably
so. For the whole of Eastern Europe, the hour is perhaps striking when the
peoples themselves will have their free and decisive word to say. There is
no longer room for the game of the bourgeois “powers” and their diplomats
who are past masters of intrigue, scheming and selfishly tripping up one
another.  

The Balkan peoples might say, as our serfs used to in the old days:
“Save us from lordly anger and lordly love, the worst of all

misfortunes.”[1] For the Balkan peasants and workers, both hostile and
would-be friendly intervention by the European “powers” means only adding
all sorts of fetters and hindrances to free progress to the general
conditions of capitalist exploitation.  

That is one reason why it is essential to fight against both
bureaucratic-governmental and liberal “diplomacy”. Rech, for
example, was false through and through when, a few days ago, it invited
“Russian society” (i.e., the bourgeoisie) to remember the statement of a
British ministerial organ which said that Europe would not permit
“misgovernment” in the Balkans! “Let our diplomats not sit back idly,”
shouted Rech.  

Even the most “liberal” bourgeois Europe, we say in reply, can bring
the Balkans nothing but support for decay and stagnation, nothing but
bureaucratic obstacles to freedom. It is “Europe” that is hindering the
establishment of a federal republic in the Balkans.  
 

The foremost workers in the Balkans, and all Balkan democrats, pin
their hopes solely on the development of the political consciousness,
democratic spirit and independent activity of the masses, and not
on the intrigues of bourgeois diplomats, whatever liberal phrases they
adorn themselves with!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Said by Liza, the maid, in Alexander Griboyedov’s comedy Wit Works
Woe.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Fox and the Hen-Coop









Lenin: The Fox and the Hen-Coop







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Fox and the Hen-Coop




Published:
Pravda No. 146, October 18, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 351-352.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The issue of a Balkan war and of “Europe’s” attitude to
it is the most burning political issue today. It is important for all
democrats in general and for the working class in particular to
understand the class interests guiding this or that party in this
matter.  

The policy of the Octobrists, nationalists and unaffiliated
“patriots”, from Novoye Vremya to Russkoye Slovo, is
clear and simple. The badgering of Austria, incitement to war against her,
and shouts about the “Slav tasks” of Russia are a poorly disguised
endeavour to divert attention from Russia’s domestic affairs and to “grab
a piece” of Turkey. Support for reaction at home and for colonial,
imperialist plunder abroad—such is the essence of this crude
“patriotic” “Slav” policy.  

The Cadets’ policy is couched in more subtle and diplomatic terms, but
in effect their policy is also a reactionary great-power policy of
imperialism. It is particularly important to understand this, for
the liberals cunningly veil their views with democratic-sounding phrases.


Look at Rech. At first—prior to the “love tryst” of
Milyukov and

Sazonov[1]—it accused Sazonov of “readiness to bargain” and
reproached the nationalists with weakening the “great idea” of capturing
Constantinople. But now, after the tryst, Rech agrees with
Rossiya, vigorously censuring the “foolish enthusiasm” of
Novoye Vremya.  

But what is the policy of Rech today?  

We must not begin with proud demands, for if we do we shall lose
support (from France and Britain), and shall “end by becoming, in spite of
ourselves, even more modest than we should be” (No. 278)!!  
 

And so, Rech is against the chauvinists because they
“will end by being more modest than they should be”. It is as much as to
say: you chauvinists are bragging and you’ll get nothing. But we are in
favour of grabbing a big chunk quietly and peacefully, with the support of
the French and British bourgeoisie!  

“We need” support (from the Triple Entente) “in the interests of our
own Balkan protégés”, writes Rech. Mark
this: Rech, too, favours the idea of Russia
“protecting” the Slavs, of the fox protecting the hen-coop,
except that it wants this done more cunningly!  


   “All that can be achieved has to be achieved only in
   this way—through the joint efforts of European diplomacy,” declares
   Rech.  


It is clear enough: the essence of Cadet policy is the same kind of
chauvinism and imperialism as that of Novoye Vremya, only more
cunning and subtle. Novoye Vremya roughly and stupidly threatens
war on behalf of Russia alone. Rech, “subtly and
diplomatically”, likewise threatens war, but only on
behalf of the Triple Entente, for to say “we must not be more modest than
we should be” means precisely threatening war. Novoye Vremya is
in favour of the Slavs being protected by Russia, while
Rech favours their protection by the Triple Entente. In other
words, Novoye Vremya wants to see only our fox in the hen-coop,
while Rech favours an agreement among three foxes.  

Democrats in general and workers in particular are opposed to all
“protection” of the Slavs by foxes or wolves, and advocate the complete
self-determination of nations, complete democracy, and the liberation of
the Slavs from all protection by the “Great Powers”.  

The liberals and nationalists are arguing about different ways
of plundering and enslaving the Balkan peoples by the European
bourgeoisie. Only the workers are pursuing a genuinely democratic policy,
for freedom and democracy everywhere and completely, against all
“protection”, plunder and intervention!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Milyukov met Sazonov, Minister of the Interior, in September 1912 to
discuss the Balkan policy of the tsarist government.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Disgraceful Resolution









Lenin: A Disgraceful Resolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Disgraceful Resolution




Published:
Pravda No. 146, October 18, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 353-354.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The resolution adopted by the St. Petersburg City Council
on October 10 has attracted public attention.  

The resolution concerns the Balkan war, the most important event in
world politics, and it comes from an influential public body—influential
among the bourgeoisie. It was adopted unanimously by avowed
reactionaries and by liberals.  

Falbork, a liberal, and all but a “democrat” (!?) and Cadet, urged
the necessity of that kind of resolution in an “ardent speech”; he was a
member of the drafting commission, and voted for the resolution.  

This resolution is a specimen of bourgeois chauvinism, of the
bourgeoisie’s abject servility to “the powers that be”, of bourgeois
support for a policy which turns the peoples into cannon fodder.  


   “St. Petersburg,” says the resolution, which is
   addressed to the capitals of the belligerent Balkan powers, “shares your
   hope of a bright future of independent liberty for the oppressed peoples, a
   liberty in whose name you are shedding your blood.”  


This is the sort of phrases that chauvinism hides behind! Never and
nowhere has “liberty” been won by the oppressed peoples through one
people waging war against another. Wars between peoples merely
increase the enslavement of peoples. Real liberty for the Slav
peasant in the Balkans, as well as for the Turkish peasant, can be ensured
only by complete liberty inside every country and by a
federation of completely and thoroughly democratic states.  

The Slav and the Turkish peasants in the Balkans are brothers who are
equally “oppressed” by their landlords and their governments.  
 

That is where real oppression lies, and the real obstacle to
“independence” and “liberty”.  

The reactionary and liberal chauvinists, who are openly making common
cause in the St. Petersburg City Council (just as they are covertly making
common cause in the press, for the arguments of Rech and
Novoye Vremya on this point are at bottom identical,
differing only in tone and detail)—these chauvinists advocate turning the
peoples into can non fodder!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Two Utopias









Lenin: Two Utopias







V. I.  

      Lenin
Two Utopias




Written: Written in October 1912 

Published:

      First published in Zhizn No. 1, 1924.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 355-359.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Utopia is a Greek word, composed of ou, not, and
topos, a place. It means a place which does not exist, a fantasy,
invention or fairy-tale.  

In politics utopia is a wish that can never come true—neither now nor
afterwards, a wish that is not based on social forces and is not supported
by the growth and development of political, class forces.  

The less freedom there is in a country, the scantier the manifestations
of open class struggle an4 the lower the educational level of the
masses, the more easily political utopias usually arise and the
longer they persist.  

In modern Russia, two kinds of political utopia have been most
persistent and they exert a certain influence on the masses owing to their
appeal. They are the liberal utopia and the Narodnik utopia.  

The liberal utopia alleges that one could bring about appreciable
improvements in Russia, in her political liberty, and in the condition of
the mass of her working people, peacefully and harmoniously, without
hurting any one’s feelings, without removing the Purishkeviches, with out a
ruthless class struggle fought to a finish. It is the utopia of
peace between a free Russia and the Purishkeviches.  

The Narodnik utopia is a dream of the Narodnik intellectuals and
Trudovik peasants who imagine that a new and just division of the land
could abolish the power and rule of capital and do away with wage
slavery, or that a “just”, “equalised” division of the land could be
maintained under the domination of capital, under the rule of
money, under commodity production.  
 

What is it that gives rise to these utopias? Why do they persist rather
strongly in present-day Russia?  

They are engendered by the interests of the classes which are waging a
struggle against the old order, serfdom, lack of rights—in a word,
“against the Purishkeviches”, and which do not occupy an independent
position in this struggle. Utopia, or day-dreaming, is a product of this
lack of independence, this weakness. Day-dreaming is the lot of
the weak.  

The liberal bourgeoisie in general, and the liberal-bourgeois
intelligentsia in particular, cannot but strive for liberty and legality,
since without these the domination of the bourgeoisie is incomplete, is
neither undivided nor guaranteed. But the bourgeoisie is more
afraid of the movement of the masses than of reaction. Hence the striking,
incredible weakness of the liberals in politics, their absolute
impotence. Hence the endless series of equivocations, falsehoods,
hypocrisies and cowardly evasions in the entire policy of the liberals, who
have to play at democracy to win the support of the masses but at
the same time are deeply anti-democratic, deeply hostile to the movement of
the masses, to their initiative, their way of “storming heaven”, as Marx
once described one of the mass movements in Europe in the last

century.[1] 

The utopia of liberalism is a utopia of impotence in the matter of the
political emancipation of Russia, a utopia of the self-interested moneybags
who want “peacefully” to share privileges with the Purishkeviches and
pass off this noble desire as the theory of “peaceful” victory for
Russian democracy. The liberal utopia means day-dreaming about how to beat
the Purishkeviches without defeating them, how to break them without,
hurting them. Clearly, this utopia is harmful not only because it is a
utopia, but also because it corrupts the democratic consciousness
of the masses. If they believe in this utopia, the masses will
never win freedom; they are not worthy of freedom; they fully deserve to be
maltreated by the Purishkeviches.  

The utopia of the Narodniks and Trudoviks is the day dreaming of the
petty proprietor, who stands midway between the capitalist and the
wage-worker, about abolishing wage slavery without a class struggle. When
the issue of economic emancipation becomes as close, immediate and

    

burning for Russia as the issue of political emancipation is
today, the utopia of the Narodniks will prove no less harmful than
that of the liberals.  

But Russia is still in the period of her bourgeois and not proletarian
transformation; it is not the question of the economic emancipation of the
proletariat that has most completely matured, but the question of
political liberty, i.e. (in effect), of complete bourgeois liberty.  

And in this latter question, the Narodnik utopia plays a peculiar
historical role. Being a utopia in regard to the economic consequences that
a new division of the land should (and would) have, it is an accompaniment
and symptom of the great, mass democratic upsurge of the
peasant masses, i.e., the masses that constitute the majority of
the population in bourgeois-feudal, modern, Russia. (In a purely bourgeois
Russia, as in purely bourgeois Europe, the peasantry will not form the
majority of the population.)  

The liberal utopia corrupts the democratic consciousness of the
masses. The Narodnik utopia, which corrupts their socialist
consciousness, is an accompaniment, a symptom, and in part even an
expression of their democratic upsurge.  

The dialectics of history is such that the Narodniks and the Trudoviks
propose and promote, as an anti-capitalist remedy, a highly consistent and
thoroughgoing capitalist measure with regard to the agrarian question in
Russia. An “equalised” new division of the land is utopian, yet a most
complete rupture—a rupture indispensable for a new
division—with the whole of the old landownership, whether landlord,
allotment or “crown”, is the most necessary, economically progressive
and, for a state like Russia, most urgent measure towards bourgeois
democracy.  

We should remember Engels’s notable dictum: 

“What formally may be economically incorrect, may all the same be
correct from the point of view of world

history”.[2] 

Engels advanced this profound thesis in connection with utopian
socialism: that socialism was “fallacious” in the formal economic
sense. That socialism was “fallacious” when it declared surplus value an
injustice from the point of view of the laws of exchange. The
theoreticians of bourgeois

    

political economy were right, in objecting to that socialism, in
the formal economic sense, for surplus value results from the laws of
exchange quite “naturally”, quite “justly”.  

But utopian socialism was right from the point of view of
world history, for it was a symptom, an expression, a harbinger of the
class which, born of capitalism, has by now, in the beginning of the
twentieth century, become a mass force which can put an end to capitalism
and is irresistibly advancing to this goal.  

Engels’s profound thesis must be borne in mind when appraising the
present-day Narodnik or Trudovik utopia in Russia (perhaps not only in
Russia but in a number of Asiatic countries going through bourgeois
revolutions in the twentieth century).  

Narodnik democracy, while fallacious from the formal economic
point of view, is correct from the historical point of view;
this democracy, while fallacious as a socialist utopia, is
correct in terms of the peculiar, historically conditioned
democratic struggle of the peasant masses which is an inseparable element
of the bourgeois transformation and a condition for its complete victory.


The liberal utopia discourages the peasant masses from fighting. The
Narodnik utopia expresses their aspiration to fight, and promises them a
million blessings in the event of victory, while this victory will in fact
yield them only a hundred blessings. But is it not natural that the
millions who are marching to battle, who for ages have lived in unheard-of
ignorance, want, poverty, squalor, abandonment and downtroddenness, should
magnify tenfold the fruits of an eventual victory?  

The liberal utopia is a veil for the self-seeking desire of the new
exploiters to share in the privileges of the old exploiters. The Narodnik
utopia is an expression of the aspiration of the toiling millions of the
petty bourgeoisie to put an end altogether to the old, feudal
exploiters, but it also expresses the false hope that the new, capitalist
exploiters can be abolished along with them.  

 

Clearly, the Marxists, who are hostile to all and every
utopia, must uphold the independence of the class which can fight feudalism
with supreme devotion precisely because it is not even
one-hundredth part involved in property owner ship which makes the
bourgeoisie a half-hearted opponent, and often an ally, of the feudal
lords. The peasants are involved in small commodity production; given a
favour able conjuncture of historical circumstances, they can
achieve the most complete abolition of feudalism, but they will
always—inevitably and not accidentally—show a certain vacillation
between the bourgeoisie and the proletariat, between liberalism and
Marxism.  

Clearly, the Marxists must carefully extract the sound and valuable
kernel of the sincere, resolute, militant democracy of the peasant masses
from the husk of Narodnik utopias.  

In the old Marxist literature of the eighties one can discover
systematic effort to extract this valuable democratic kernel. Some day
historians will study this effort systematically and trace its connection
with what in the first decade of the twentieth century came to be called
“Bolshevism”.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The expression is taken from the letter appraising the Paris Commune
which Karl Marx wrote to L. Kugelmann on April 12, 1871 (Marx and Engels,
Selected Works, Moscow, 1958, Vol. II, p. 463).





[2]
Lenin is quoting from Frederick Engels’s preface to the first German
edition of Karl Marx’s The Poverty of Philosophy (Foreign
Languages Publishing House, Moscow, pp. 12–13).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Debates in Britain on Liberal Labour Policy









Lenin: Debates in Britain on Liberal Labour Policy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Debates in Britain on Liberal Labour Policy




Written: Written in October 1912 

Published:

      First published in Prosveshcheniye No. 4, April 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the magazine text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 360-365.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It is well known that in Britain there are two workers’
parties: the British Socialist Party, as the Social-Democrats now call
themselves, and the so-called Independent Labour Party.  

This split in the British workers’ socialist movement is no
accident. It originated long ago. It arose out of the specific features of
British history. Capitalism developed in Britain before it did in any other
country, and for a long time Britain was the “workshop” of the
world. This exceptional, monopoly position created relatively tolerable
conditions of life for the labour aristocracy, i.e., for the
minority of skilled, well-paid workers in Britain.  

Hence the petty-bourgeois, craft spirit in the ranks of this labour
aristocracy, which has been divorcing itself from its class, following in
the wake of the Liberals, and treating socialism contemptuously as a
“utopia”. The Independent Labour Party is a party of liberal labour
policy. It is justly said that this Party is “independent” only of
socialism, but very dependent on liberalism.  

In recent times Britain’s monopoly has been thoroughly undermined. The
previous relatively tolerable conditions of life have given way to extreme
want as a consequence of the high cost of living. The class struggle is
becoming immensely intensified, and along with this the basis for
opportunism, the former basis for the spread of the ideas of liberal labour
policy among the working class, is being undermined.  

So long as these ideas persisted among considerable numbers of British
workers, elimination of the split among the workers was out of the
question. Unity cannot be created by phrases and desires, so long
as the Social-Democrats

    

have to fight against liberal labour policy. At the present time,
however, this unity is really becoming possible, be cause the
protest against liberal labour policy is growing in the
Independent Labour Party itself.  

Before us lies the official report of the latest, Twentieth, Annual
Conference of that Party, held at Merthyr on May 27 and 28, 1912. The
debate on parliamentary policy given in the report is extremely
interesting; essentially it was a debate on a deeper issue, that of
Social-Democratic and liberal labour policies, although the speakers did
not use these terms.  

The Conference debate was opened by Jowett, M.P. He moved a resolution
against supporting the Liberals, of which we shall speak in greater detail
below, and a fellow-thinker, Conway, who seconded the motion, said plainly:
“The aver age worker is asking the question whether the Labour Party in
Parliament has a view of its own.” Suspicion is growing among the workers
that the Labour Party is “tied” to the Liberals. “A feeling is growing
in the country that the Labour Party is simply a wing of the Liberal
Party.” It should be observed that the Parliamentary Labour Party consists
not only of I.L.P. M.P.s, but also of M.P.s sponsored by trade
unions. These call themselves Labour M.P.s and Labour Party members, and
do not belong to the I.L.P. The British opportunists have
succeeded in doing what the opportunists in other countries are frequently
inclined to do, namely, in combining opportunist “socialist” M.P.s with
the M.P.s of allegedly non-party trade unions. The notorious “broad labour
party”, of which certain Mensheviks spoke in Russia in 1906–07, has
materialised in Britain, and only in Britain.  

To give practical expression to his views, Jowett moved a resolution,
drawn up in the truly “British” manner, that is, without any general
principles (the British pride them selves on their “practicality” and
their dislike for general principles; this is just another expression of
the craft spirit in the labour movement). The resolution called on the
Labour group in the House of Commons to ignore all threats that
the Liberal government might find itself in a minority and so be compelled
to resign, and to vote steadfastly on the merits of the questions
brought before them.  
 

Jowett’s motion “took the bull by the horns”. The Liberal Cabinet in
Britain, like the entire Liberal Party, is doing its utmost to persuade the
workers that all forces must be united against reaction (i.e., against the
Conservative Party), that the Liberal majority must be preserved, for it
may melt away if the workers do not vote with the Liberals, and that the
workers must not isolate themselves but must support the Liberals. And so
Jowett puts the question clearly: vote “steadfastly”, ignore the threat
that the Liberal government may fall, do not vote as the interests of the
Liberal Party require it, but on the merits of the questions, i.e., in
Marxist language—pursue an independent proletarian class policy and not a
liberal labour policy.  

(In the ranks of the Independent Labour Party, Marxism is rejected
on principle, and that is why Marxist language is not used at
all.)  

The opportunists, who predominate in the Party, immediately attacked
Jowett. And—characteristically—they did it exactly as opportunists, in
a roundabout way, by an evasion. They did not want to say plainly
that they were in favour of supporting the Liberals. They
expressed their idea in general phrases, and, of course, did not
fail to mention the “independence” of the working class. Just like our
liquidators, who always shout especially loudly about the “independence”
of the working class whenever they are in fact preparing to
replace its independence by a liberal labour policy.  

Murray, the representative of the opportunist majority, moved an
amendment, i.e., counter-resolution, as follows: 


   “That this Conference recognises that the Labour Party,
   in order to effectually carry out its object, must continue to regard all
   the possible consequences and effects, immediate and otherwise, of any line
   of action before adopting it, bearing in mind that its decisions must be
   guided solely by consideration for its own interest as a party. and by
   desire to increase its opportunities for attaining its ends.”  


Compare the two motions. Jowett’s motion clearly demanded a break with
the policy of supporting the Liberals. Murray’s consisted of meaningless
commonplaces, quite plausible and at first sight indisputable, but
in fact serving to disguise precisely the policy of
supporting the Liberals. Had Murray been acquainted with Marx, and had he

    

been speaking to people who respected Marxism, he would have thought
nothing of sweetening his opportunism with Marxist turns of speech and
saying that Marxism demands that all the concrete circumstances of each
particular case should be taken into consideration, that we must not tie
our hands, that while preserving our independence we “take advantage of
conflicts”, “seize at the Achilles heel of the contradictions” in the
present regime, and so on and so forth.  

Opportunism can be expressed in terms of any doctrine you
like, including Marxism. The peculiarity of the “destiny of Marxism”
in Russia lies precisely in the fact that not only opportunism in the
workers’ party, but also opportunism in the liberal party (Izgoyev and
Co.), likes to dress itself in Marxist “terms”! But that is by
the way. Let us return to Merthyr.  

Jowett was supported by McLachlan.  


   “What are the interests of a political party?” he asked. “Are the
   interests of the party merely to be served by retaining men in the House of
   Commons? If the interests of the party are to be considered, then the men
   and women who are outside Parliament have as much right to be considered as
   the men in Parliament. As a socialist organisation we should try to give
   effect to our principles in our political activities.”  


And McLachlan referred to the vote on the Heswell Reformatory case. A
boy inmate of the reformatory had been tortured to death. A question was
asked in Parliament. The Liberal Cabinet was threatened with defeat:
Britain is not Prussia, and a Cabinet that is in the minority must
resign. And so, to save the Cabinet, the Labour M.P.s voted in favour of
whitewashing the torturer.  

The Labour Party, said McLachlan, keeps on taking into account the
effect which their vote might have on the fate of the government, thinking
that should the Cabinet fall, Parliament would be dissolved and a new
general election announced. But that was nothing to be afraid of. The fall
of the Cabinet and the announcement of new elections would result in a
combination of the two bourgeois parties (McLachlan simply said:
the “other two parties”, without the word “bourgeois”. The British do
not like Marxist terms!), and the sooner that happened, the better for
our movement. The words of our propagandists should be carried into
effect by

    

the work of our men in the House. Until that was done, the Tory (i.e.,
Conservative) workman would never believe there was any difference
between the Liberal and Labour Parties. Even if we lost every seat in
the House through upholding our principles, it would do more good than
attempts to coax a Liberal government into making concessions!  

Keir Hardie, M.P., the Party leader, twists and turns.  


   “It is not true to say that the Labour Party upholds the
   balance of power. The Liberals and Irishmen in the House can outvote the
   Tory and Labour members.... In the case of the Heswell Reformatory I voted
   for the government purely on the merits of the case, and not in support of
   the government. The superintendent had been guilty of harshness and
   cruelty, and every Labour member went to the House determined to vote
   against the government. But during the debate the other side was put, and
   it showed that although the superintendent had been guilty of cruel
   treatment, the record of the School was the best in the Kingdom. Under
   those circumstances it would have been wrong to vote against the
   government.... [Such is the p ass to which the British opportunists have
   brought the Labour Party: the leader was not howled down for that sort of
   speech, but was listened to calmly!]  

   “The real trouble is hot with the I. L. P. members, but
   that when the Labour Party took over the Miners’ Federation, and the
   miners’ members joined the Labour group, they were Liberals, and
   they have not changed their opinions, since they gave a purely
   nominal adherence to the Party....  

   “Jowett’s resolution reduces Parliamentary government to
   absurdity. The consequences of any vote must be considered....  

   “I would advise the previous question as regards both
   the resolution and the amendment.” (!!!)  


Lansbury, supporting Jowett’s resolution, said: 


   “It is not so foolish as Keir Hardie would have us
   suppose. It does not mean that in voting upon a question every
   consideration should be ignored but only the consideration as to
   what effect it would have on the government. I got into the socialist
   movement through sheer disgust with political caucuses and bosses, and the
   control of the House of Commons by such people. My experience has been that
   every question that comes up for discussion has to be discussed in regard
   to its probable effect on the fortunes of the government of the day.  

   “It makes it almost impossible for the Labour Party to
   differentiate itself from the Liberal Party. I do not know of any
   particular piece of legislation in connection with which the Labour Party
   has in any kind of way differentiated itself from the Liberals. We as a
   party were part and parcel of the government in regard to the Insurance
   Act.... The Labour Party voted steadily for the Bill, and stood by the
   government all the way through.  
 

   “I was ashamed of the vote over the Heswell
   Reformatory. When a man poured boiling water over a boy until he died I
   felt ashamed of ... voting for the whitewashing of that man. On that
   occasion the Labour Party whips ran about the House bringing up their men
   to prevent the government being defeated.... To accustom men ... to voting
   against their consciences is deadly for the future of democracy in this
   country....”  


Philip Snowden, M.P., one of the most rabid Opportunists, wriggled like
an eel. He said: 


   “My fighting instinct inclines me to support the
   resolution, but my common sense, judgement, and experience induce me to
   vote for the amendment. I agree that the present Parliamentary system has a
   demoralising effect upon those who went to the House moved by idealism and
   political enthusiasm. But I do not believe the adoption of Jowett’s
   resolution will make much difference. The merits of a question are not
   confined to the particular question itself. There are certain issues which
   the Labour Party considers of greater importance than any possible
   consequences of voting for the government—Women’s Suffrage is one—but
   are we to disregard consequences on every paltry issue? This policy would
   necessitate repeated General Elections and nothing is more irritating to
   the public than such con tests.... Politics means compromise.”  


When a Vote was taken, 73 voted for the resolution and 195
against.  

The opportunists carried the day. That is not surprising in an
opportunist party like the British I.L.P. But it is now a fully established
fact that opportunism is giving rise to an opposition in the ranks of this
very Party.  

The opponents of opportunism acted far more correctly than their
like-minded colleagues in Germany frequently do when they defend rotten
compromises with the opportunists. The fact that they came out openly with
their resolution gave rise to an extremely important debate on principles,
and this debate will have a very strong effect on the British working
class. Liberal labour policy persists owing to tradition, routine and the
agility of opportunist leaders. But its bankruptcy among the mass of the
proletariat is inevitable.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Cadet Professor









Lenin: A Cadet Professor







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Cadet Professor




Published:
Pravda No. 147, October 19, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 366-367.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Professor Tugan-Baranovsky, a candidate of the Cadet Party,
is one of those Russian economists who were near-Marxists in their youth
but later quickly “grew wiser”, “corrected” Marx with shreds of
bourgeois theories, and by their great services as renegades secured
university chairs from which to bamboozle students in erudite fashion.


A few days ago Mr. Tugan, who bas developed from a Marxist into a
liberal, dished up in the newspaper Rech the following argument
concerning the burning issue of the high cost of living: 


   “In my [?] view, the main [aha!] reason for the
   increased cost of living is perfectly clear. It is due to the enormous
   growth of the population, chiefly in the towns. The increased population
   necessitates a change to the use of more intensive cultivation methods,
   which, in accordance with the well-known law of declining
   productivity of agricultural labour, leads to a higher labour cost per
   unit of product.”  


Mr. Tugan likes to shout “I” and “my”. But in fact he merely
repeats shreds of bourgeois doctrines refuted long ago by Marx.  

The “well-known law of declining productivity” is a bit of old
bourgeois rubbish, which ignoramuses and the hired scholars of the
bourgeoisie use to justify capitalism. Marx long ago disproved
this “law”, which puts the blame on nature (as if to say,
productivity of labour is dropping, and there’s nothing to be done about
it!), whereas in fact the blame lies with the capitalist social
system.  

The “law of declining productivity of agricultural labour” is a
bourgeois lie. The law of the growth of rent, i.e., of the income
of the owners of land, under capitalism is a reality.  
 

One reason for the high cost of living is land monopoly,
i.e., the fact that land is held as private property. The landowners are
therefore taking an ever greater contribution from growing
productivity of labour. Only the organisation of the workers to defend
their interests, only the abolition of the capitalist mode of production,
can put an end to the high cost of living.  

None but hangers-on of the bourgeoisie, such as the Cadet Mr. Tugan,
are capable of trying to defend the fable about the “law” of declining
productivity of agricultural labour.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A New Chapter of World History









Lenin: A New Chapter of World History







V. I.  

      Lenin
A New Chapter of World History




Published:
Pravda No. 149, October 21, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 368-369.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Even the bourgeois press throughout Europe, which for
reactionary and selfish reasons defended the notorious status quo
in the Balkans, is now unanimous in acknowledging that a new chapter of
world history has begun.  

The defeat of Turkey is beyond question. The victories won by the
Balkan states united in a quadruple alliance (Serbia, Bulgaria, Montenegro
and Greece) are tremendous. The alliance of these four states is a
fact. “The Balkans for the Balkan peoples” is something that has
already been achieved.  

What, then, is the significance of the new chapter of world history?


In Eastern Europe (Austria, the Balkans, Russia), the powerful
survivals of medievalism, which terribly hamper social development and the
growth of the proletariat, have not yet been abolished. These survivals are
absolutism (unlimited autocratic power), feudalism (landlordism and feudal
privileges) and the suppression of nationalities.  

The class-conscious workers of the Balkan countries are the first to
put forward the slogan of a consistently democratic solution of the
national problem in the Balkans. That slogan calls for a Balkan federal
republic. The weakness of the democratic classes in the present-day Balkan
states (where the proletariat is small in number and the peasants are
downtrodden, disunited and illiterate) has resulted in an economically and
politically indispensable alliance be coming an alliance of Balkan
monarchies.  

The national question in the Balkans has taken a big stride towards its
settlement. Of all the states of Eastern Europe, Russia alone
remains the most backward today.  
 

Although the alliance which has come into being in the Balkans is an
alliance of monarchies and not of republics, and although this alliance has
come about through war and not through revolution, a great step has
nevertheless been taken towards doing away with the survivals of
medievalism throughout Eastern Europe. And you are rejoicing prematurely,
nationalist gentlemen! That step is against you, for there are
more survivals of medievalism in Russia than anywhere
else!  

As for Western Europe, the proletariat there is still more vigorously
proclaiming the slogan: No intervention! The Balkans for the Balkan
peoples!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Cadets and Nationalists









Lenin: Cadets and Nationalists







V. I.  

      Lenin
Cadets and Nationalists




Published:
Pravda No. 151, October 24, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 370-371.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

When we pointed out that the Cadets were essentially
national-liberals in their outlook and that their approach to the national
question was anything but democratic, we got an angry and haughty
retort from Rech, which accused us of not knowing the facts or
misrepresenting them.  

Here is a record—one of many. Let the readers and voters judge for
themselves.  

On October 18 a “circle of persons interested in the Slav question”
held a second meeting at Mr. M.M. Kovalevsky’s.  An appeal to society was
read, signed by Y. Anichkov.  Kareyev, L. Panteleyev (Cadet ex-candidate),
G. Falbork, Mr. Kovalevsky (of course) and others.  

Will Rech try to dodge responsibility for Kareyev, Panteleyev
and Co.?  

The gist of the liberals’ appeal to society is that 


   “amidst general enthusiasm, the hearts of the
   Russians... are beating in sympathy for the Slavs and with the hope
   that Russian national consciousness will help to ensure that they
   retain the fruits of their victories”.  


In what way does this differ from the nationalism and chauvinism of
Novoye Vremya and Co.? Only in that it has white gloves on and
that the turns of speech used in it are more diplomatically cautious. But
chauvinism is abominable even when wearing white gloves and using the most
refined turns of speech.  

Democrats will never speak of “general enthusiasm” when beside (and
above!) them are Russian nationalists ruthlessly oppressing a number of
peoples.  

Democrats will never stand for the Slav as such being contrasted with
the Turk, whereas one should contrast the

    

Slav and Turkish peasants, together, with the Slav and Turkish
landlords and bashi-bazouks.  

Democrats will never allow “Russian national consciousness” to be
substituted for the political consciousness of the partisans of
freedom and enemies of oppression in all nationalities—at a time
when Poles, Jews, and “non-Russians” in general are oppressed and
persecuted.  

No fair-minded democrat, no sincere supporter of, the oppressed
nationalities, should vote for the Cadets!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Horrors of War









Lenin: The Horrors of War







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Horrors of War




Published:
Pravda No. 155, October 28, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Signed: V. Fr..

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 372-373.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The belligerents are doing their utmost to conceal from
“outsiders”, i.e., from the whole world, what is going on in the
Balkans. Correspondents are deceived and held up, and are not allowed on
the battlefield until long after battles have come to an end.  

That is why only exceptional circumstances enable one at rare intervals
to learn the truth about the war. Apparently, such exceptional
circumstances helped Mr. Donohoe, a correspondent of the British Daily
Chronicle. He succeeded in being with the Turkish Army during the
battle at Lule Burgaz; then he drove by car to Constantinople, and from
there went by sea to Constanta in Rumania. From Constanta he was able to
wire London without hindrance.  

The Turks suffered a terrible defeat. Up to 40,000 (!) of them fell in
battle. A catastrophe not less than that at

Mukden,[1] wrote the British correspondent. Three-quarters of the
Turkish artillery passed into Bulgarian hands. The Bulgarians would let the
Turks come up very close and engage in a hand-to-hand combat, and then
would swiftly withdraw while their machine-guns mowed the Turks
down in hundreds and thousands.  

The Turks’ retreat became a disorderly flight of stupefied, starving,
exhausted and maddened mobs. The correspondent’s car got stuck in a crowd
of fugitives. The starving Turks begged him for bread. They had to bandage

    

their own wounds. Doctors were few. There were no dressings and no
supplies. I have witnessed many a military campaign, wrote the
correspondent, but I could never have imagined so appalling a disaster,
such a wholesale massacre of starving, exhausted, tormented, helpless
peasants from Anatolia (Asiatic Turkey).  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The reference is to the battle in the Mukden area in February 1905, the
last major land engagement of the Russo-Japanese war of 1904–05. The
Russians lost about 89,000 men, and the Japanese about 71,000.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadets and the Big Bourgeoisie









Lenin: The Cadets and the Big Bourgeoisie







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Cadets and the Big Bourgeoisie




Published:
Pravda No. 157, November 1, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 374-375.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Cadet victories in the first city curias of Moscow and
St. Petersburg, then in the elections to the Council of State from the
industries, and lastly, the reactionaries’ aid to the Cadets
against the Social-Democrats—a fact established beyond question—are all
signs of a very interesting political development of all the
classes of our society.  

Let us recall the Social-Democrats’ main decision on the nature of the
Cadet Party, adopted in 1907: “The parties of the liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie, and the most important of them—the Cadet Party—have
already turned definitely away from the revolution and aim at stopping it
through a deal with the counter-revolution; the social basis of these
parties is made up of the economically more progressive sections of the
bourgeoisie, above all the bourgeois intelligentsia, while a section of the
urban and rural petty bourgeoisie is still following these parties only by
force of tradition [blind habit] and because it is simply deceived by the
liberals.”  

The correctness of this description has been fully borne out by
events. The democrats are ousting the Cadets from the second city curia
(where there are many democratic voters). The Cadets are ousting
the Octobrists from the first urban curia.  

The more the reaction rages and the more openly the elections are
rigged, the more big capital goes over to the side of liberalism. The class
nature of the Cadet Party, indicated by the Marxists in 1906 and 1907, is
now being revealed clearly before the masses.  

The error of those who considered the Cadets a party of urban
democrats is becoming obvious. The alliance of

    

the Cadets and the reactionaries is gradually turning from a secret into an
open one: it is the reactionaries who are voting the Cadet
Mansyrev in against the Social-Democrat Priedkalns, and the Cadet Nikolayev
against the Social-Democrat Pokrovsky.  

The strength of Social-Democratic policy, the invincibility of this
policy, is due to the fact that the entire development of
capitalist society is increasingly proving it correct. The Cadets are
rallying to the big bourgeoisie, which cannot be content for all
that it is counter-revolutionary. The democrats are moving to the
left, away from the Cadets.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Truly Russian Morals









Lenin: Truly Russian Morals







V. I.  

      Lenin
Truly Russian Morals




Published:
Pravda No. 160, November 4, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 376-377.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A few days ago the newspaper Zemshchina carried,
along with verses by Purishkevich, a little article concerning the
“famous” official publicist Guryev of Rossiya (who from now on
will be famous without inverted commas). Zemshchina assures its
readers that he is a “publicist of a Jewish-liberal shade”. How strange!
Is it possible that the official Rossiya, too, is a Jewish-liberal
organ?  

But what is the point? It is that Guryev has been unanimously expelled
from the board of a St. Petersburg spinning mill by the general meeting of
its shareholders. In addition, the meeting resolved to request the
procurator to start proceedings against Guryev for his irregular practices.


It appears that Guryev contributed 1,000 rubles and acquired the right
to one-third of the profits, although two co-owners of the mill
had contributed 100,000 rubles! Why this generous treatment of Guryev by
the capitalists?  

Because that gentleman is a councillor of state, a contributor to the
official newspaper Rossiya, and so on and so forth. He was Witte’s
private secretary. He has “exceptional connections”. He promised
government subsidies!  

And so, the capitalist gentlemen “valued” those government
“connections” fairly highly: 49,000 rubles exactly. You have the goods,
we have the money. You have “connections in government quarters”, an
opportunity of obtaining subsidies, we have money. Sale and
purchase. “Connections in government quarters”, so-and-so many thou
sands; a promise of subsidies, so-and-so much; contributions to the
official Rossiya, so-and-so much. Collect your money, Mr. Guryev!


Guryev collected it—and fooled them. He did not keep his promises but
claimed over one-third of the profits and,

    

what is more, resorted to blackmail, i.e., to extorting money under threat
of undermining the credit of the establishment.  

A characteristic affair. A typical affair. An everyday occurrence. An
illustration to the theme, “Government connections and subsidies, and
their relation to capital”.  

Only, where does the “Jewish-liberal shade” come in, gentlemen of
Zemshchina? It is a truly Russian, truly conservative shade!
Don’t be so modest, friends of Purishkevich!  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Platform of the Reformists and the Platform of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats









Lenin: The Platform of the Reformists and the Platform of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Platform of the Reformists and the Platform of the Revolutionary Social-Democrats




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 28–29, November 5 (18), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 378-386.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The revolutionary upswing in Russia made itself clearly
felt in the first half of 1912. The number of political strikers, as
calculated by the factory owners, reached 515,000 for five months. A
particularly important document, reprinted in full in No. 27 of the Central
Organ, namely, the May Day appeal of the St. Petersburg workers, provides
evidence as to the nature of the strikers’ slogans, their demands, the
political content of their demonstrations, meetings, etc.  

The slogans with which the St. Petersburg workers came forward in those
memorable days were not reformist but revolutionary Social-Democratic
slogans: a constituent assembly, an eight-hour working day, confiscation of
the land ed estates, the overthrow of the tsarist government, and a
democratic republic.  

The revolts and attempted revolts of soldiers and sailors—in
Turkestan, in the Baltic Fleet and on the Black Sea—supplied fresh
objective evidence that after long years of rampant
counter-revolution and of a lull in the working-class movement, a new
revolutionary upswing had begun.  

This upswing coincided with the period of the elections to the Fourth
Duma, when all parties and all political trends had to present, in
one form or another, their general appraisal of the political
situation. Now, if we want to analyse our political tasks seriously, as the
tasks of the working class and not the pious wishes of little groups, and
if we want to test programmes and platforms in a Marxist way by comparing
them with the facts of the mass struggle and with the actions of
all the classes of this society, we

    

must also test the various election platforms on the touch stone of
this revolutionary upswing of the masses. For, as far as the
Social-Democrats are concerned, elections are not a special political
operation, not an attempt to win seats through all sorts of promises and
declarations, but merely a special occasion for advocating the basic
demands and the principles of the political world outlook of the
class-conscious proletariat.  

The programmes and platforms of all the government parties, from the
Black Hundreds to Guchkov, leave no room for doubt. They are plainly and
openly counter-revolutionary. It is common knowledge that these parties
lack a foothold of any real importance not only among the working class and
the peasantry, but even among wide sections of the
bourgeoisie. These sections have almost completely turned away from the
Octobrists.  

The programmes and platforms of the liberal bourgeois parties have been
published in part almost officially (the platform of the Moslem group) and
are partly known quite accurately through the “big” political press (the
platforms of the “Progressists” and of the Cadets). The essence
of all these programmes and platforms has been inimitably expressed in the
declarations of the garrulous Cadet, Gredeskul, which were reprinted in
Rech and from there found their way into the Marxist press.  

“A public denial of the need for a new revolution in Russia”
is how Gredeskul himself formulated his views
(cf. Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27, p. 3). It was he, too, who contrast
ed the real platform of the liberals (with the Cadets at their
head) with that of the revolutionaries, saving that “what we need is
merely quiet, persevering and confident constitutional
work”.  

We stress the words “real platform”, for in Russia, as in all
bourgeois countries, most platforms are mere window dressing.


The crux of the matter is what was admitted (in a rare fit of
truthfulness) by Mr. Gredeskul. The liberal monarchist bourgeoisie is
opposed to a new revolution and advocates only
constitutional reforms.  

The Social-Democrats consistently, and the bourgeois democrats
(Narodniks) hesitantly, uphold the “need” for

    

a new revolution, and are carrying on propaganda in favour of such a
revolution. The upswing of the mass struggle has
begun. The revolutionary Social-Democrats are trying to extend and
strengthen it, helping it develop to a still higher plane, to the stage of
revolution. The reformists, however, regard the upswing as a mere
“revival”; their policy is a policy aimed at obtaining constitutional
concessions, constitutional reforms. It follows that the bourgeoisie and
proletariat have entered, at this “stage” of Russian history as well,
into a struggle for influence over the “people”, over the masses. No one
can foretell the outcome of this struggle, but neither can anyone entertain
any doubts as to the position which the R.S.D.L.P. must occupy in
this struggle.  

It is in this way, and only in this way, that one can start to appraise
the election platform of the Party and the election platform
issued the other day by the “Organising Committee” elected by the
liquidationist conference.  

The election platform of the Party, published by the Central Committee
after the January Conference, was draft ed before the events of
April and May. These events proved it correct. A single theme runs
through the whole platform—criticism of constitutional reforms in
present-day Russia as hopeless and utopian, and the propaganda of
revolution. The slogans of the platform have been framed precisely
in such a way as to express the revolutionary tasks with perfect clarity
and make it absolutely impossible to mistake them for promises of
constitutional reforms. The platform of the Party represents a direct
appeal of the revolutionary Social-Democrats to hundreds of
thousands of political strikers, to those who are in the front ranks
of the millions of the muzhik armed forces, to whom it explains
the tasks of an uprising. A revolutionary party could not even dream of a
better test for its platform, of a better confirmation of it by experience,
than this direct response to the explanations of the Party—the May
strikes and the attempted military revolts in June and July.  

Look at the platform of the liquidators. Its liquidationist essence is
artfully concealed by Trotsky’s revolutionary phrases. This camouflage may
sometimes blind na\"ive and altogether inexperienced people, and may even
appear to

    

be “reconciliation” between the liquidators and the Party. But the most
cursory examination will rapidly dissipate this self-deception.  

The platform of the liquidators was written after the May
strikes and the attempted revolts in the summer. And in seeking a real
practical answer to the question of the essence of this platform, the first
thing we ask is: how does it appraise those strikes and those
attempts?  

“The economic upswing...”, “...by the growth of its strike movement,
the proletariat has signalled the coming new social upswing...”, “...the
powerful April movement of the proletariat demanding freedom of
association”—that is all the liquidators’ platform says about
the April and May strikes.  

But this is indeed an untruth! It is a crying distortion of the issue!
The main thing is omitted here, namely, the revolutionary
character of the political strike, which is not aimed at winning a
constitutional reform, but at over throwing the government, i.e.,
at revolution.  

How could such an untruth come to be written in an illegal,
revolutionary leaflet full of “red” phrases? It had to be,
because such is the view of the liberals and the
liquidators. They see in strikes what they wish to see—a struggle for
constitutional reforms. They do not see what they do not wish to see,
namely, a revolutionary upswing. We liberals want to fight for reform, but
not for revolution—there you have the truth of the class
position that found expression in the untruth of the liquidators.


With regard to the attempted revolts we read, “...the soldiers in the
barracks are driven by violence, humiliation and starvation to
outbursts of desperate protest, then they are suppressed with
bullets, the rope”, etc.  

This is a liberal appraisal. We revolutionary Social-Democrats regard
the attempted revolts as the beginning of an uprising of the
masses, even if an unsuccessful, untimely, incorrect beginning. And we
know that the masses learn how to make a successful uprising only
from the experience of unsuccessful ones, just as the Russian workers, by a
series of unsuccessful, and sometimes particularly unsuccessful, political
strikes in 1901–04 learned to organise the successful strike of
October 1905. We say that the workers

    

and peasants who are most downtrodden by the barracks have begun
to rise in revolt. Hence the plain and obvious conclusion: we must
explain to them how and for what purpose they should prepare for a
successful uprising.  

The liberals take a different view. The soldiers are
“driven” to “outbursts of desperate protest”, they say. To a
liberal, an insurgent soldier is not the subject of the revolution, not the
forerunner of the masses rising in revolt, but an object of
governmental evil (“driven to desperation”), serving to demonstrate that
evil.  

See how bad our government is—it drives the soldiers to
desperation and then suppresses them with bullets, says the
liberal (the inference being: if we liberals were in power, there would be
no soldiers’ mutinies).  

See how deeply and widely revolutionary energy is maturing among the
masses—says the Social-Democrat—even the soldiers and sailors who are
downtrodden by barrack drill are beginning to rise in revolt, and by rising
badly they teach how to rise successfully.  

As you see, the liquidators have “interpreted” (in the
senatorial sense of the word interpret) the revolutionary upsurge in Russia
during the spring and the summer.  

After which they “interpreted” the programme of our Party.  

The Programme of the R.S.D.L.P. says: 


   “The R.S.D.L.P. sets itself the immediate political task of
   overthrowing the tsarist autocracy and replacing it by a democratic
   republic, whose constitution would ensure:
   (1) the sovereignty of the people” ... etc., and then comes a list of
   “liberties” and “rights”.  


One would think that this could not be misunderstood; the “immediate”
task is the overthrow of the autocracy and its replacement by a republic,
which would ensure liberties.  

The liquidators have revised all this.  


In their platform we read: “The Social-Democrats call on
   the people to fight for a democratic republic....  

   “Striving for this aim, which the people will be able to
   achieve only as a result of revolution, the Social-Democrats
   in the present election campaign [listen to this!] call on the
   working masses to rally to the following current demands:
   (1) universal, etc., suffrage ...  in the elections to the Duma”,
   etc.  

 

Mr. Peshekhonov, a Socialist-Revolutionary liquidator, wrote in the
autumn of 1906, when he was founding an “open party” (and almost
succeeded in founding it, but the police stepped in and put him in quod!),
that the republic was a “remote prospect”, that “the question
of a republic requires extreme caution”, that the immediate
demands now were reforms.  

But the Socialist-Revolutionary liquidator was na\"ive, simple, clumsy
and blunt. Do the “European” opportunists ever act in that way? No. They
are more cunning, more clever, more diplomatic.  

They do not renounce the slogan of a republic—what a libel! They only
“interpret” it in a suitable fashion, being prompted by considerations
obvious to every philistine. It is a moot point whether there will be a
revolution or not, says the man in the street simply, and Trotsky repeats
it in a scholarly fashion in Nasha Zarya (No. 5, p. 21). A
republic “only as a result of revolution”, but the
“current” issue “in the present election campaign” is
constitutional reforms!  

Everything went off so smoothly: the republic is both recognised and
relegated to the distant future. Heaps of r-r-revolutionary words were
spoken, but in reality the demands put forward “in the present election
campaign” (the whole platform is written only for this present
campaign!) as “current are those for reforms.  

Yes, it was certainly great “masters of diplomacy” who were present
at the liquidators’ conference. But what puny masters they are! While they
may delight the group diplomatists and mislead the simple-minded
“conciliators” the Marxists will talk to them in a different strain.


The philistine is satisfied with the undoubted, holy and empty
truth that it is impossible to say in advance whether there will be a
revolution or not. A Marxist is not satisfied with that; he says: our
propaganda and the propaganda of all worker Social-Democrats is one of
the factors determining whether there will be a revolution or
not. Hundreds of thousands of political strikers and the foremost men of
various units of the armed forces ask us, our Party, what they should
strive for, for the sake of what they should rise, what they should try to
achieve, whether they should expand the up-

    

surge that has begun into a revolution, or whether they should direct it
towards a struggle for reforms.  

The revolutionary Social-Democrats have given their answer to these
questions, which are more interesting and important than the
philistine-Trotskyist attitude of uncertainty: will there be a revolution
or not, who can tell?  

Our answer is—criticism of the utopia of constitutional reforms,
explanation of the futility of the hopes placed in them, the utmost
all-round promotion of the revolutionary upsurge, utilisation of
the election campaign for this purpose. Whether or not there will
be a revolution does not depend on us alone. But we shall
do our work, and this work will never be in vain. It will sow the
seeds of democracy and proletarian independence deep among the masses, and
these seeds will certainly sprout and produce either a democratic
revolution tomorrow, or a socialist revolution the day after.  

Those, however, who preach to the masses their
vulgar, intellectualist. Bundist-Trotskyist scepticism—“we don’t know
whether there will be a revolution or not, but the ‘current’ issue
is reforms”—are already corrupting the masses, preaching
liberal utopias to them.  

Instead of permeating the election campaign with the spirit of
the present, real, “actual” political situation, in which half a
million workers are engaged in revolutionary strikes, and the foremost men
in the muzhik armed forces are firing on their aristocrat
officers—instead of this they dismiss from their would-be
“European” (they are so European, so European, are our liquidators!)
“parliamentary” considerations this real situation (in which there is
very little of the “European”, but very much of the “Chinese”, that
is to say, of the democratic-revolutionary), and having dismissed it
by means of a few non-committal phrases, they declare the reformist
election campaign to be the real thing.  

The Social-Democratic Party needs a platform for the elections to the
Fourth Duma in order once more to explain to the masses—in connection
with the elections, on the occasion of the elections, and in
debates on the elections—the need for, and the urgency and
inevitability of, the revolution.  

They, the liquidators, need a platform “for” the elections,
i.e., a platform enabling them politely to dismiss considerations

    

about a revolution as an uncertain eventuality and to declare the election
campaign for a list of constitutional reforms to be the “real” thing.


The Social-Democratic Party wants to use the elections in order again
to drive home to the masses the idea of the need for revolution, and the
fact of the revolutionary up swing which has begun. That is why the
Social-Democratic Party, in its platform, says briefly and plainly to those
voting in the elections to the Fourth Duma: not
constitutional reforms, but a republic, not reformism, but
revolution.  

The liquidators are using the elections to the Fourth Duma to preach
constitutional reforms and weaken the idea of revolution. It is
for this purpose and because of this that they depict soldiers’
revolts as “outbursts of desperate protest” to which soldiers are
“driven”, and not as the beginning of a mass uprising which will
grow or subside according, among other things, to whether or not
all the Social-Democratic workers of Russia at once begin to
support it with all their might, with all their energy, with all their
enthusiasm.  

It is for this purpose that the May strikes have been “interpreted”
from being revolutionary into being reformist.  

It is for this purpose that the Party programme has been
“interpreted”, and instead of the “immediate” task of establishing a
republic that will ensure liberties, it has been decreed to regard
as current in the “present election campaign”—for the Fourth
Duma, don’t laugh!—the demand for various liberties.  

How much that is old Chinese there is in Russian life! What an amount
of old Chinese practices there is in our tsarism, and also in our
liquidators, who wish to fit the “ceremonials” of parliamentary struggle
and reformism into a setting which has the Purishkeviches and Treshchenkovs
on top and revolutionary attempts of the masses below! How much that is old
Chinese there is in these vain efforts of intellectuals to defend
themselves against the Khvostovs and Makarovs by producing a letter of
recommendation from MacDonald and Jaurès, from Bissolati and
Bernstein, from Kolb and Frank!  

The diplomatic “reconciliation” of liquidationist views with those of
the Party that was staged by Trotsky at the

    

liquidationist conference does not in reality “reconcile” anything at
all. It does not remove the greatest political fact, which determines the
entire social and political situation in present-day Russia. That fact is
the struggle between the reformist and the revolutionary Social-Democratic
platforms; it is the pronouncement of the bourgeoisie, as represented by
its liberal party leaders, against the need for a new revolution in Russia
and in favour of purely constitutional “work”, in opposition to the
revolutionary strike of hundreds of thousands of proletarians, which is a
call to the masses to begin a real struggle for freedom.  

To make one bow to the reformists and another to the revolutionary
Social-Democrats does not do away with this objective political fact, does
not weaken its force and weight in the slightest degree. Good intentions to
smooth over differences arising from this fact—even assuming that these
intentions are indeed perfectly “good” and sincere—are powerless to
alter the irreconcilably hostile political tendencies arising from the
entire counter-revolutionary situation.  

The proletariat has risen with its revolutionary Social-Democratic
banner, and on the eve of the Fourth, Black Hundred, Duma, It will not
lower it before the liberals, will not furl it to please the reformists,
will not consent to blunt or tone down its platform for reasons of group
diplomacy.  

The platform of revolutionary Social-Democracy versus the platform of
reformism—this was the watchword under which the May strikes took
place. Under it, too, the R.S.D.L.P. is entering the elections to a
landlord and priest Duma, and under it the Party will carry on its entire
work in that Duma and among the masses.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Illegal Party and Legal Work









Lenin: The Illegal Party and Legal Work







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Illegal Party and Legal Work




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 28–29, November 5 (18), 1912.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 387-396.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question of the illegal party and of legal work of the
Social-Democrats in Russia is one of the cardinal Party questions. It has
been the concern of the R.S.D.L.P. throughout the
post-revolutionary period, and has given rise to the bitterest struggle
within its ranks.  

The struggle over this issue has been going on chiefly between the
liquidators and the anti-liquidators, and its bitterness is due in full
measure to the fact that it amounted to the question whether our
old, illegal Party was to be or not to be. The Conference of the
R.S.D.L.P. in December 1908 emphatically condemned liquidationism and, in a
special resolution, clearly formulated the Party’s view on the
organisational question: the Party is made up of illegal Social-Democratic
nuclei, which must establish for them selves “strong-points for work among
the masses” in the form of as wide and as ramified a network of various
legal workers’ societies as possible.  

Both the decision of the Plenary Meeting of the Central Committee in
January 1910 and the All-Russia Conference in January 1912 fully confirmed
this view of the Party. The thoroughly definite and stable character of
this view Is perhaps most clearly described in Comrade Plekhanov’s latest
Dnevnik (No. 16, April 1912). We say “most clearly” because it
was Plekhanov who at that time took a neutral stand (on the significance of
the January Conference). And from his neutral standpoint, he fully
confirmed this established Party view, saying that the so-called
“initiating groups”—which had broken away from the Party organisation
or had deserted it or arisen independently of it—could

    

not be considered as belonging to the Party without a special decision
taken by a congress or conference of the illegal nuclei. It is anarchism in
regard to principle, and support for and legitimation of liquidationism in
regard to practice, wrote Comrade Plekhanov, to allow the “initiating
groups” to decide for themselves whether they belong to the
Party.  

It would seem that, in view of this last explanation by the neutral
Plekhanov, the question which has been quite definitely decided by the
Party on so many occasions should be regarded as finished with. But the
resolution of the latest liquidationist conference makes us return to it in
view of the fresh attempts to tangle what had been untangled and to obscure
things that are clear. Nevsky Golos (No. 9), along with the most
furious abuse of the anti-liquidators, declared that the new conference was
not liquidationist. Yet the conference resolution on one of the most
important issues, that of the illegal Party and legal work, shows most
plainly that the conference was liquidationist through and through.  

It is necessary, therefore, to analyse the resolution in detail and to
quote it in full for this purpose.  
I

The resolution of the liquidators’ conference is headed
“Organisational Forms of Party Building”, yet its very
first clause reveals that it is not a question of “forms” of building,
but of the kind of party—old or new—that they want to
“build” in this case. Here is that first clause: 


   “This Conference, having discussed the forms and methods
   of building the Party, has reached the following conclusion: 

   “1. The transformation of the Social-Democratic Party
   into a self-governing organisation of the Social-Democratic proletariat can
   be effected only insofar as the Social-Democratic organisation takes shape
   in the course of drawing the mass of the workers into open social and
   political activities in all their manifestations.”  


Thus the very first word used in the resolution on building
the Party is an unqualified recognition of the necessity

    

for a transformation of the Social-Democratic Party. This is
strange, to say the least. To be sure, every member of the Party has a
right to seek its “transformation”, but then the question has
admittedly been, for four years already, whether the old
Party should be recognised! Anyone knows that!  

The Party resolution (December 1908) spoke in the clearest possible
terms of condemning the liquidators, who wanted to “replace” the
old Party by a new one. In April 1912 Plekhanov asked point-blank the
defenders of the “initiating groups” which planned to (and did) call a
liquidationist conference: “Does our old Party exist or not?”
(Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata No. 16, April 1912, p. 8).  

This question cannot be evaded. It is posed by a four years’
struggle. It fully expresses the gravity of the so—called Party
“crisis”.  

When a question such as this is answered by saying:
“the transformation of the Social-Democratic Party ... can be
effected only—”, we see at once that it is a meaning less evasion and
not an answer.  

None but members of the old Party may speak of transforming
the Party. By evading the question whether there is an
old Party or not, and decreeing without further ado (with non-Party
“initiating groups” co-operating) what you call a “transformation”, you
do no more, gentlemen, than fully confirm that your standpoint is
liquidationist!  This becomes still more evident when the, resolution,
after the perfectly meaningless, declamatory phrase about a “self
governing organisation of the Social-Democratic proletariat”, reduces the
issue to the proposition that the “transformation” “can be
effected only insofar as the Social-Democratic organisation takes
shape [we will not dwell on the ridiculous, inflated and stupid phraseology
used] in the course of drawing the mass of the workers into open social
and political activities”!!  

What does that mean? Do the authors of this amazing resolution call
strikes and demonstrations “drawing the masses into open”, etc.,
activities?  Logic suggests that they do! In that case the
resolution is sheer nonsense, for anyone knows very well that an
“organisation takes shape” even without strikes and
demonstrations. The organisation,

    

wise gentlemen, is always there, while the masses resort to open
action only from time to time.  

By “open social and political activities” (the bureaucratic-liberal
style those people use—just like that of Russkiye Vedomosti
thirty years ago!) the liquidators mean the legal forms of the
working-class movement, and not at all strikes, demonstrations and so
on. Splendid. In that case, too, the resolution is nonsense, because it is
by no means “only” in the course of drawing the masses into the legal
movement that in our country the organisation “takes shape”, and has
taken shape. We have organisations in many places where
no forms of legal movement are allowed.  

Thus the main clause of the resolution (the organisation Lakes shape
“only insofar”) is definitely worthless. It is nothing but a
muddle.  

But there is an obvious liquidationist content to this
muddle. A transformation is possible only in the course of drawing
the masses into the legal movement—that is what the gibberish of
Clause 1 boils down to. And this is the sheerest liquidationism.


For four years the Party has been saying: our organisation consists of
illegal nuclei surrounded by as wide and as ramified a network of legal
societies as possible.  

For four years the liquidators have been denying that they are
liquidators, and for four years they have been asserting: a transformation
can be effected only in the course of drawing the masses into the
legal movement. They evade the question of what our Party consists
of and what this old Party is like, doing it in
exactly the way that suits the legalists. It is very much the same old
story; in April 1912 Plekhanov asked: does our old Party exist or not? The
liquidators’ conference replies: “a transformation can be effected
only insofar as the masses are drawn into the legal movement”!


This reply comes from the legalists, who have broken away from the
Party and who yesterday were strong and goaded the Party, but today (having
been defeated) are timid and defend themselves by eloquence.  
    

II

Clause 2 of the resolution reads: 


   “2. In view of the changed social and political
   conditions compared with the pre-revolutionary epoch, the illegal Party
   organisations already existing or coming into existence must adapt
   themselves to the new forms and methods of the open working-class
   movement.”  


Fine logic again. A change in social conditions necessitates
only a change in the form of organisation, but the resolution in
no way substantiates the direction of this change.  

Why does the resolution refer to “the changed social and political
conditions”? Evidently to prove, substantiate and draw the practical
conclusion: it is necessary for the illegal organisation to adapt itself to
the legal movement. But the premise does not warrant this conclusion. “In
view of the changed conditions”, the legal must adapt itself to the
illegal—such a conclusion would be just as legitimate!  

Why this confusion of the liquidators?  

Because they are afraid to tell the truth and want to sit on two stools
at once.  

The truth is that the liquidators stand for a liquidationist
appraisal (made by Levitsky, Larin, Yezhov and others) of the “present
situation”, for explaining how “social and political conditions
have changed” is an appraisal of the present situation.  

But they are afraid to state that appraisal in plain terms. Indeed, the
conference could not bring itself even to raise this question. Tacitly,
stealthily, in a smuggling fashion, it upholds the view that there have
come about (some kind of) changes which necessitate “adapting”
the illegal to the legal.  

This is a view which in no way differs from the Cadet view, as the
Social-Democratic Party press has repeatedly pointed out. The Cadets fully
admit that their party “as a whole is compelled to remain illegal” (see
Clause 3 of the liquidators’ resolution) and that, in view of changed
conditions, the illegal party must adapt itself to the legal movement. As
far as the Cadets are concerned, this is

    

enough. To them prohibition of their party, its illegality, is an accident,
an “abnormality”, a survival whereas the main, essential and basic thing
is their legal work. This view of theirs follows, logically from
the “appraisal of the situation” formulated by Mr. Gredeskul: what is
needed is not a new revolution, but only “constitutional work”.  

The illegality of the Cadet Party is an accident; it is an exception
from the general rule of “constitutional work”. Hence the logical
conclusion that the illegal organisation must “adapt itself to the legal
movement”. And that is how matters actually stand with the Cadets.  

But the Social-Democratic Party takes a different view. The main
conclusion to be drawn from our appraisal—the Party appraisal—of the
situation is that the revolution is necessary and is coming. The
forms of the development leading to the revolution have changed,
but the old tasks of the revolution remain. Hence the conclusion:
the forms of organisation must change, the forms of the “nuclei” must be
flexible, their expansion will often occur through the expansion, not of
the nuclei themselves, but of their legal “periphery”, etc. All this has
been stated many times in Party resolutions.  

But this change in the forms of the illegal organisation is
not at all covered by the formula: “adaptation” to the legal movement. It
is something entirely different! Legal organisations are
strong-points for propagating the ideas of illegal nuclei
among the masses. In other words, we change the form of exerting influence
to ensure that former influence continues along illegal lines.


In terms of the form of the organisations, the illegal
“adapts itself” to the legal. But in terms of the content of the
work of our Party, legal activity “adapts itself” to illegal
ideas. (Hence—it may be said in passing—the war which “revolutionary
Menshevism” has been waging against the liquidators.)  

Now judge how profound our liquidators must be to have accepted the
first premise (on the form of the work) and forgotten the second
(on the content of the work)!! And they have headed their piece of
Cadet wisdom by an argument about the organisational forms of Party
building that runs as follows: 
 


   “We must build the Party in such a way as to reorganise
   [it] by drawing the masses into the legal movement and to adapt the illegal
   organisation to that movement.”  


The question arises: does this look like the answer of the Party? (To
build the Party means strengthening and increasing the number of illegal
nuclei, surrounding them by a network of legal strong-points.)  

Or does it look like legalising a loophole for the liquidators, since
it repeats the ideas of the Cadets and the Popular Socialists? It was
precisely these ideas that Mr. Peshekhonov, a Popular Socialist,
was defending in August 1906, when he tried to found an “open
party”—see Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1906, No. 8, and
Proletary No. 4, the article “Socialist-Revolutionary

    Mensheviks”.[1]

III

Clause 3 of the resolution reads: 


   “3. The Social-Democratic Party even at the present
   time, when its organisation as a whole is forced to remain illegal, must
   endeavour to carry on various parts of its Party work openly and to
   establish appropriate bodies for this purpose.”  


We have already pointed out that this is a literally exact description
of the Cadet Party, correct from the first to the last word. But
the term “Social-Democratic” is out of place here.  

It is true that the Cadet Party “as a whole” is “forced” to remain
illegal, and that “even” at the present time (when we have a
constitution, thank God) they endeavour to carry on parts of their party
work openly.  

The implicit premise which shows through every line of this
liquidationist resolution is its recognition of “constitutional work” as
the sole work or, at the least, as the chief, fundamental and lasting work.


That is radically wrong. It is precisely a liberal labour policy
outlook.  

The Social-Democratic Party is illegal both “as a whole” and in its
every nucleus, and—most important of all—in the entire content
of its work, which is to propagate and

    

pave the way for the revolution. Therefore the most open work of
the most open nucleus of the Social-Democratic Party cannot be regarded as
“openly conducted Party work”.  

For example, the most “open” nucleus of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1907–12
was the Social-Democratic Duma group. It was in a position to speak more
“openly” than anyone else. It alone was legal, and could speak
legally of a great many things.  

But not of everything! And not only, generally speaking, “not
of everything”, but not, in particular, even of its own Party and its
Party work—“not of everything” nor of the most important thing. That is
why, even in respect of the Social-Democratic Duma group, we
cannot accept Clause 3 of the liquidationist resolution, not to speak of
the remaining “various parts” of the Party.  

The liquidators advocate an “open”, legal party. They are now afraid
(the workers have made them afraid, and Trotsky advises them to be afraid)
to say so plainly. They now say the same thing using little
disguises. They say nothing about legalising the Party. But they
advocate its legalisation by parts!  

The “initiating groups” of the legalists who have broken away are
anti-Party, the neutral Plekhanov told the liquidators in April 1912. The
“initiating groups” of the break away legalists are precisely the open
conduct of various parts of “Party work”, the liquidationist conference
replies; they are precisely the “open movement” to which the
illegal Party must “adapt” itself; they are the “open activities”, the
“drawing” of the masses into which is the yardstick and guarantee of the
necessary “transformation” of the Party.  

What simpletons the liquidators must have found if their story is true
that these views were approved by the “anti-liquidators” brought by
Trotsky!  
IV

The last clause of the resolution reads: 


   “4. Being unable, on account of the illegal conditions
   of its existence, to draw into its sphere large sections of the workers to
   whom its influence extends ,the Social-Democratic organisation must link
   itself with the politically active sections of the proletariat and through

    

   them with the masses, by establishing various kinds of more or less
   developed legal or illegal political organisations and various kinds of
   legal cover (election committees, political societies founded under the law
   of March 4, municipal companies, societies for combating the high cost of
   living, and so on), as well as by co-ordinating its actions with
   non-political working-class organisations.”  


Here, too, indisputable arguments about legal covers disguise
what is not merely disputable but downright liquidationist.  

Establishing legal political organisations is precisely what
Levitsky and N. R —kov advocated; it is legalisation of the Party part by
part.  

For more than a year we have been telling the liquidators: stop talking
and start founding your “legal political societies”, such as the
“society for the defence of working-class interests”, and so on. Stop
phrase-mongering and get down to work!  

But they cannot get down to work because it is impossible to realise a
liberal utopia in present-day Russia. All they can do is to
defend in this covert fashion their “initiating groups”, which
are engaged in useful talk and mutual encouragement, in suggestions and
considerations about “legal political organisations”.  

They defend their “initiating groups”, officially declaring in their
resolution that the illegal organisations must “link themselves
with the politically-active sections of the proletariat and
through them with the masses”!!! That is to say, it is outside
the nuclei that the “politically-active” are to be found! Is this not a
mere rewording of the well-known phrases and exclamations to the effect
that all the active have fled from the “dead Party” into the
“initiating groups"?  

Trotsky and the liquidators expelled from the Party are putting more
“mildly” what Nasha Zarya and Dyelo

Zhizni[2] said plainly in reviling the illegal Party: in
their view, it is outside the narrow illegal Party that the most
“active” are, and it is with these that one must “link
oneself”. We—the liquidators who have broken away—are the active
element; through us the “Party” must link itself with the masses.  

The Party has said in no uncertain terms: in leading the economic
struggle, the Social-Democratic Party nuclei

    

must co-operate with the trade unions, with the Social-Democratic nuclei in
them, and with individual leaders of the trade union movement. Or, in the
Duma election campaign, it is essential that the unions should march
abreast of the Party. This is clear, precise and easy to understand. What
the liquidators are advocating instead is a hazy “co-ordination”
of the Party’s work in general with the “non-political”, i.e., non-Party,
unions.  

P.B. Axelrod supplied Trotsky with liquidationist ideas. Trotsky
advised Axelrod after the latter’s sad reverses in Nasha Zarya, to
cover up those ideas with phrases that would muddle them up.  

Nobody will be deceived by this company. The liquidationist conference
will teach the workers to look more closely into the meaning of evasive
phraseology. That conference has nothing to give the workers apart from
this lesson, which is bitter and uninteresting but not useless in bourgeois
society.  

We have studied the ideas of liberal labour policy attired in
Levitsky’s everyday clothes; it is not difficult to recognise them in
Trotsky’s gaudy apparel as well.  

The Party’s views on the illegal organisation and its legal work stand
out more and more impressively when compared with all that hypocritical
masquerading.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 11, pp. 197–206.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Dyelo Zhizni (Life’s Cause)—a legal periodical
published by the Menshevik liquidators in St. Petersburg from January to
October 1911. Nine issues appeared.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Social Significance of the Serbo-Bulgarian Victories









Lenin: The Social Significance of the Serbo-Bulgarian Victories







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Social Significance of the Serbo-Bulgarian Victories




Published:
Pravda No. 162, November 7, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 397-399.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“Macedonia’s conquest by Bulgaria and Serbia means for her a bourgeois
revolution, a kind of 1789 or 1848.” These words of Otto Bauer, the
Austrian Marxist, reveal at a stroke the meaning of the events now taking
place in the Balkans.  

The revolution of 1789 in France and that of 1848 in Germany and other
countries were bourgeois revolutions, because the liberation of the country
from absolutism and from landlord, feudal privileges in fact provided
freedom for the development of capitalism. But it goes without saying that
such revolutions were most urgently required by the interests of the
working class; in 1789 and 1848 even “non-Party” workers, who were not
organised as a class, were leading fighters of the French and German
revolutions.  

Macedonia, like the other Balkan countries, is economically very
backward. She still retains exceedingly strong survivals of the feudal
system and of medieval dependence of the peasants on their feudal
landlords. Among those survivals are quit-rent (in money or kind),
share-cropping (the Macedonian peasant usually gives the landlord one-third
of the harvest, that is, less than the Russian peasant does), and so on.


The landlords in Macedonia (known as spahijas) are Turks and
Mohammedans, while the peasants are Slays and Christians. The class
antagonism is therefore aggravated by a religious and national antagonism.


Thus, the victories gained by the Serbians and Bulgarians denote the
undermining of feudal rule in Macedonia,

    

the formation of a more or less free class of peasant land owners, and a
guarantee for the entire social development of the Balkan countries, which
has been checked by absolutism and feudal relations.  

Bourgeois newspapers, from Novoye Vremya to Rech, are
talking of national liberation in the Balkans, leaving out
economic liberation. Yet in reality it is the latter that is the
chief thing.  

Given complete liberation from the landlords and from absolutism,
national liberation and complete freedom of self-determination of the
peoples would be an inevitable result. On the other hand, if the tyranny of
the landlords and the Balkan monarchies over the peoples remains, national
oppression, too, is bound to persist in some measure or another.  

If the liberation of Macedonia had been accomplished through a
revolution, that is, through the Serbian and Bulgarian and also the
Turkish peasants fighting against the landlords of all
nationalities (and against the landlord governments in the Balkans),
liberation would probably have cost the Balkan peoples a hundred times less
in human lives than the present war. Liberation would have been achieved at
an infinitely lower price and would have been infinitely more complete.


One may ask what are the historical causes of the issue being settled
by war and not by revolution. The main historical cause is the weakness,
disunity, immaturity and ignorance of the peasant masses in all the Balkan
countries, as well as the small number of the workers who had a clear
understanding of the state of affairs and demanded a Balkan federal (union)
republic.  

This brings out the radical difference between the European bourgeoisie
and the European workers in their attitude to the Balkan problem. The
bourgeoisie, even the liberal bourgeoisie, similar to our Cadets, shouts
about the “national” liberation of the “Slavs”. Thereby it plainly
misrepresents the meaning and historic significance of the events now
taking place in the Balkans, and thus hampers the real liberation
of the Balkan peoples. It thus contributes to the preservation of
landlord privileges, political tyranny and national oppression in some
measure or another.  
 

On the other hand, the worker democrats are the only ones to champion
the real and complete liberation of the Balkan peoples. Nothing but
economic and political liberation of the peasants of all the
Balkan nationalities, carried through to the end, can eliminate all
possibility of any sort of national oppression.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Regenerated China









Lenin: Regenerated China







V. I.  

      Lenin
Regenerated China




Published:
Pravda No. 163, November 18, 1912.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 400-401.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Progressive and civilised Europe shows no interest in the
regeneration of China. Four hundred million backward Asians have attained
freedom, and have awakened to political life. One quarter of the
world’s population has passed, so to say, from torpor to enlightenment,
movement and struggle.  

But civilised Europe does not care. To this day even the French
Republic has not officially recognised the Republic of China! A question on
this subject is to be asked shortly in the French Chamber of Deputies.


Why this indifference on the part of Europe? The explanation is that
throughout the West power is in the hands of the imperialist bourgeoisie,
which is already three-quarters decayed and willing to sell all its
“civilisation” to any adventurer for “stringent” measures against the
workers, or for an extra five kopeks’ profit on the ruble. To this
bourgeoisie, China is only booty, and now that Russia has taken
Mongolia into her “tender embrace”, the Japanese, British, Germans, etc.,
will probably try to tear off a piece of this booty.  

But China’s regeneration is making speed nevertheless.  Parliamentary
elections are about to be held—the first in what was a despotic
state. The Lower House will have 600 members and the “Senate”, 274.  

Suffrage is neither universal nor direct. It is
granted only to persons above the age of 21 who have resided in the
constituency for at least two years and who pay direct taxes amounting to
about two rubles, or own property worth about 500 rubles. They will first
vote for electors, who will elect the members of parliament.  
 

This kind of suffrage indicates in itself that there is an alliance of
the well-to-do peasantry and the bourgeoisie, there being no proletariat at
all or one that is completely powerless.  

The same circumstance is evident from the nature of China’s political
parties. There are three main parties: 

(1) The Radical-Socialist Party, which in fact has nothing at
all to do with socialism, any more than our own Popular Socialists
(and nine-tenths of the Socialist-Revolutionaries). It is a party of
petty-bourgeois democrats, and its chief demands are political
unity of China, development of trade and industry “along social lines”
(just as hazy a phrase as the “labour principle” and “equalisation” of
our Narodniks and Socialist-Revolutionaries), and preservation of peace.


(2) The second party is that of the liberals. They are in alliance with
the Radical-Socialists and together with them constitute the National
Party. This party will in all likelihood win a majority in China’s
first parliament. Its leader is the well-known Dr. Sun Yat-sen. He is now
drawing up a plan for a vast railway network (Russian Narodniks will please
note that Sun Yat-sen is doing this in order that China may
“avoid” a capitalist fate!).  

(3) The third party calls itself the Republican League, an example of
how deceptive political signboards can be. Actually it is a
conservative party, backed chiefly by government officials,
landlords and the bourgeoisie of northern China, which is the most
backward part of the country. The National Party, on the other hand, is
predominantly a party of the more industrially-developed and progressive
southern part of the country.  

The peasant masses are the mainstay of the National Party. Its leaders
are intellectuals who have been educated abroad.  

China’s freedom was won by an alliance of peasant democrats and the
liberal bourgeoisie. Whether the peasants, who are not led by a proletarian
party, will be able to retain their democratic positions against
the liberals, who are only waiting for an opportunity to shift to the
right, will be seen in the near future.  

 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Results and Significance of the U.S. Presidential Elections









Lenin: The Results and Significance of the U.S. Presidential Elections







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Results and Significance of the U.S. Presidential Elections




Published:
Pravda No.164, November 9, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 402-404.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Wilson, a “Democrat”, has been elected President of the United States
of America. He has polled over six million votes, Roosevelt (the new
National Progressive Party) over four million, Taft (Republican Party) over
three million, and the Socialist Eugene Debs 800,000 votes.  

The world significance of the U.S. elections lies not so much in the
great increase in the number of Socialist votes as in the far-reaching
crisis of the bourgeois parties, in the amazing force
with which their decay has been revealed. Lastly, the significance of the
elections lies in the unusually clear and striking revelation of
bourgeois reformism as a means of combating socialism.  

In all bourgeois countries, the parties which stand for
capitalism, i.e., the bourgeois parties, came into being a long time ago,
and the greater the extent of political liberty, the more solid they are.


Freedom in the U.S.A. is most complete. And for a whole
half-century—since the Civil War over slavery in
1860–65—two bourgeois parties have been distinguished there by
remarkable solidity and strength. The party of the former slave-owners is
the so-called Democratic Party. The capitalist party, which favoured the
emancipation of the Negroes, has developed into the Republican Party.  

Since the emancipation of the Negroes, the distinction between the two
parties has been diminishing. The fight between these two parties has been
mainly over the height of customs duties. Their fight has not had
any serious importance for the mass of the people. The people have
been deceived and diverted from their vital interests by means of

    

spectacular and meaningless duels between the two bourgeois
parties.  

This so-called bipartisan system prevailing in America and Britain has
been one of the most powerful means of preventing the rise of an
independent working-class, i.e., genuinely socialist, party.  

And now the bipartisan system has suffered a fiasco in America, the
country boasting the most advanced capitalism! What caused this fiasco?


The strength of the working-class movement, the growth of socialism.


The old bourgeois parties (the “Democratic” and the “Republican”
parties) have been facing towards the past, the period of the emancipation
of the Negroes. The new bourgeois party, the National Progressive Party, is
facing to wards the future. Its programme turns entirely on the
question whether capitalism is to be or not to be, on the issues, to he
specific, of protection for the workers and of “trusts”, as the
capitalist associations are called in the U.S.A.  

The old parties are products of an epoch whose task was to develop
capitalism as speedily as possible. The struggle between the parties was
over the question how best to expedite and facilitate this development.


The new party is a product of the present epoch, which raises the issue
of the very existence of capitalism. In the U.S.A., the freest and most
advanced country, this issue is coming to the fore more clearly and broadly
than anywhere else.  

The entire programme and entire agitation of Roosevelt and the
Progressives turn on how to save capitalism by means of
bourgeois reforms.  

The bourgeois reformism which in old Europe manifests itself in the
chatter of liberal professors has all at once come forward in the free
American republic as a party four million strong. This is American style.


We shall save capitalism by reforms, says that party. We shall grant
the most progressive factory legislation. We shall establish state control
over all the trusts (in the U.S.A. that means over all
industries!). We shall establish state control over them to eliminate
poverty and enable everybody to earn a “decent” wage. We shall establish

    

“social and industrial justice”. We revere all reforms—the
only “reform” we don’t want is expropriation of the
capitalists!  

The national wealth of the U.S.A. is now reckoned to be 120 billion
(thousand million) dollars, i.e., about 240 billion rubles. Approximately
one-third of it, or about 80 billion rubles, belongs to
two trusts, those of Rockefeller and Morgan, or is subordinated to
these trusts! Not more than. 40,000 families making up these two trusts are
the masters of 80 million wage slaves.  

Obviously, so long as these modern slave-owners are there, all
“reforms” will be nothing but a deception. Roosevelt has been
deliberately hired by the astute multimillionaires to preach this
deception. The “state control” they promise will become—if the
capitalists keep their capital—a means of combating and crushing strikes.


But the American proletarian has already awakened and has taken up his
post. He greets Roosevelt’s success with cheerful irony, as if to say: You
lured four million people with your promises of reform, dear impostor
Roosevelt. Very well! Tomorrow those four million will see that your
promises were a fraud, and don’t forget that they are following you
only because they feel that it is impossible to go on
living in the old way.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The “Vexed Questions” of Our Party









Lenin: The 'Vexed Questions' of Our Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
The “Vexed Questions” of Our Party
The “Liquidationist” and “National” Questions




Written: Written in November 1912 

Published:

      First published in Pismo Dyskusyjne (Discussion Sheet) No. 1, August 1913.

      Translated from the Polish.

      Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the text in Pismo Dyskusyjne.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 405-412.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In August 1912 the Executive Committee of the Social-Democracy of
Poland and Lithuania convened a “territorial

conference”[2] of the Polish Social-Democrats. It will be recalled
that at present the Executive of the Polish Social-Democracy is an
executive without a party. In Warsaw, the Polish capital, the
local Social-Democratic organisation emphatically condemned the
disorganising policy of the Executive, which replied by resorting to vile
anonymous accusations of provocation, set up a fictitious Warsaw
organisation and hastened to convene a suitably rigged territorial
conference “of its own”.  

Subsequent elections to the Duma by the Warsaw worker curia fully
revealed the spurious character of the supporters of the Executive: among
the 66 delegates there were 34 Social-Democrats, including only 3
(doubtful) supporters of the Executive.  

This introductory remark is necessary for the reader to regard the
resolution of the territorial conference of the S.D.P. and L. that we are
going to discuss only as a resolution of the Tyszka
Executive, and under no circumstances as a decision of the Polish worker
Social-Democrats.  
I

The question of the Polish Social-Democrats’ attitude
towards the R.S.D.L.P. is an unusually important and burning one. Therefore
the decision adopted by the Tyszka conference

    

on this question, however hard it may be to take it seriously,
deserves closer study.  

It is hard to take seriously the Tyszka resolution, which is full of
abuse, if only because of its attitude to the fundamental
question, that of liquidationism.  

This has been a fundamental question in the R.S.D.L.P. during
1908–1912. The Party has been terribly broken up by the
counter-revolution. It is making every effort to re-establish its
organisation. And throughout the four years of counter-revolution,
it has been waging a continuous struggle against the little groups
of Social-Democrats who want to liquidate the Party.  

Does it not follow clearly from this that one who has not settled the
issue of liquidationism explicitly has no right to call himself a
Party member?  

The Tyszka conference, too, in its resolution on the attitude to the
R.S.D.L.P. allotted more space to liquidationism than to anything else. The
conference admitted that liquidationism was “a most serious obstacle to
the development of the R.S.D.L.P. and a grave danger to its very
existence”.  

“Overt and consistent liquidationism and revolutionary
Social-Democracy are mutually exclusive,” said the resolution.  

As you see, Tyszka and Co. tackled the problem with a bold and firm
hand—and dodged solving it!  

Who are, then, the “overt and consistent” liquidators? And what is
the practical conclusion that follows from the experience of four years
of struggle against liquidationism?  

These natural and necessary questions were answered in clear, precise
and convincing terms by the January 1912 Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.,
which said that the liquidators were the group associated with the
publications Nasha Zarya and Zhivoye Dyelo. This group
had placed itself out side the Party.  

One may consider this answer right or wrong, but one cannot deny that
it is quite clear, one cannot evade making a clear statement of one’s
attitude!  

But the Tyszka conference sought precisely to evade the issue, twist
and turn like a petty thief. If it is not true that Nasha Zarya
represents open and consistent liquidators,

    

as we said clearly in January 1912, then why did Tyszka and Co. not
disclose our error to the Polish worker Social-Democrats in August 1912? If
it is not true that Nasha Zarya has placed itself outside
the Party, and if you, Messrs. Tyszka, Rosa Luxemburg and Warski, consider
it to be in the Party, why did not you say so plainly? It was your
direct duty to the Polish worker Social-Democrats!  

And however much you may abuse and curse and revile “Lenin’s”
conference in January 1912, the racket you are raising will not enable you
to deceive anyone but people who want to be deceived. For, after the
January Conference, one cannot be a politically-conscious and honest
Social-Democrat, nor speak of the state of affairs in the R.S.D.L.P.,
without giving a clear and explicit answer to the question:
is Nasha Zarya liquidationist or not, and does it belong in or
outside the Party?  
II

The spate of varied and wordy abuse which the Tyszka conference slung
at the “Leninists” boils down to one thing—an accusation of
splitting the Party.  

The January Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. considered only the Nasha
Zarya group to be outside the Party. This is a fact known to all. From
this fact even Tyszka and his friends could have drawn the simple and
obvious conclusion that the accusation of splitting the Party means
regarding the Nasha Zarya group as a Party group.  

Even a child would see that this conclusion is inevitable. And Tyszka
and Co. are long past childhood years.  

Anyone who accuses us of splitting the Party should have sufficient
elementary courage and elementary honesty to say plainly: “The Nasha
Zarya group is not liquidationist”, “it ought not to be
outside the Party, but belongs inside the Party”, “it is a
legitimate shade of opinion in the Party”, and so on.  

This is the heart of the matter, that the gentlemen who accuse us of
splitting the Party, such as Tyszka, say this in undertones,
shyly, in a roundabout way (for this naturally follows from the
howls about a split) but they are afraid to say it plainly!  
 

It is not easy to say and prove that Nasha
Zarya ought to be in the Party. Anyone who says so assumes a certain
responsibility, decides a certain question of principle, and plainly
defends the chief liquidators. One may (and should) regard such a
person as a supporter of the liquidators, but one must admit that he has
his convictions and it cannot be denied that he is politically honest, if
only within the limits of the narrow question whether or not a definite
group of liquidators should be in the Party.  

But when an entire organisation, if one may call it that, or a sum
total of the organisations of a whole territory, dodgingly and stealthily,
shamefacedly and without speaking straight out, defends the liquidators and
accuses those who have expelled the liquidators from the Party of causing a
split, but does not dare to say plainly, “This group of liquidators ought
to be in the Party”, the conclusion inevitably suggests itself that what
we have before us is not an organisation of Social-Democrats who share
such-and-such views, but a circle of plotters who want to make
political capital out of “utilising” the struggle between the liquidators
and the anti-liquidators.  

To those who are familiar with the internal affairs of the
R.S.D.L.P. since 1907, it has long been an open secret that Tyszka and Co.,
like the Bundists who preceded them, are specimens of this type of
intriguer, “Marxists by weight”, or “Tushino

turncoats”,[3] as Social-Democrats call such people. Tyszka, like some
of the Bundists, bases his entire “stand” in the Party on a game
between the liquidators and the anti-liquidators, on mediation, on
profiting from being the extra “weight in the scales”, without which
neither the liquidators nor the anti-liquidators can have a majority!  

In the autumn of 1911, when this old “game” of Tyszka’s, of which
everyone had grown tired, resulted in his collapse, he was openly called a
plotter by the press of both opposed trends—the liquidators and
the anti-liquidators.  

Indeed, place yourself in the position of an extra “weight in the
scales”, and then the illogical, childishly naive, ludicrously feeble and
helpless resolutions of the Tyszka conference will at once become
perfectly intelligible to you. This is just the way a plotter
should speak: I condemn liquidationism—but I don’t say plainly who are
the overt

    

and consistent liquidators! I admit that liquidationism endangers the very
existence of the Party—but I don’t say plainly whether or not
such-and-such a group ought to be in the Party! I can always,
under all circumstances, derive an advantage from a “position” such as
this, can make “political capital” out of it, for without me the
anti-liquidator cannot defeat the liquidator, without me the
liquidator can not have an assured place in the Party!!  

“Tyszka” politics are not an accidental or isolated phenomenon. When
there is a split and, in general, when there is a bitter struggle between
trends, it is inevitable that groups should appear which base
their existence on a continuous darting from one side to the other, and on
petty intrigue. This is a sad and unpleasant feature of the life of our
Party, a feature accentuated by the conditions of revolutionary work in
exile. Groups of intriguers, and features of intrigue in the policy of
certain groups, particularly those lacking strong ties with Russia, are
phenomena one has to be aware of if one does not want to be fooled and to
fall victim to various “misunderstandings”.  
III

The slogan of “unity” is “popular”, of course, among wide sections
of the Workers, who do not know with whom that unity should be
established, what concessions to a particular group that
unity implies, and on what basis the policy of including
the liquidators in the Party or expelling them from it is shaped.  

To be sure, nothing could be easier than demagogically taking advantage
of this incomprehension of the essence of the matter to howl about
a “split”. Nothing could be easier than disguising diplomacy by a demand
for the “unity” of trends that have irrevocably drifted apart.  

But however “popular” the slogan of “unity” among
politically-ignorant people, and however convenient it is now for various
demagogues, intriguers and group diplomats to hide behind it, we shall
never stop demanding from every politically-conscious Social-Democrat a
clear and explicit answer to the question decided by the January 1912
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.  
 

The conference which the liquidators convened in August 1912 showed
clearly that all the controversies turn on the question of liquidationism,
on whether the liquidators’ groups are pro-Party or non-Party (or even
anti-Party). Whoever evades this cardinal issue mystifies himself and
others.  

As a matter of fact, talk about the “factionalism” of the January
Conference, and so on, is just such an evasion of the cardinal
issue. All right, gentlemen, we might answer the talkers, let us assume
that the January Conference was arch-factionalist and disruptive, that it
was not duly authorised, and so on. But are you not using these “terrible
words” merely to clear yourselves in your own eyes? A section of
the Social-Democrats—it makes no difference which—declared in January
that Nasha Zarya consisted of anti-Party liquidators who were
outside the Party. That opinion is substantiated in a resolution—a
detailed, well-grounded resolution prompted by four years of Party history.


Anyone who sincerely wishes to explain and refute the error of these,
let us say, “January” Social-Democrats must analyse and refute this
resolution. He must say and prove that Nasha Zarya should be in
the Party, that its ideas are not ruinous to the Party, that such-and-such
concessions should he made to that group, that such-and-such obligations
should be demanded of it, that the guarantees of the fulfilment of these
obligations should consist in this or that, and that the extent of the
influence of the group within the Party should be established in
such-and-such a way.  

To put the question in this way would mean conscientiously and
honestly refuting the convictions of the January Social-Democrats, would
mean explaining to the workers what you think wrong. But the point
is that not one of those who now engage in cheap clamour about a
split has taken a single step towards putting the question in this way!!


That is why contemptuously brushing aside the demagogues and
intriguers, we calmly repeat: our resolution expelling the liquidators has
not been refuted and is irrefutable. New facts, such as the publication of
the liquidationist

Luch[4] which has made Trotsky’s phrase-mongering

    

its own, merely increase the force of our resolution a hundred-fold. The
facts—the May Day action, the rallying of hundreds of workers’ groups
around the anti-liquidationist newspaper, the elections to the Fourth Duma
by the worker curia—are conclusive proof of the correctness of
our stand against the liquidators.  

No amount of howling about a “split” can shake this conviction,
because this howling is a cowardly, covert, hypocritical defence
of the liquidators.  
IV

The January 1912 Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. posed yet
another serious question of principle, that of the structure of
our Party with regard to nationalities. For lack of space, I shall only
briefly touch on this question.  

Complete or incomplete federation, “federation of the worst type” or
complete unity? That is the question.  

The Tyszka conference replies to this problem, too, with nothing but
abuse and shouts about “fraud”, “distortion of the facts”, and so
on. What senseless shouters they are, this Tyszka and his retinue!  

The complete separateness of the Lettish, Polish and Jewish (Bund)
Social-Democrats is a fact. Every Polish Social-Democrat knows that there
is not, and has never been, anything like unity with the
Bund in Poland. The same is true of the Russians and the Bund, etc. The
non-Russians have their own special organisations, their central bodies,
congresses, etc. The Russians lack these things, and
their Central Committee cannot decide Russian questions without
the participation of the Bundists, Poles and Letts who are fighting one
another and who are unfamiliar with Russian matters.  

This is a fact, one that no amount of abuse can
suppress. Everyone in our Party has seen it since 1907. Everyone
has sensed the falsity of this situation. That is why our Conference dubbed
it “a federation of the worst

     type”.[1]

 

All honest and sincere Social-Democrats must give a pertinent answer to
this presentation of the question.  

The correctness of this presentation of the question was borne
out most convincingly by the August conference, which, as
even Plekhanov admits, “adapted socialism to nationalism” by its
notorious resolution on “national cultural” autonomy.  

The Bund and Tyszka’s Executive are alike in swearing by all the saints
that they stand for unity, while in Warsaw, Lodz and elsewhere there is a
complete split between them!!  

The connection between the “liquidationist question” and the
“national question” is not an invention of ours but has been revealed by
the realities of life.  

Let, then, all serious-minded Social-Democrats raise and discuss the
“national question” as well. Federation or unity? Federation for the
“nationalities”, with separate centres and without a separate
centre for the Russians, or complete unity? Nominal unity with a virtual
split (or secession) of the Bund’s local organisations, or real unity from
top to bottom?  

Anyone who thinks he can get away from these questions is sorely
mistaken. Anyone who counts on a simple restoration of the “federation of
the worst type” of 1907–11, mystifies himself and others. It is
already impossible to restore that federation. That misbegotten
child will never rise from the dead. The Party has moved away from it for
good.  

Where has it moved to? Towards an “Austrian”

federation?[5] Or towards a complete renunciation of
federation, to actual unity? We are for the latter. We are opposed to
“adapting socialism to nationalism”.  

Let everyone give full thought to this question and finally decide it.


 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 464–65.—Ed.  
 



[2]
The Polish Social-Democrats’ “territorial conference” met on
August 11–17 (N. S.), 1912. All the participants were supporters of the
Executive Committee of the Social-Democratic Party of the Kingdom of Poland
and Lithuania (Zarzadists), which took a conciliatory position in regard to
the liquidators and opposed the Rozlamists, who upheld the Bolshevik
standpoint. The Conference approved the activities of the Executive and
resolved to dissolve the Party organisations that supported the
Rozlamists. It declared for a tactical agreement with the Bund and the Left
wing of the P.S.P. in the Fourth Duma elections. It also adopted a
decision—analysed in this article—concerning the attitude of the Polish
Social-Democrats to the R.S.D.L.P.





[3]
In 1608 Russia was invaded by Polish interventionist troops under
Dmitry II the Impostor, an agent of the Polish feudal lords (he was made
out to be the youngest son of Tsar Ivan the Terrible). The invaders drew
near Moscow and camped in the village of Tushino. The Impostor formed a
government with its own Court as a counter to the Moscow government. Some
of the Russian noblemen and boyars deserted alternately to the Moscow and
the Tushino governments in an effort to safeguard themselves in the event
of the victory of either side. It was those deserters that were nicknamed
“Tushino turncoats”.





[4]
Luch (The Ray)—a legal daily newspaper published by
the Menshevik liquidators in St. Petersburg from September 16 (29), 1912,
to July 5 (18), 1913. In all, 237 issues appeared. The newspaper was
supported chiefly by donations from the liberals. Ideologically it was
directed by P. B. Axelrod, F. I. Dan, L. Martov and A. S. Martynov. The
liquidators used it to oppose the Bolshevik’s revolutionary tactics. They
advocated the opportunist slogan of founding a so-called open party,
opposed revolutionary mass strikes, and sought to revise the major
provisions of the Party Programme. Lenin wrote that “Luch has
been enslaved by a liberal policy” and called it a renegade organ.





[5]
The term “Austrian” federation refers to the
Austrian Social-Democratic Party’s organisation on the national
principle. The Vienna Party Congress in 1897 abolished the united party,
and replaced it by a federation of six national “Social—Democratic
groups”:

German, Czech, Polish, Ruthenian, Italian and South Slav. These groups were
all united by a joint congress and a common Central Executive. The
Brünn Congress in 1899 reorganised the Central Executive into a
federal body composed of the executive commit tees of the national
Social-Democratic parties. Organisational federalism resulted in the
break-up of the integral Social-Democratic Party of Austria.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concerning Certain Speeches by Workers’ Deputies









Lenin: Concerning Certain Speeches by Workers' Deputies







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning Certain Speeches by Workers’ Deputies[3]




Written: Written in November 1912 

Published:

      First published in Lenin’s Collected Works, Second and Third editions, Vol. XVI, 1930.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 413-419.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

What are the basic ideas that should underlie the
first speech of a workers’ spokesman in the Duma?  

Naturally, the workers will look forward to the first speech
with particular eagerness and particular attention. Naturally, it is in the
first speech that they expect to find the important and fundamental thing,
a concise exposition of the view taken on issues that are of especial
concern to everyone and come particularly into the forefront in the
country’s policies in general and in the practice of the working-class
movement (both political and economic) in particular.  

Among these issues are the following: 

(1) Continuity of the activity of the Social-Democratic group
in the Fourth Duma. Continuity implies the preservation of an
inseparable connection with the former Social-Democratic groups of
all the former Dumas, it being particularly necessary to stress the
connection with the Social-Democratic group in the Second Duma—in view of
the well-known attack which the counter-revolution made upon it.  

It is important to lay stress on continuity, for, unlike the bourgeois
parties, the worker democrats see something integral and
common in their work in the First, Second, Third and
Fourth Dumas, and will not let themselves be distracted by any turn in
events (or by any development like the coup d’état of June 3) from
fulfilling their tasks, from pursuing their invariable aims.  

(2) The second thesis which should go into the first speech of a
workers’ deputy is socialism. Strictly speaking, it

    

consists of two subjects. One is the fact that Russia’s Social-Democratic
Party is a contingent of the international army of the socialist
proletariat. That, in fact, is exactly what Pokrovsky said in the Third
Duma (see his declaration in the verbatim reports, p. 328 of the official
publication, Seventh Sitting, November 16, 1907). It is, of course,
absolutely indispensable to make this point.  

But there is another point which is highly important in our day. It is
a reference to the present situation and the tasks of socialism
throughout the world. What are the characteristics of this
situation?
(a) An extreme aggravation of the struggle between the working class and
the bourgeoisie (high cost of living, mass strikes, the
imperialism of the Powers, their fierce competition over markets
and their nearness to war), and
(b) the nearness of the realisation of socialism. The working class of the
world is fighting not for recognition of its right to have a socialist
party, but for power, and for the organisation of society along
new lines. It is highly important to say so from the Duma platform, to tell
the workers of Russia about the beginning of the great battles for
socialism in Europe and America, about the nearness of the triumph
(inevitable triumph) of socialism in the civilised world.  

(3) The third thesis concerns the Balkan war and Russia’s international
position and foreign policy.  

It is impossible to omit this subject, which is the most topical. It
may be subdivided into the following questions: 

(a) The Balkan war. The slogan of a Balkan federal republic should also
be proclaimed by the Russian workers’ deputy. Against Slav-Turkish
enmity. For freedom and equal rights for all the peoples
of the Balkans.  

(b) Against the interference of other Powers in the Balkan war. It is
absolutely necessary to side with the demonstration for peace which took
place in Basle, at the International Socialist

Congress.[4] War against war! Against all interference! For peace! Such
are the slogans of the workers.  

(c) Against the foreign policy of the Russian Government in general,
with particular mention of the “lust” to seize (and of the seizure
already begun) the Bosphorus, Turkish Armenia, Persia, Mongolia.  
    


 

(d) Against the nationalism of the government, with reference to the
oppressed nationalities: Finland, Poland, the Ukraine, the Jews, etc. It is
highly important to put forward in precise terms the slogan of the
political self-determination of all nationalities, in contrast to
all hedging (such as only “equality”).  

(e) Against liberal nationalism, which is not so crude but is
particularly harmful because of its hypocrisy and its “refined” deception
of the people. What are the signs of this liberal
(Progressist-Cadet) nationalism?  Chauvinist speeches about the
tasks of the “Slavs”, speeches about the tasks of Russia as a “Great
Power”, speeches about Russia reaching an agreement with Britain and
France so as to be able to plunder other countries.  

(4) The fourth thesis is the political position of Russia. The
essential thing here is to describe the existing tyranny and lack of
rights, and reveal the compelling necessity of political liberty.


Special note should be made here of: 

(a) The necessity of mentioning the prisons—Kutomara, Algachi,

etc.[5] 

(b) A reference to the rigging of elections, Bonapartist methods, the
fact that the government is no longer trusted even by those classes (the
landlords and the bourgeoisie) on which the coup d’état of June 3
counted.  

The priests were made to vote against their conscience.  

The Duma has moved to the right, while the country has moved to the
left.  

(c) It is particularly important to state correctly the relationship
between the notorious liquidationist slogan of “freedom of association”
and the objectives of political liberty in general. It is highly
important to point out that freedom of the press, association, assembly and
strikes is absolutely indispensable to the workers, but that it is
precisely in order to bring it about that we must realise the
inseparable connection between it and the general foundations of
political liberty, a radical change in the entire political
system. Not the liberal utopia of freedom of association under the
June Third regime, but a struggle for freedom in general, and for
freedom of association in

    

particular, against this regime all along the line, against the
foundations of this regime.  

(5) Fifth thesis: the intolerable plight of the peasantry. The
starvation of 30 million peasants in 1911. The ruin and impoverishment of
the countryside. The government “land distribution system” only makes
things worse. Financial prosperity is so much tinsel, a pretence
of prosperity achieved by extorting dues and befuddling the people with
drink. Even the modest land Bill of the Right-wing peasants (the
“forty-three peasants”) submitted to the Third

Duma[6] has been shelved. The peasants need deliverance from the
oppression of the landlords and of landlordism.  

(6) Sixth thesis: three camps in the elections to the Fourth Duma, and
three camps in the country: 

(a) The government camp. It is impotent. Rigs elections.  

(b) The liberal camp. It is highly important to point out, if only very
briefly, the counter-revolutionary nature of the liberals, who are
against a new revolution. One may quote word for word Gredeskul’s
statement which Pravda reprinted in its issue No. 85

     (August 8).[1]

“No second popular movement [in other words, no second revolution] was
needed but merely quiet, persevering and confident constitutional
work”. These were Gredeskul’s exact words, and Rech published
them.  

Liberal hopes of constitutional reform with the foundations of
the present system retained, and without a broad movement of the
people, are utopia.  

(c) The third camp, the democrats. It is led by the working class. One
may say, speaking of the past in the third person, what was said
even by Golos Moskvy, namely, that the working class
advanced three slogans during the elections:
(1) a democratic republic;
(2) an eight-hour working day;
(3) confiscation of all the landed estates in favour of the peasantry.


(7) Seventh thesis: a reference to the political movement and strikes
in 1912.  

(a) It is highly important to point out that the number of
political strikers rose to a million. Resurgence of the entire
emancipation movement.  
 

(b) It is highly important to stress that the workers by their
political strikes set themselves objectives affecting the whole
people, that they did not raise particular problems but problems
affecting the whole people.  

(c) It is necessary to point out that it is the connection
between political and economic strikes that lends strength and vitality to
the movement.  

(d) Mention the workers’ protest against the execution of sailors.


(8) The eighth thesis, an important one following from the whole of the
foregoing and closely linked with it, is the hegemony of the proletariat,
its guiding role, its role as leader. It leads the whole people, the entire
democratic movement. It demands freedom and leads into the battle for
freedom. It sets an example, provides a model. It raises morale. It arouses
a new mood.  

(9) The ninth and final thesis: recapitulation and summary. It should
be said, speaking of the class-conscious workers in the third person, that
they are “unshakably loyal” to three principles: first,
socialism; second, “the principles of the old, battle-tested Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party”—the workers are loyal to it. This
fact should be conveyed; third, the workers are loyal to “their
republican convictions”. It is not a question of an appeal or slogan, but
of loyalty to one’s convictions. (There exist legal republican parties in a
number of monarchies—Britain, Sweden, Italy, Belgium and other
countries.)  

P.S. The question may also arise of the need to put for ward
separately “freedom of association”. It should be borne in mind
that the liquidators advocate under this flag the liberal demand for a
constitutional reform while keeping intact the
foundations of the June

       Third—[2]


 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 254–55 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
The manuscript breaks off at this point.—Ed.  
 



[3]
Lenin’s theses “Concerning Certain Speeches by Workers’
Deputies” formed the basis of a declaration by the Social-Democratic
group in the Fourth Duma. The manuscript has survived only in part.  

The adoption of the declaration was preceded by a bitter fight of the
Bolshevik deputies against the seven Menshevik members of the
group. A. Y. Badayev, a Bolshevik member of the group, wrote in his
recollections:

“Our group devoted a number of meetings to the declaration, which it began
to discuss before the Duma opened. The debate was exceedingly heated and
often lasted till late into the night. On either side not only deputies but
also Party functionaries then in St. Petersburg took part in drafting the
declaration.... After a long and stubborn struggle and a number of heated
clashes with the Mensheviks we at last had all the fundamental demands of
the Bolsheviks incorporated in the declaration.” (A. Badayev, The
Bolsheviks in the Duma. Recollections, Moscow, 1954, p. 67, Russ. ed.)


In accordance with Lenin’s directives, the declaration included nearly
all the main provisions of the minimum programme. Nevertheless, the
Mensheviks succeeded in getting the demand for cultural national autonomy
included in the declaration. On December 7 (20), 1912, the declaration was
read in the Duma.  

On December 8 (21), 1912, Pravda carried a verbatim report of
the Duma sitting together with the text of the declaration. This
Pravda issue was confiscated for publishing the declaration, and
its editor brought to trial.





[4]
The Extraordinary International Socialist Congress of the Second
International took place in Basle on November 24–25, 1912. On the
opening day there was a large anti-war demonstration and an international
protest meeting against the war. On November 25 the Congress unanimously
adopted a manifesto calling on the workers to use the organisation and
might of the proletariat for a revolutionary struggle against the war
danger.





[5]
This refers to the unrest among the political prisoners In the Kutomara
and Algachi prisons. It began in August 1912 owing to the Transbaikal
Military Governor’s order Introducing military rules of treatment of
political prisoners in Nerchinsk penal-servitude prisons. In protest, the
political prisoners at Kutomara declared a fifteen-day hunger strike. The
prison administration retaliated by mass torture. Some of the prisoners,
driven to despair, committed suicide. Similar events took place in Algachi
prison. The summer and autumn of 1912 saw unrest among political prisoners
elsewhere in Russia. In response to these developments there were protest
strikes of workers in St. Petersburg, Moscow, Warsaw and Riga. On behalf of
the Social-Democratic and the Trudovik groups in the Fourth Duma, an
interpellation was made concerning the outrages against the
prisoners. Discussion was postponed by a majority vote but was never
resumed.





[6]
This refers to the land Bill which was Introduced by (non-party and
Right-wing) peasant deputies in the Third Duma on May 10 (23), 1908. The
Bill provided for the compulsory alienation, at average market prices, of
landed estates not tilled by their owners them selves. For carrying out the
land reform, it was proposed that local land committees should be set up to
be elected by a general vote. Lenin appraised the Bill in his article “The
Agrarian Debates in the Third Duma”










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concerning the Workers' Deputies to the Duma and Their Declaration









Lenin: Concerning the Workers' Deputies to the Duma and Their Declaration







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning the Workers’ Deputies to the Duma and Their Declaration[1]




Written: Written in mid-November 1912 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Published according to a copy made by N. K. Krupskaya.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 420-423.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Social-Democratic group, speaking from the platform of the Fourth
Duma, declares that there is an inseparable continuity between its activity
and that of the Social-Democratic groups in the previous Dumas,
particularly the one in the Second Duma, a group against which the
counter-revolutionaries committed an act of unprecedented political
vengeance. The Russian Social-Democratic Party is a contingent of the great
international liberation army of the socialist proletariat. This army is
now growing rapidly throughout the world. The universal high cost of
living, the oppression of capital grouped in associations, cartels, trusts
and syndicates, and the imperialist policies of the Powers make the
condition of the working masses intolerable and aggravate the struggle
between capital and labour. The time is fast approaching when an end will
be put to capitalism, when millions of united proletarians will establish a
social system in which there will be no poverty of the masses, nor
exploitation of man by man.  

The Social-Democratic group joins its voice to that of the workers of
all countries, who at the International Congress in Basle expressed an
emphatic protest against war. The workers demand peace. They protest
against all interference in Balkan affairs. Only complete freedom and
independence of the Balkan peoples, and only a federal Balkan republic are
capable of providing the best way out of the present crisis and a real
solution to the national question through the recognition of complete
equality and an absolute right to political self-determination for all
nationalities without exception.  
 

The Social-Democratic group in the Fourth Duma protests above all
against the foreign policy of the Russian Government. It condemns the
hidden intention to enlarge our state by seizing foreign territories on the
Bosphorus, in Turkish Armenia, in Persia and China, and condemns the
seizure of Mongolia, which disrupts good relations with the great,
fraternal Chinese Republic.  

All chauvinism and nationalism will find an implacable enemy in the
Social-Democratic group—whether the crude, brutal nationalism of the
government which crushes and strangles Finland, Poland, the Ukraine, the
Jews and the other non-Great-Russian nationalities, or the hypocritically
disguised, refined nationalism of the liberals and Cadets, who are willing
to talk about the tasks of Russia as a Great Power and about an agreement
between her and other Powers with the aim of plundering foreign lands.


The ruling classes resort to noisy nationalist speeches in a vain
effort to divert the attention of the people from the intolerable domestic
position of Russia. The unheard of rigging of the Fourth Duma elections,
which is reminiscent of the Bonapartist methods of that adventurer,
Napoleon III, has shown for the hundredth and thousandth time that the
government cannot rely for support upon any one class of the population. It
cannot even maintain its alliance with the landlords and the big
bourgeoisie, for the sake of which the coup d’état of June 3, 1907,
was carried out. The Duma has swung to the right while the whole country
has moved to the left.  

The whole of Russia is suffocating under the yoke of oppression and
tyranny. The entire civilised world hears with startled indignation of the
tortures and the suffering of political prisoners in the Kutomara, Algachi
and other prisons, where the finest people of our country are languishing
in torment. Russia needs political liberty as badly as man needs air to
breathe. Russia cannot live and develop unless there is freedom of the
press, assembly, association and strikes, and, more than to any other
class, these liberties are indispensable to the proletariat, which the lack
of rights typical of Russian reality binds hand and foot in the fight it
must carry on for higher wages, shorter working hours and better living
conditions. The oppression

    

of capital, the high cost of living, unemployment in the towns and the
impoverishment of the countryside make it all the more necessary for the
workers to associate in unions and fight for their right to live, while
lack of political liberty keeps the worker in the position of a slave or
serf. The workers will stop at no sacrifice in their struggle for freedom,
well knowing that only a radical change in all the political conditions of
Russian life, only the fullest provision of the foundations and pillars of
political liberty, can guarantee the freedom of their struggle against
capital.  

The elections to the Fourth Duma and the workers’ mass political
strikes in 1912, which involved up to a mil lion workers, showed that the
time is drawing near when the workers will again march at the head of all
democrats to win freedom. Three camps tested their strength in the election
struggle. The camp of government counter-revolution proved so impotent that
it had to rig the elections even under the law of June 3, compelling the
downtrodden rural priests to vote against their conscience and
convictions. The liberal camp moved still further from the democrats
towards the big bourgeoisie. The Cadets demonstrated their
counter-revolutionary nature by an alliance with the Black Hundreds against
the Social-Democrats in Riga and Yekaterinodar, in Kostroma and the first
St. Petersburg curia. The liberal utopia of constitutional reform, with the
foundations of the present political system unchanged and without a
powerful movement of the people, is more and more losing favour among the
democrats. The slogan of the liberals is: “There is no need for a second
revolution, what is needed is merely constitutional work.” Being fully
aware of the spuriousness of this slogan, the working class waged its
struggle in the elections, rallying all the democratic forces to itself.


Everyone knows, and even the government press said so, that the working
class had three slogans in the election campaign: a democratic republic, an
eight-hour working day, and confiscation of all the landed estates in
favour of the peasants.  

The Social-Democratic proletariat is convinced that these three demands
are the necessary culmination of the demands shared by every democrat, such
as universal suffrage,

    

freedom of the press, assembly, association and strikes, the election of
judges and government officials by the people, abolition of the standing
army and introduction of a people’s militia, disestablishment of the Church
and separation of the school from the Church, etc.  

The condition of the peasant masses in Russia is becoming more and more
intolerable. The government’s so-called “land distribution system” merely
worsens the plight of the majority by ruining the countryside, leading to
famine such as affected 30 million peasants last year, and bringing no
lasting improvement of agriculture in general. The pretence of financial
prosperity is kept up by extorting taxes and befuddling the population with
drink, while the government delays its bankruptcy by contracting more and
more loans. Even the modest land Bill submitted to the Duma by the
forty-three Right-wing peasants has been shelved. No wonder the better
section of the peasantry is looking more and more to the working class as
the only leader of the people in the struggle for freedom. No wonder all
democrats regard the political strikes of 1912, which are inseparably
linked with the economic movement of the working class, as the dawn of a
new life, of a new more powerful emancipation movement.  

The Social-Democratic group in the Fourth Duma will champion the
interests and needs of this movement. It considers that it has no right to
conceal from the majority in the Fourth Duma what all the class-conscious
workers of Russia are thinking and feeling. The class-conscious workers
remain unshakably loyal to socialism. They re main unshakably loyal to the
principles of the old, battle-tested Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party. In the name of these principles, they remain unshakably loyal to
their republican convictions.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The document “Concerning the Workers’ Deputies to the Duma and
Their Declaration” was the draft of a declaration of the
Social-Democratic group. It was copied by N. K. Krupskaya and sent to the
Bolshevik members of the Duma from Cracow on November 13 (26), 1912. The
draft was Intercepted by the tsar’s police.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Concerning the Event of November 15









Lenin: Concerning the Event of November 15







V. I.  

      Lenin
Concerning the Event of November 15
An Undelivered Speech




Written: Written in the latter halt of November 1912 

Published:

      First published in Lenin’s Collected Works, Second and Third editions, Vol. XVI, 1930.

      Signed: A Non-deputy.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 424-426.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On November 15 the Fourth Duma opened. And on November 15
there was a demonstration of workers in

St. Petersburg.[1] In view of previous political strikes, and because
of them, this demonstration had the importance of a major historical
event. The strikes led up to demonstrations. The movement of the masses
rose to a higher plane—from strikes of a political nature to street
demonstrations. This is a great step forward, which should be stressed,
noted and estimated at its true worth by all politically enlightened
leaders of the proletariat.  

The significance of this step forward is all the greater because it
coincided with the opening of the Fourth, landlord, Black-Hundred, June
Third Duma. A perfectly timed demonstration! Wonderful proletarian
instinct, the ability to counter and contrast the opening of the
Black-Hundred “parliament” with red banners in the streets of the
capital!  

Wonderful proletarian instinct, the ability to counter the sycophantic,
slavish, Cadet-Octobrist “demonstration” (over Rodzyanko’s wretched
phrase-mongering about a

“constitution”[2]) inside the Palace by a demonstration of the real
kind, a truly popular, truly democratic, purely labour demonstration (the
intelligentsia, unfortunately, was absent, if we are to trust the
newspapers).  

Sycophantic chatter about a “constitution” (or pie in the sky
à la Rodzyanko) inside the Black-Hundred Duma, and a
specimen of the incipient struggle for freedom and a people’s
representative assembly (without inverted commas), for a republic, outside
the Duma—this contrast revealed the deep and unerring instinct of the
revolutionary masses.  
 

The fact that the liberal and liquidationist Luch “warned”
against such a demonstration is worthy of traitors to the working-class
cause.  

But how could the Social-Democratic group “warn”? How could it stoop
to the level of Cadets—to a slavish level? How did it happen that
individual members of it submitted, and accepted such infamy?  

The supposition arises—one that is sometimes put forward “in
private”—that perhaps there were fears of a provocation in one of the
groups “calling for” the demonstration?  

Let us assume for a moment that this supposition was
made. Does it exonerate the Social-Democratic group? No. Or, to be exact,
it justifies the group’s move from a personal point of view, but
not politically. It exonerates the Social-Democratic Duma group
from the suspicion of betrayal of the workers’ cause, but not from the
accusation of a political error.  

Indeed, what would a workers’ deputy, a real workers’ deputy,
have done had he, after three days of news about preparations for a
demonstration of this kind, heard on the last day the “rumour” (which
might have been provocative too): “Is there some provocation
here?”  

The workers’ deputy would have found his way to several influential
workers. He would have realised that at such a time his place was
alongside the prominent workers, that it was a hundred times more important
to be there with the workers than at the meetings of the Duma group. He
would have learned from the prominent workers, from two or three (or
perhaps four or five) influential workers of the capital, how
matters stood, what the workers thought about it, and
what the mood of the masses was.  

The workers’ deputy would have made inquiries about these things—he
would have known how to make inquiries about them, and would have
learnt that there was to be a strike (15 to 50 thousand!!
according to the bourgeois press), that there was to be a demonstration,
that the workers were not thinking of violence and disorders, and that,
consequently, the rumour about a provocation was no more than a
silly rumour.  

The workers’ deputy would have found out these things,

    

and would not have let himself be deceived by the terrified petty liberal
intellectuals of the infamous “initiating group”.  

Rumours of a provocation. All right. But were there no rumours during
the Gaponiad? A fine worker or workers’ leader one would have been had one
been unable to distinguish between the incipient peculiar awakening of the
masses during the Gaponiad and the agent provocateur Gapon, or the
police agents provocateurs who urged Gapon on!!  

Let us assume that the police and agents provocateurs had a
hand in the preparations for the demonstration on November 15. Let us
(although it has not been proved and is incredible; it is more likely that
what was a provocation was the rumours about a
provocation).  

But let us assume it was so. What of it? One must not resort to
violence when there has been no question of it. One must warn against
violence. But to warn against a peaceful strike at a time when the masses
are seething? To warn against a demonstration??  

It is a very, very sad mistake the Social-Democratic Duma group as a
whole has made. And it would be gratifying to learn that this mistake was
not made by all, and that many of those who did make it realise their
mistake and will not repeat it.  

The movement of the proletariat in Russia (whatever the police tricks
anywhere) has risen to a higher plane.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The demonstration was organised on the initiative of the Bolshevik
representatives of various districts and factories of St. Petersburg. A few
days prior to the opening of the Fourth Duma a leaflet was distributed in
the factories calling on the workers to organise a one-day political strike
on November 15 (28), 1912, and to march to the Taurida Palace. The
liquidators, writing in Luch, opposed the idea of a march. On
November 13 (26) the Social-Democratic group called a meeting of
representatives of the St. Petersburg Committee, the Editorial Board of
Pravda, the liquidators’ leading centre—the Organising
Committee, and the liquidationist Luch. At the meeting the
Bolsheviks supported the workers’ proposal to mark the opening day of the
Black-Hundred Duma by a strike and demonstration. The liquidators
emphatically opposed it. After the meeting the Social-Democratic group
published in the press a politically erroneous statement in which they took
a negative stand on the proposal for a strike. Despite the opposition of
the liquidators and the political error of the Social-Democratic group,
tens of thousands of workers struck on the day the Duma opened. In a number
of factories short meetings were held at which the workers decided to
boycott Luch.  

After the demonstration the Bolshevik members of the Duma admitted
their error at workers’ meetings.





[2]
Lenin is referring to the speech which Rodzyanko made upon his election
to the chair of the Fourth Duma. Rodzyanko signified his “unshakable
devotion” to the tsar and his support of a representative constitutional
system.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to J. V. Stalin (December 11, 1912)









Lenin: A Letter to J. V. Stalin (December 11, 1912)







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to J. V. Stalin[1] (December 11, 1912)




Written: Written December 11, 1912 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Sent from Cracow to St. Petersburg.

      Published according to a copy found in Police Department archives.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 427-429.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Dear friend, local Polish papers report that Jagiello has been admitted
into the group, and has been granted a voice but no

vote.[2] If that is true, it is a definite victory for the Party
principle. In view of the agitation carried on by Luch, it is
necessary:
(1) To publish an article in Dyen[3] (I am sending a draft
today), ... in the

Collegium[4] (we must by all means teach them—doing so while they are
with us here—to respond to everything with resolutions and immediately
send copies of them here). Here is a tentative draft of such a resolution:
“Having examined all the circumstances of Jagiello’s admission into the
Social-Democratic group, having studied the articles about it in the
Marxist organ, Pravda, and in the newspaper of the liquidators,
Luch, and taken into account So-and-So’s report on the debate
about it in the Social-Democratic Duma group and on the opinions of the
various Social-Democratic organisations of Russia, the Collegium resolves:

to recognise that the refusal to admit Jagiello with the right to vote was
the only proper way out from the point of view of Party principle, since
Jagiello is not a member of the Social-Democratic Party and was elected to
the Fourth Duma against the will of the majority of the electors in the
worker curia of the city of Warsaw. The Collegium condemns the anti-Party
agitation carried on by the Bund and the liquidators in favour of admitting
Jagiello into the group and expresses the hope that the granting of a
consultative voice to Deputy Jagiello may help in rallying all the
class-conscious Polish workers closer around the Polish Social-Democrats
and in merging them completely with the workers of all nationalities into
integral organisations of the R.S.D.L.P.”  
 

If, contrary to expectations, the liquidators have won and Jagiello has
been admitted, it is still necessary, and doubly so, to have a resolution
similar in content, expressing regret and appealing to the Party as a
whole.  

It is highly important, furthermore, for the Collegium to “correct
itself” on the well-known resolution of November 13 and adopt a new
one. Something like this: “Having examined all the circumstances of the
strike of November 15, the Collegium finds that the warnings against the
strike both from the Social-Democratic group and from the St. Petersburg
Committee were prompted solely by the fact that part of the organisation
was not ready to go into action on that day. However, events showed that
nonetheless the movement of the revolutionary proletariat assumed a large
scale and developed into street demonstrations in the name of a republic,
an eight-hour working day, and confiscation of the landed estates, thus
raising the entire working-class movement in Russia to a higher
plane. There fore the Collegium emphatically condemns the propaganda
against revolutionary strikes which the liquidators, their ...  group and
Luch are carrying on, and recommends the workers to devote all
their efforts to more extensive, thorough and concerted preparations for
street demonstrations and political protest strikes, which should be made
as short as possible (one-day) and concerted. The Collegium will try to
develop a campaign for a strike and demonstration on January 9, 1913, with
a special protest against the 300th anniversary of the House of Romanov,
which enslaves Russia and drenches her in blood.”  

Next, it is highly important and essential for the five (curia)
deputies to draft a well-grounded resolution on the Badayev case. Something
like this: “The five deputies from the worker curia, having considered the
baiting of Comrade Badayev by the liquidators in Luch and among
the St. Petersburg workers, have resolved:
(1) not to submit this matter to the Duma group, since the latter has
admitted Badayev and no objection was raised in the group to his admission;

(2) to investigate the conditions of Badayev’s election, provided he
abstains from voting on this matter;
(3) the fact, established and verified by the five deputies, that
(a) the anti-liquidationist mandate was printed beforehand,

    

and was adopted unanimously by the delegates’ meeting, all the electors and
delegates who backed Badayev acting in concert and unity and as staunch
fellow-thinkers, at the request of the St. Petersburg Committee of the
R.S.D.L.P.;
(b) that at the meeting of the Social-Democratic delegates fifteen persons
voted for the St. Petersburg Committee’s list and nine for the liquidators
and that not all of the delegates and electors of Luch behaved as
fellow-thinkers of the liquidators, some of them (Sudakov and others)
vacillating;
(c) that when three electors had been elected from each side, Badayev’s
supporters did their duty by moving that the matter be settled by drawing
lots to prevent the dispute from being revealed to the bourgeoisie;
(d) that the very fact that Badayev’s supporters tabled this motion and the
fact that the liquidators refused ... the question of P. and

M.[5] (a liquidator)—therefore we have resolved: to recognise that
Badayev is undoubtedly the elected representative of the majority of the
worker Social-Democrats of St. Petersburg and is in fact a candidate at the
request of the St. Petersburg Committee; that the entire responsibility for
the disorganisation of the Social-Democratic Party elections in the
St. Petersburg worker curia falls on the liquidators, who sought to
frustrate the will of the majority, knowing themselves to be in a minority;
and that the liquidators’ refusal to draw lots was an outrageous violation
of what is the duty of every

Social-Democrat,[6] a violation unheard of in the working-class
movement. We have resolved to publish this resolution in the press and to
take concerted action among the workers for Badayev and against
liquidationist agitation.”  

This resolution is essential. The Badayev case has already got into the
world press. Steklov has printed evasive but foul things in Die Neue
Zeit. And what is contained in the pamphlet which the liquidators have
published in the German language for the International Congress is simply
preposterous. We cannot keep silent. It is for the curia deputies to check
the facts and exonerate Badayev, with Badayev himself abstaining, of
course.  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin’s letter was sent from Cracow to Stalin in St. Petersburg on
November 28 (December 11), 1912. It had been copied by N. K. Krupskaya in
invisible ink. On the way the letter was intercepted, decoded and copied on
a typewriter by the police. The copy of the letter was found in the Police
Department archives. Some of the words could not be decoded and there are
omissions in the text.





[2]
Jagiello, J. I.—a member of the Polish Socialist Party
(P.S.P.), was elected deputy for Warsaw to the Fourth Duma. The Bolsheviks
strongly objected to Jagiello’s admission into the Social-Democratic group
because he had been elected to the Duma thanks to the support of the
bourgeoisie and the bloc of the P.S.P. and the Bund.  When the issue was
first put to the vote, the group split, six Menshevik deputies voting for
and six Bolshevik deputies against Jagiello. With the arrival of the Right
Menshevik Mankov, deputy for Irkutsk, the Mensheviks gained a majority and
Jagiello was admitted into the group. But under pressure from the Bolshevik
deputies his rights within the group were restricted:

he was granted a voice but no vote on all inner-Party questions.





[3]
Dyen (The Day)—a name given to the newspaper
Pravda to evade the censor.





[4]
There is an omission in the text of the document. The
Collegium was the Bolshevik section of the Social-Democratic group
in the Fourth Duma.





[5]
Several words are missing in the letter. “P.”—N. G. Poletayev, a
Bolshevik member of the Third Duma. The liquidationist “M.”—apparently
Y. Mayevsky (a pseudonym of V. A. Gutovsky), one of the contributors to the
liquidationist Luch.





[6]
The delegates from the worker curia of St. Petersburg Gubernia for the
Fourth Duma met on October 5 (18), 1912, with 50 delegates present. Of the
six electors elected by the delegates, four were Bolsheviks.  

The tsarist government was afraid that the Social-Democrats might win
in the worker curia and therefore it cancelled the election of delegates in
twenty-one St. Petersburg factories. In reply, the St. Petersburg Committee
of the Bolsheviks called on the workers for a one-day political strike. The
strike involved about 100,000 workers. The government had to give in and
announced supplementary elections. At all the factories where these
elections were held the workers adopted a “Mandate of the St. Petersburg
Workers to Their Workers’ Deputy”. On October 17 (30) the Mandate was
passed by a new gubernia meeting. But during the second election of
electors the vote was not taken by platforms, with the result that three
Bolsheviks and three liquidators were elected. The Bolsheviks proposed to
the liquidators that lots should be cast to decide who was to be nominated
for election to the Duma for the worker curia. The liquidators rejected the
proposal. The gubernia meeting of electors elected A. Y. Badayev, a
Bolshevik, for the worker curia of St. Petersburg Gubernia.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to J. V. Stalin (December 6, 1912)









Lenin: A Letter to J. V. Stalin (December 6, 1912)







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to J. V. Stalin[1] (December 6, 1912)
For Vasilyev




Written: Written December 6, 1912 

Published:

      First published in the book The Period of of Zvezda and Pravda, 1911–14, Issue III, 1923.

      Sent from Cracow to St. Petersburg.

      Published according to a copy made by N. K. Krupskaya.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 430-431.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

December 6.  

Dear friend, with regard to January 9, it is highly important to think
things over and make preparations in advance. A leaflet must be prepared in
advance calling for meetings, a one-day strike, and demonstrations (the
latter should be decided on the spot, where it will be easier to

decide).[2] We must “correct” the mistake of November 15—correct it
against the opportunists, of course. The slogans in the leaflet must be the
three main revolutionary ones (a republic, an eight-hour working day, and
confiscation of the landed estates), with special emphasis on the 300
years’ “infamy” of the Romanov dynasty. If there is no complete and
absolute certainty that we can have the leaflet in St. Petersburg, we must
prepare it here beforehand and take it there. The liquidators’ impudence
over Jagiello is unparalleled. If all of our six representatives have been
elected by the worker curia, we must not tacitly submit to any
Siberians. The six must by all means voice the most emphatic protest if
they are outvoted; they must print their protest in Dyen and
declare that they are appealing to the rank and file, to the workers’
organisations. The liquidators want to inflate their majority and force
through a split with the Polish Social-Democrats. Is it possible that the
workers’ representatives from six working-class gubernias will submit to
the Skobelevs and Co. or to a chance

Siberian[3]? Write more often and in greater detail.  
 

The Luch articles against strikes are the height of
villainy. We must come out sharply against them in the illegal press. Let
me know as soon as possible which of the plans made by you for such action
you have chosen.  

Best regards.  

P.S. Return the document—it is inconvenient to use it, its holder may
be in St. Petersburg.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]

N. K. Krupskaya copied the letter to J. V. Stalin in invisible ink,
writing it between the lines of another letter. The letter was discovered
in the files of the Police Department, among other letters that had been
secretely inspected.  

Vasilyev—pseudonym of J. V. Stalin.





[2]
The Leaflet on the occasion of January 9, 1913, “To All
Working Men and Women of Russia”, was written by J. V. Stalin in
December 1912 on the basis of the directives given by V. I. Lenin, and was
brought out over the signature of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P.





[3]
This refers to the Right-wing Menshevik I. N. Mankov, a member of the
Fourth Duma.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Disease of Reformism









Lenin: The Disease of Reformism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Disease of Reformism




Published:
Pravda No. 180, November 29, 1912.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 432-434.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“What ails us?” was the question asked in a recent issue
of Luch by the author of an instructive feuilleton under that
heading, written under the influence of the strike of November 15.  

The answer is evident from the following two quotations: 


   “It would appear to be obvious to those who lay claim to
   the role of leaders that the demand for the abolition of emergency
   regulations and for freedom of association is one thing, and is an object
   of the struggle now and in the near future, while the alteration of the
   existing system, which the appeal speaks of, is something else. This can be
   brought about not by playing at strikes, which is what we see at present,
   but by stubborn, methodical work, by winning one position after another, by
   straining every nerve, by achieving perfect organisation and drawing into
   this struggle the mass of the people, and not merely the working class....
   

   “If we take an intelligent attitude towards our tasks,
   methodically defend our interests and do not flare up today only to subside
   tomorrow, we shall create for ourselves both strong trade union
   organisations and an open political party that no one will dare encroach
   upon.”  


These passages are enough for us to say to the author: you would do
better, my dear fellow, to ask “what ails” you yourself. And we will
answer you: you are clearly suffering from reformism. You are obsessed with
a fixed idea, the idea of a Stolypin workers’ party. It is a dangerous
disease, and the Luch doctors’ cure will finish you off
altogether.  

The author very explicitly and deliberately advocates an “open
political party” in contrast to the general demand for political
liberty. A comparison of the two passages quoted leaves no room for doubt
on this score. All ovasion would be useless here.  
 

We would ask the author: why is it that the “open party” of the
opportunists among the petty-bourgeois democrats (the Popular Socialists of
1906) and the big-bourgeois liberals (the Cadets in 1906–07 and later)
turned out to be a utopia while your “open” workers’ party is not
utopian?  

You admit (or, at any rate, the “open” action in the elections
made you admit) that the Cadets are counter revolutionary, that
they are not democrats, not a party of the masses at all, but a party of
the well-to-do bourgeoisie, a party of the first curia. And yet here are
you, a “sober minded, realistic politician”, an enemy of “flare-ups and
fist-shaking”, putting forward, allegedly on behalf of the workers, an
“immediate” demand which turned out to be utopian, unattainable for the
Cadets!! You are a great utopian, but your utopia is small, petty, and
wretched.  

You have unwittingly contracted a fashionable disease—there is such
an epidemic just now!—the disease of dejection, faint-heartedness,
despair and lack of faith. And that disease is pushing you into the pitfall
of opportunism, for which Popular Socialists and Cadets alike have already
paid the price of universal ridicule.  

You consider the demand for abolishing the emergency regulations and
for freedom of association to be topical and realistic, “methodical” and
“conscious”. You are at variance with the Social-Democrats radically, for
they understand the general conditions for achieving (and the
seriousness of) such reforms. You are substantially at one with the
Progressists and the Octobrists, for these are the people who deceive
themselves and others with meaning less talk about reforms and
“liberties” under existing conditions. The Italian reformist Bissolati
betrayed the working class for the sake of the reforms promised by
Giolitti, a liberal Minister, with the parties of all
classes existing “openly”. But you are betraying the working class for
the sake of reforms that even the Izgoyevs and Bulgakovs do
not expect from Makarov!  

You speak contemptuously of “playing at strikes”. I am not in a
position to answer you properly on that point here. I shall merely point
out briefly that it is not really clever to describe a profound historical
movement as “playing”. You are angry at strikes just as
Novoye Vremya (see

    

Neznamov’s article in the issue of November 17), the Izgoyevs and the
Bulgakovs are. And the reason why you are angry is that reality mercilessly
shatters your liberal illusions. The mass of the workers fully recognise
the need of organisation, system, preparation, and method, but your
statements they treat with contempt, and will continue to do so.  

The serious disease that has poisoned your system is due to a very
widespread bacillus. It is the bacillus of liberal labour policy, or, in
other words, of liquidationism. It is in the air. But however angry you may
be at the course of events in general and at November 15 in particular,
that course is proving deadly to the bacillus.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Impoverishment in Capitalist Society









Lenin: Impoverishment in Capitalist Society







V. I.  

      Lenin
Impoverishment in Capitalist Society




Published:
Pravda No. 181, November 30, 1912.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 435-436.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Bourgeois reformists, who are echoed by certain
opportunists among the Social-Democrats, assert that there is no
impoverishment of the masses taking place in capitalist society. “The
theory of impoverishment” is wrong, they say, for the standard of living
of the masses is improving, if slowly, and the gulf between the haves and
have-nots is narrowing, not widening.  

The falsity of such assertions has lately been revealed to the masses
more and more clearly. The cost of living is rising. Wages, even
with the most stubborn and most successful strike movement, are
increasing much more slowly than the necessary expenditure of labour
power. And side by side with this, the wealth of the capitalists is
increasing at a dizzy rate.  

Here are some data on Germany, where the workers’ condition is far
better than in Russia, thanks to a higher standard of culture, to
freedom of strikes and association, to political liberty, to the
millions of trade unionists and the millions of readers of workers’
newspapers.  

According to data furnished by bourgeois sociologists, who
draw on official sources, wages in Germany have increased by an average of
25 per cent during the past 30 years. In the same period, the cost of
living has gone up by at least 40 per cent!!  

Food, clothing, fuel and rent have all become more expensive. The
worker is becoming impoverished absolutely, i.e., he is actually
becoming poorer than before; he is compelled to live worse, to eat worse,
to suffer hunger more, and to live in basements and attics.  
 

But the relative impoverishment of the workers, i.e., the
diminution of their share in the national income, is still more
striking. The workers’ comparative share in capitalist society,
which is fast growing rich, is dwindling because the millionaires are
becoming ever richer.  

There is no income tax in Russia, and no data are available on the
growing wealth of the well-to-do classes of society. Our reality, which is
even sadder, is shut off by a veil—the veil of ignorance and lack of
publicity.  

In Germany there are exact data on the wealth of the propertied
classes. In Prussia, for example, the first 10,000 million marks
(5,000 million rubles) of taxable property belonged to 4,853 persons in
1902 and to 1,108 in 1908.  

The number of the very rich has diminished. Their wealth has
increased—in 1902 each of them owned property worth 5,000,000 marks
(2,500,000 rubies) on the average and in 1908, as much as 9,000,000 marks
(4,500,000 rubles)!  

People speak of the “upper 10,000”. In Prussia the “upper 21,000”
rich owned property valued at 13,500 million marks, while the taxable
property of the remaining 1,300,000 owners was worth only 3,000 million
marks.  

Four of the wealthiest millionaires in Prussia (one prince, one duke
and two counts) owned property worth 149 million marks in 1907 and 484
million marks in 1908.  

Wealth in capitalist society is growing at an incredible rate—side by
side with the impoverishment of the mass of the workers.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Working Class and its “Parliamentary” Representatives









Lenin: The Working Class and its 'Parliamentary' Representatives







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Working Class and its “Parliamentary” Representatives




Published:
Pravda No. 191, December 12, 1912.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 437-438.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This is not the first time that Russia’s class-conscious
workers have had to deal with a collective body of representatives of the
working class in the Duma. And each time such a body was formed in the
Second, Third or Fourth Duma (we do not mention the First, which most of
the Social-Democrats boycotted), there was a discrepancy between
the views and trend of the majority of Social-Democrats and those
of their representatives in the Duma.  

There are exact data on this discrepancy as regards the Second Duma. In
the spring of 1907 it was established officially and beyond question what
were the views, tendencies and trends or groups predominating in the
Social-Democratic Party and those in the Social-Democratic Duma group.


It was found that, by sending one delegate from every 500 worker
Social-Democrats, the Bolsheviks at that time had 105 delegates, the
Mensheviks 97 and those not belonging to either group

4.[1] 

The Bolsheviks had an obvious superiority.  

Among the non-Russian Social-Democrats, the Poles had 44 delegates, the
Bundists 57 and the Letts 29. As opponents of opportunism, Menshevism and
the Bund strongly predominated among the Letts at that time, the ratio of
the “trends” among the non-Russians in general was similar to that among
the “Russian’s Social-Democrats.  

Yet in the Duma group of the Social-Democrats at that time there were
36 Mensheviks and 18 Bolsheviks, with 12 Mensheviks and 11 Bolsheviks among
the deputies elected by the worker

curia.[2] It is obvious that the Mensheviks predominated.  
 

Thus the balance of the “trends” in the Duma group was not the same
as in the Social-Democratic movement but the direct opposite.  

Is that an accident?  

No. As a general rule, in all countries of the world the parliamentary
representatives of the workers’ parties have a more opportunist
composition than that of the workers’ parties themselves. The reason is
easy to see: firstly, all the electoral systems of the bourgeois countries,
even the most democratic, in practice restrict suffrage for the
workers, either by making it conditional on age (in Russia it has to be 25
years), or on residence and permanence of work (six months in Russia),
etc. And it is the young, more politically-conscious and resolute sections
of the proletariat that these restrictions generally hit hardest of all.


Secondly, under any suffrage in bourgeois society, the
non-proletarian elements of the workers’ parties—officials of workers’
unions, small proprietors, office employees, and particularly the
“intelligentsia”—specialise more readily in the “parliamentary”
profession (owing to their occupations, social standing, training, etc.).


What are the conclusions to be drawn from this fact, and how did
matters stand in the Third and Fourth Dumas compared with the Second? We
shall devote our next article to these questions.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is referring to the composition of the delegates to the Fifth
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.





[2]
Lenin is referring to the composition of the Social-Democratic group in
the Second Duma.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The “Reconciliation” of the Nationalists and Cadets









Lenin: The 'Reconciliation' of the Nationalists and Cadets







V. I.  

      Lenin
The “Reconciliation” of the Nationalists and Cadets




Published:
Pravda No. 194, December 15, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 439-440.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The most important political result of the Duma debate on
the declaration of the government is the touching unity of the
nationalists, Octobrists and Cadets. Our Russian
so-called “society” yields so readily to high-sounding and cheap phrases
that we have to lay particular emphasis on this real result of the
action of all parties, with their criticism of political questions
of principle.  


   “The parties disappeared,” wrote the nationalist
   Novoye Vremya (No. 13199). “Deputy Maklakov’s excellent speech
   (at the December 7 sitting) united the entire Duma, which applauded him,
   forgetful of all party calculations and differences of opinion.”  


This comment by a nationalist paper, the chief organ of all
toadyism, of persecution of Jews and non-Russians in general. should be
remembered and pondered by all who take a serious interest in politics.


It was not because they were “forgetful” of party differences of
opinion that the Octobrists and nationalists, the Guchkovites and the
Novoye Vremya people applauded Maklakov, but because they
appreciated the profound unity of opinion of the liberal
bourgeoisie and the nationalist landlords.  

Maklakov revealed that unity of opinion on the fundamental issues of
home and foreign policy. “While Russia does not seek war, neither does she
dread it,” exclaimed this Cadet, to prolonged applause by the
nationalists. How could they help applauding? Any politically
literate person realises that these words expressed the Cadets’
acceptance of the policy of resorting to the threat of war,

    

the policy of militarism, of armaments by land and by sea that oppress and
ruin the mass of the people.  

The liberals, who support militarism, are not feared by the
reactionaries, who very correctly argue that support for militarism is
action, whereas liberal exclamations are mere words which
simply cannot be made a reality so long as the reactionaries are in
power. “Give us millions to spend on armaments, and we will clap and
applaud your liberal talk”—this is what every clever semi-feudal
landlord says, and should say, to the Duma
Balalaikins.[1] 

And what about Maklakov’s stand on home policy? Is it accidental that
the Right-wing priests are highly satisfied, as Rech itself
testifies, or that Novoye Vremya gleefully reprints Maklakov’s
“keynote”: “Let there be no division of Russia into two camps—the
country and the government”?  

No, it is not accidental, because by his whining about the desirability
of “reconciliation” Maklakov in fact echoes Kokovtsov. For
Kokovtsov, too, desires “reconciliation”!  

Kokovtsov desires no change in the balance of the social
forces. Maklakov did not show the slightest understanding
of the kind of change that is necessary or how it can be
brought about. “Reconciliation” is precisely the term which
obscures the only serious question, that of the conditions and
means of achieving this change—obscures it with rotten phrases that say
nothing, that blunt the civic consciousness of the masses and lull them.


A “society” which is capable of applauding the speeches of a Maklakov
about “reconciliation” deserves nothing but contempt.  

As for the speech of Malinovsky, the workers’ representative, on the
Ministerial declaration, both the nationalists and the Cadets took pains
not to notice that in it the democrats were posing questions. But
then Malinovsky’s speech was not intended for their like at all.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Balalaikin—a character in M. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s A
Modern Idyll, personifying a liberal windbag, impostor and liar.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The National-Liberals









Lenin: The National-Liberals







V. I.  

      Lenin
The National-Liberals




Published:
Pravda No. 200, December 22, 1912.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 441-443.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Recent years have seen a definite differentiation taking
place among the Russian liberals. The “genuine” bourgeoisie has been
setting itself apart from the general liberal camp. Liberal capital is
forming its own special party, which is to incorporate (and is
incorporating) many bourgeois elements which in the past made common cause
with the Octobrists and which, on the other hand, is being joined by the
most moderate, big-bourgeois, “respectable” elements of the Cadet Party.


The “Progressist” group in the Third and Fourth Dumas, as well as the
one in the Council of State are on the verge of becoming the official party
representatives of this national-liberal bourgeoisie in the parliamentary
arena. Indeed, the recent congress of the “Progressists” virtually out
lined the national-liberal programme which Russkaya

Molva[1] is advocating.  

What do the so-called “Progressists” want? Why do we call them
national-liberals?  

They do not want full and undivided rule of the land lords and
the bureaucrats. They seek—and they say so plainly—a moderate
constitution with narrowly-restricted rights based on a bicameral system
and an anti-democratic suffrage. They want a “strong authority” that
would pursue the “patriotic” policy of conquering with sword and fire new
markets for “national industry”. They want the bureaucrats to heed them
as much as they heed the Purishkeviches. And then they would be willing to
forget their “old accounts” with the reactionaries and work hand in glove
with them to establish a “great” capitalist Russia.  

What separates these people from the Octobrist Party is that the
landlords constitute too strong an element in

    

that party and that it is tractable to the point of impotence. From the
Cadet Party they are separated by their distaste for the Cadets’
demagogical flirting with the democrats. The Cadets’ hypocritical talk
about universal suffrage and compulsory alienation of the land (even with
compensation) seems to these “respectable” constitutionalists quite
unnecessary and impermissible.  

The national-liberals go straight to the point: one must not be afraid
of accusations of “pandering to the reactionary forces” but must fight
openly against “appeals for seizing the landed estates” and against
“fomenting hatred of the propertied classes”; as regards “military
might”, there should be neither Right nor Left.  


   “We are back in our country.... The Russian army is
   ... our own army.... The Russian court of justice is not
   Shemyaka’s[2] but our own.... Russia’s world standing is not a
   vainglorious whim of the bureaucracy but our own strength and
   joy” (see the policy statements of Russkaya Molva).  


The national-liberals undoubtedly have a certain “future” in
Russia. They will be a party of the “genuine” capitalist bourgeoisie,
such as we see in Germany. The purely intellectual, liberal elements who
have few “roots” will remain with the Cadets. The national-liberals will
gain such ideologists as Struve, Maklakov, Protopopov, Kovalevsky and
others, who have long had one foot in the reactionary camp. They will no
doubt be joined also by the exceedingly moderate “Shipovite”
Zemstvo-landlord elements, who likewise favour a constitution with
narrowly-restricted rights, a “constitution” for the rich. (It is not for
nothing that Mr. Struve has recently recalled Mr. Shipov in such kind
terms.)  

The “Progressists’” dreams of a “strong authority”
pursuing a liberal policy cannot, of course, materialise in the near
future. And so the Khvostovs and Purishkeviches are still sitting
pretty. It may be that the national liberal party will not take final shape
just yet and that their news paper will cease to exist as

Slovo,[3] a paper which on the whole had set itself the same
aims, did three years ago. (In the Duma, however, the “Progressists” have
become relatively stronger than the Cadets.)  In any case, the coming

    

into the open of the national-liberal bourgeoisie indicates a considerable
maturing of the class antagonisms in Russia.  

The workers must counter the self-determination of the capitalist
bourgeoisie by putting ten times greater energy into their own
organisation and their own self-determination as a class.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Russkaya Molva (Russian News)—a daily newspaper
published by the Progressist Party in St. Petersburg from December 9 (22),
1912, to August 20 (September 2), 1913.





[2]
Shemyaka’s trial—an unjust trial (from the title of and old
Russian folk story).





[3]
Slovo (The Word)—a daily newspaper published in
St. Petersburg from 1904 to 1909. From November 1905 to July 1906 it was an
organ of the Octobrist Party. Subsequently it became an organ of the
constitutional-monarchist Party of Peaceful Renovation.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On the Attitude to Liquidationism and on Unity









Lenin: On the Attitude to Liquidationism and on Unity







V. I.  

      Lenin
On the Attitude to Liquidationism and on Unity
THESES




Written: Written in December 1912 

Published:

      First published in Bolshevik No. 1, 1939.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 444-446.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

1. Four years’ struggle against liquidationism.  

The Party defined liquidationism in December 1908.
Liquidationism condemned for destroying the Party, not for legal
work. Anti-liquidationism wins in the legal arena, 1912. (“Pravda”
and the elections.)  

2. The liquidators caused a split. The liquidators broke away from the
Party. Their initiating groups are a product and manifestation of the
split.  

3. The August 1912 conference was anti-Party in composition, as even
the conciliators had to admit.  

It is impermissible for little groups abroad, having no direct mandate
from any Social-Democratic organisation in Russia, and not operating by
agreement with it, to act in the name of the Social-Democratic Party.  

4. The resolutions of the August conference on basic issues of the
movement, above all on the fundamental issue of recognition—complete and
sincere recognition—of the illegal Party, are, to put it as mildly as
possible, “diplomacy”, i.e., evasion of a straightforward answer to the
question. They are in effect liquidationist resolutions.  

5. The political behaviour of the liquidationist group in Nasha
Zarya and Luch after the (August) conference revealed the
absolutely anti-Party character of this group, which found expression
(a) in advocacy of an open Party;
(b) in scoffing at “underground” work in the legal press;
(c) in a struggle against revolutionary strikes and revolutionary mass
struggle in general.  
 

A resolute struggle must be waged against this group as anti-Party.


6. The advocacy of unity in the legal press—evading and obscuring the
essence of the matter, namely, the question of recognising the
illegal Party in practice—is deception of the workers.  

7. The unity of all trends and shades in the illegal organisation is
absolutely necessary. Appeal for such unity.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notification and Resolutions of the Cracow Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Functionaries









Lenin: Notification and Resolutions of the Cracow Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Functionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
Notification and Resolutions of the Cracow Meeting of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party Functionaries[3]




Published:

      Published in pamphlet form by the C.C. R.S.D.L.P. in Paris, February 1913.

      Published according to the text of the pamphlet, which was checked: for the “Notification”, against the manuscript and for the “Resolutions”, against the hectographed edition.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 447-466.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

NOTIFICATION

A meeting of the C.C. R.S.D.L.P. and Party functionaries
was held in February this year. The Central Committee succeeded in securing
the attendance of members of the illegal Party organisations of
St. Petersburg (five persons), the Moscow Region (two), the South (two),
the Urals and the Caucasus. Elections from the local organisations could
not be held, and the meeting was therefore not constituted a
conference. Some of the members of the Central Committee were unable to
attend because of police measures.  

Nearly all the participants in the meeting had been playing a prominent
role in various legal workers’ societies and in the use of so-called
“legal opportunities”. Thus the composition of the meeting ensured an
accurate picture of the whole of Party work in all the principal areas of
Russia.  

The meeting held eleven sittings, and drafted resolutions on the
following items of the agenda:
(1) The revolutionary upswing, the strikes and the tasks of the Party.
(2) Building the illegal Party organisation.
(3) The Duma Social-Democratic group.
(4) The 2arty press.
(5) The insurance campaign.
(6) The attitude to liquidationism. The issue of unity.
(7) The non-Russian Social-Democratic organisations.  

The resolutions were adopted unanimously, the only exception being the
abstention of one comrade on two clauses of the “insurance” resolution,
and of another on particulars of the resolution on the non-Russians.  

Endorsed by the Central Committee, the resolutions of the meeting
provide a summary of Party experience and a guiding line on all the major
questions of Social-Democratic work in present-day Russia.  
    

     *     *  * 

Taking systematic stock of the experience of 1912 is a most important
task of the Social-Democrats, for that year saw a great, a historic change
in Russia’s working-class movement. The point is not merely that decline
and disintegration are giving way to a revival. The working class has gone
over to a massive offensive against the capitalists and the tsarist
monarchy. The wave of economic and political strikes has surged so high
that in this respect Russia is once more ahead of all the
countries of the world, including the most developed of them.  

This fact will not, of course, make any class-conscious worker forget
how very far ahead of us are the proletarians of the free countries in
regard to organisation and class education of the masses. But this fact has
proved that Russia has entered a period of the growth of a new
revolution.  

The working class is faced with the great task of bringing about the
revolutionary awakening of all the democratic masses and of educating them
in the struggle, of leading them to the powerful onslaught which must bring
Russia freedom and a republic by destroying the Romanov monarchy. The
fundamental task of the moment is to give the utmost support to the open
revolutionary struggle of the masses, to organise, extend, deepen and
intensify it. Anyone who has failed to realise this task, who does not work
in an illegal organisation, group or nucleus promoting the cause of the
revolution, is not a Social-Democrat.  
 *     *  * 

The revolutionary upswing of the proletariat in 1912 was the main cause
of the universally recognised change in the mood of the democrats. Both in
the elections to the Fourth Duma and in the matter of founding a legal
working-class press that advocates at least the basic elements of Marxist
theory, the Social-Democrats achieved important

    


    

victories. The tsarist government was unable to prevent these achievements
solely because the open revolutionary struggle of the masses had altered
the entire social and political situation. While continuing its steadfast,
persevering and systematic work of using absolutely all “legal
opportunities”—ranging from the platform of the Black-Hundred Duma to a
simple temperance society—the R.S.D.L.P. does not for one moment forget
that only he is worthy of the lofty name of Party member who really carries
on his entire work among the masses in the spirit of the Party decisions
that were thought out and adopted from the standpoint of the growing
revolution and not of June Third “legality”. Our task is not to succumb
to the disorder and disintegration left over from the period of 1908–11,
but to fight against them. Our job is not to swim with the stream of
chaotic and unprincipled legalism, but to use every legal possibility for
gradually grouping all live elements around the illegal Party. Our slogan
is: no peace with those who misuse legalism to sow scepticism and
indifference to the revolutionary struggle of the masses or even to hamper
it outright.  

We cannot guarantee the realisation of our demands by reducing them, by
curtailing our programme, or by adopting the tactics of attracting
unenlightened people with the deceptive promise of easy constitutional
reforms under Russian tsarism. We can guarantee it only by educating the
masses in the spirit of consistent democracy and awareness of the falsity
of constitutional illusions. The guarantee lies in the revolutionary
organisation of the foremost class, the proletariat, and in the great
revolutionary enthusiasm of the masses.  

The period of rampant counter-revolution has left us a heritage of
ideological disorder and disruption, organisational disintegration in many
centres of the working-class movement, primitive methods and forced
isolation from the Party on the part of some, and a scornful, or even
malicious, attitude to the “underground” that preserves the behests of
the revolution and elaborates revolutionary tactics, on the part of
others. The liquidators’ break-away from time Social-Democratic Party,
their virtual isolation, and in some cases departure from Social-Democratic

    

principles and disintegration of the non-Russian Social-Democratic
organisations have all accentuated the demand for unity to the
utmost degree.  

Unity of the Social-Democratic proletariat is a necessary condition for
its victories.  

Unity of the Social-Democratic proletariat is impossible without the
unity of its Party, the R.S.D.L.P.  

And here we see at once that we cannot decide the question of unity
without deciding—not merely in words but by deeds as well—the question
of the need for an illegal Party. Anyone who speaks of unity and yet
advocates an “open workers’ party” deceives himself and the
workers. Anyone who speaks of unity, pretending that this question can be
decided, cleared up, or at least raised, within the bounds of legality,
deceives himself and the workers.  

What will solve the problem of unity is certainly not meaningless
phrases about “unity” in the legal press, nor agreements with various
“straggling” little groups of intellectuals, nor yet the diplomacy of
negotiations abroad, but solely unity in the localities, the
actual fusion of all worker members of the
R.S.D.L.P. into an integral illegal organisation.  

The workers have already started of their own accord, from below, on
the solution of the problem of unity, the only solution that is serious and
realistic. This meeting calls on all Social-Democrats to take the same
path.  

Worker Social-Democrats everywhere are re-establishing integral illegal
organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. in the form of factory nuclei and
committees, district groups, town centres, Social-Democratic groups in
all kinds of legal institutions, etc. Let all who do not wish to
doom themselves to the role of powerless individuals join these
organisations, where the recognition of the illegal Party and support for
the revolutionary struggle of the masses take place under the control of
the workers themselves.  
 *     *  * 

The period of disintegration is passing. The time has come to gather
our forces. Let us, then, rally in the illegal organisations of the
R.S.D.L.P. They do not close the door to

    

any Social-Democrat who wishes to work in them, who wishes to help the
organisation of the proletariat, its struggle against capital, and the
revolutionary onslaught against the tsarist monarchy that it has begun.


A nation-wide political crisis is slowly but steadily maturing in
Russia. The June Third system was the last attempt to rescue the tsar’s
Black-Hundred monarchy, to renovate it by an alliance with the upper ranks
of the bourgeoisie, and that attempt fell through. The new democratic
forces are growing and gathering strength daily and hourly among Russia’s
peasantry and town bourgeoisie. The number of proletarians in town and
country is growing faster than ever, they are becoming more organised, more
united, and more confident of their invincibility, and their confidence is
strengthened by the experience of mass strikes.  

The R.S.D.L.P., in organising the foremost contingents of this
proletariat into an integral whole, must lead it into revolutionary battle
in the name of our old revolutionary demands.  

Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. 

February 1913 

    

RESOLUTIONS
The Revolutionary Upswing, the Strikes, and the Tasks of the Party

1. The outstanding fact in the history of the working-class movement
and the Russian revolution in 1912 was the remarkable development of both
the economic and the political strike movement of the proletariat. The
number of political strikers reached one million.  

2. The character of the strike movement of 1912 deserves special
attention. The workers in a number of cases put forward economic and
political demands simultaneously; the period of economic strikes was
succeeded by a period of, political strikes and vice versa. The struggle
against the capitalists for the gains of 1905 taken away by the counter
revolution, and the growing cost of living, aroused more and more sections
of the workers, confronting them with political issues in the sharpest
form. All these forms of combination, and intertwining of the economic and
political struggle are a condition for and an earnest of the might of the
movement, giving rise to revolutionary mass strikes.  

3. The beginning of outbursts of discontent and of revolts in the Navy
and the Army, which marked the year 1912, was undoubtedly linked with the
revolutionary mass strikes of the workers, and indicated the growing
ferment and indignation among large sections of the democrats, in
particular among the peasantry, who supply the bulk of the troops.  

4. All these facts, combined with the general swing to the left in the
country, which had its effect on the elections to the Fourth Duma despite
the most shameless rigging

    

of them by the Black-Hundred tsarist government, showed beyond all doubt
that Russia had once more entered a period of open revolutionary struggle
by the masses. The new revolution, the beginning of which we are
experiencing, is an inevitable result of the bankruptcy of the June Third
policy of tsarism. This policy was unable to satisfy even the most
compliant big bourgeoisie. The mass of the people has become still more
enslaved, particularly in the case of the oppressed nationalities, and the
peasantry has again been reduced to a state where millions upon millions
are starving.  

5. Under these circumstances, revolutionary mass strikes are of
exceptional importance also because they constitute one of the most
effective means of overcoming the apathy, despair and disunity of the
agricultural proletariat and the peasantry, rousing them to independent
political activity and drawing them into the most concerted, simultaneous
and extensive revolutionary actions.  

6. The Party organisations, in extending and intensifying their
agitation for the immediate demands of the R.S.D.L.P.—a democratic
republic, an eight-hour working day, and confiscation of all the landed
estates for the benefit of the peasantry—must make it one of the prime
objects of their activity to give all-round support to revolutionary mass
strikes, and to develop and organise all forms of revolutionary action by
the masses. In particular, an essential current task is to organise
revolutionary street demonstrations both in combination with political
strikes and as independent actions.  

7. The fact that some capitalists resort to lock-outs (mass dismissals)
against the strikers confronts the working class with new tasks. It is
necessary to take careful account of the economic conditions of strikes in
every area, every industry and every particular case, find new forms of
struggle (such as stay-in strikes) to counteract the lock-outs, and replace
political strikes by revolutionary meetings and revolutionary street
demonstrations.  

8. Some legal press organs are carrying on general agitation against
revolutionary mass strikes, irrespective of their appraisal of this or that
strike. Besides the liberal press, such agitation is being carried on, for
example, by

    

the group of liquidators in the newspaper Luch, against the will
of a substantial section of those workers who sup port the newspaper in one
form or another. In view of this, the task of all pro-Party worker
Social-Democrats is:
(1) to wage a determined struggle against that group;
(2) systematically and perseveringly to explain the harm of the
above-mentioned agitation to all workers, irrespective of their leanings,
and
(3) to rally all proletarian forces for the furtherance of revolutionary
agitation and revolutionary action by the masses.  
Building the Illegal Organisation

1. In summing up the working-class movement and the Party’s work in
1912, this meeting finds that—the new wave of revolutionary actions by
the masses that has begun has fully borne out the previous decisions of the
R.S.D.L.P. (particularly those of the January 1912 Conference) as regards
building the Party. The course of the strike movement in 1912, the
Social-Democrats’ campaign in the elections to the Fourth Duma, the course
of the insurance campaign, etc., have shown beyond doubt that the only
correct type of organisational structure in the present period is an
illegal party as,the sum total of Party nuclei surrounded by a network of
legal and semi-legal workers’ associations.  

2. It is absolutely obligatory to adapt the organisational forms of
illegal building to local conditions. A variety of forms of cover for
illegal nuclei and the greatest possible flexibility in adapting forms of
work to local and general living conditions guarantee the vitality of the
illegal organisation.  

3. The chief immediate task in the field of organisational work at the
present time is to establish in all factories purely Party illegal
committees consisting of the most active elements among the workers. The
tremendous up swing of the working-class movement creates conditions in
which factory Party committees can be restored and the existing ones
strengthened in the vast majority of localities.  
 

4. The meeting points out that it has now become essential in every
centre to form a single leading organisation out of the disconnected local
groups.  

In St. Petersburg, for example, a leading City Committee, formed by
combining the principle of election by district nuclei and the principle of
co-option, has emerged as a type of city-wide organisation.  

This type of organisation makes it possible to establish a very close
and direct connection between the leading body and the primary nuclei, and
at the same time to create a small, mobile, particularly well disguised
executive body, authorised to act at any moment on behalf of the entire
organisation. The meeting recommends this type for other centres of the
working-class movement as well, with such modifications as may be prompted
by local and general living conditions.  

5. With a view to establishing close links between local organisations
and the Central Committee, as well as to guiding and unifying Party work,
this meeting deems it imperative to organise regional centres in the
principal areas of the working-class movement.  

6. A system of authorised nominees is proposed as a most important
practical factor in establishing a permanent living link between the
Central Committee and local Social-Democratic groups, as well as in
devising flexible forms of directing local work in the major centres of the
working-class movement. Nominees should be recruited among workers in
charge of local work. Only advanced workers can by themselves strengthen
and consolidate the central apparatus of the Party locally, and throughout
Russia.  

7. This meeting expresses the wish that the Central Committee should
confer as frequently as possible with local Party functionaries active in
various fields of Social-Democratic work.  

8. This meeting stresses the repeated Party decisions to the effect
that the workers’ party cannot exist unless there are regular membership
dues and contributions by workers. In the absence of such contributions,
particularly in present conditions, the existence of a central (local or

    

all-Russia) Party body, however modest, will be absolutely impossible.


9. (Not to be published.)  
The Social-Democratic Group in the Duma

1. This meeting notes that despite unheard-of persecution and the
rigging of the elections by the government, and despite the Black-Hundred
and liberal bloc against the Social-Democrats that in many places assumed a
very definite character, the R.S.D.L.P. won tremendous victories in the
elections to the Fourth Duma. The Social-Democrats polled an increased
number of votes almost every where in the second urban curia, which they
are wresting more and more from the liberals. In the worker curia, which is
the most important for our Party, the R.S.D.L.P. retained its undivided
supremacy, the working class emphasising with particular unanimity, by
electing none but Bolshevik deputies in the curia, its unshakable loyalty
to the old R.S.D.L.P. and its revolutionary behests.  

2. This meeting hails the vigorous activity of the Social-Democratic
deputies to the Fourth Duma, which found expression in a number of speeches
in the Duma, the sub mission of interpellations and the reading of a
declaration which in general correctly expressed the fundamental principles
of Social-Democracy.  

3. This meeting recognises that our Party’s established tradition, by
which the Duma Social-Democratic group is a body subordinate to the Party
as a whole, in the shape of its central bodies, is the only correct one,
and finds that in the interests of the political education of the working
class and the proper organisation of the Party’s work in the Duma, careful
attention should be paid to every step of the Social-Democratic group, and
in this way Party control exercised over the group.  

4. This meeting cannot but regard the resolution concerning Jagiello as
a direct violation of Party duty by the Social-Democratic group. That
resolution backs the disruptive move of the Bund, which entered into an
agreement with a non-Social-Democratic party (the P.S.P.) against

    

the Polish Social-Democrats and elected Jagiello, a non Social-Democrat, in
opposition to all the Social-Democratic electors, who were in the majority
among the working-class electors. The group thereby aggravated the split
among the workers in Poland and hampered the cause of unity in the Party as
a whole.  

5. Comrade Chkhenkeli’s defence, on behalf of the group, of cultural
national autonomy under the guise of “establishing the necessary
institutions for the free development of each nationality” is a direct
violation of the Party

Programme.[4] The Second Congress of the Party, which adopted the

Programme,[5] rejected by a special vote what was in effect an
identical formulation. Concessions to nationalist sentiment, even in this
disguised form, are impermissible for a proletarian party.  

6. The Social-Democratic group’s vote in favour of the Progressist (in
reality Octobrist) formula of procedure with regard to the declaration of
the Minister, and the failure to introduce an independent Social-Democratic
formula are a blunder which should be noted by the Party in view of the
malicious comments of the liberal

press.[6] 

7, 8 and 9. (Not to be

published.)[7] 
Illegal Literature

Having discussed the necessity for all-round development of illegal
publishing and worked out a number of concrete instructions on the matter,
this meeting insistently calls upon all local organisations of the Party,
all workers’ nuclei and individual workers to show greater independence and
initiative in the matter of transport and contacts with the Bureau of the
Central
Committee[8] for the distribution of illegal literature.  
The Insurance Campaign

Noting that the working class and its Party, despite all persecution,
have displayed great energy in upholding proletarian interests in
connection with the introduction of the insurance law, this meeting
considers: 
 

1. It is necessary to wage the most determined and concerted struggle
against attempts by the government and the capitalists to make the workers
elect their delegates to the sick benefit funds blindly, without allowing
workers’ meetings.  

2. Despite the prohibition, workers should everywhere try to hold
spontaneous meetings for the preliminary nomination of the candidate
delegates they want.  

3. Workers should organise revolutionary meetings to protest against
the violence and outrages accompanying the introduction of the insurance
laws.  

4. It is at all events necessary to draw up beforehand a workers’ list
of candidate delegates from among the more influential worker
Social-Democrats and by concerted effort to champion the list also where no
meetings can be held.  

5. This meeting considers it inadvisable and harmful to boycott the
election of delegates. At present the capitalists are devoting their main
efforts to preventing the workers from gaining ascendancy in certain
proletarian factory nuclei, such as the workers’ sick benefit funds should
become. A boycott, which at the present time would disunite the workers,
would only assist the above-mentioned efforts of the capitalists.  

6. The struggle for the proper election of delegates to sick benefit
funds must not cease for one moment. While using every opportunity in every
way and with the utmost energy, not for a moment allowing the employers to
consider the normal course of production assured, and extending and
developing the workers’ struggle, we must not refrain from securing that
the Social-Democratic list is adopted despite all obstacles. Elections do
not preclude further development of the struggle. On the contrary, by
securing the election of staunch worker Social-Democrats as delegates, we
shall facilitate the further struggle for proper elections, in which the
delegates will give the utmost assistance to the workers.  

7. Wherever elections take place without meetings, it is necessary to
carry on agitation for the re-election of delegates through genuinely free
elections, with the workers holding meetings by every means available.

 

8. The Social-Democratic Duma group must immediately make a new
interpellation on the banning of workers’ election meetings.  

9. All agitation on the introduction of insurance must be closely
combined with a description of the entire state of affairs in tsarist
Russia, explaining our socialist principles and revolutionary demands.

The Attitude to Liquidationism, and Unity

1. The Party’s four years of struggle against liquidationism have
proved the absolute correctness of the definition given by the December
1908 Party Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., which said: 

“Attempts by a certain section of intellectuals in the Party to
abolish the existing organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. and replace it by an
amorphous association within the framework of legality at all costs, even
at the price of a down right repudiation of the programme, tactics and
traditions of the Party.”  

Consequently, the liquidators are condemned not for stressing the
necessity of legal work, but for renouncing and destroying the illegal
Party.  

The founding of the first Marxist workers’ daily newspaper in Russia
and the election of none but Bolshevik deputies in the worker curia proved
beyond all doubt that the Party was able to cope with legal activity,
having pushed aside the liquidators.  

2. By withdrawing from the illegal Party and grouping themselves
separately from the local organisations, the liquidators brought about a
split, which they confirmed by setting up so-called initiating groups in a
number of localities, above all in St. Petersburg. The January 1912
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., which decided that the liquidationist group
of contributors to Nasha Zarya and Dyelo Zhizni—a group
forming the core of the initiating groups—had “definitely placed itself
outside the

       Party”,[1]

thereby merely registered the split effected by the liquidators.  
 

3. The August 1912 conference, which named itself a “conference of
organisations of the R.S.D.L.P.”, proved in fact to be a liquidationist
conference, since its principal and leading section was the literary group
of liquidators which had broken away from the Party and was cut off from
the mass of the Russian workers.  

4. The devotion of the overwhelming majority of the foremost workers to
the illegal Party compelled the August conference to make seeming
concessions to Party principle and profess recognition of the illegal
Party. In reality, however, all the resolutions of that conference are
permeated through and through with liquidationism, and immediately after
the conference Nasha Zarya and Luch, which announced its
adherence to the August decisions, intensified their liquidationist
propaganda— 

(a) for an open party; 

(b) against the underground; 

(c) against the Party Programme (defence of cultural national autonomy,
revision of the agrarian laws enacted by the Third Duma, shelving the
slogan of a republic, and so on); 

(d) against revolutionary mass strikes; 

(e) for reformist, exclusively legalist tactics.  

Hence one of the Party’s tasks is still to wage a determined struggle
against the liquidationist group of Nasha Zarya and Luch,
and to make clear to the mass of the workers the great harm of the
liquidators’ propaganda.  

5. The “unity” campaign launched by the liquidators in the legal
press evades and obscures the main issue, that of joining the illegal Party
and working in it; thus it misleads the workers, for this issue cannot even
be raised in the legal press. In reality the liquidators still behave as
splitters, which became only too obvious during the elections in
St. Petersburg, for when the electors were divided into two equal groups,
it was the liquidators who rejected the proposal for drawing lots, the only
means of doing away with the disunity of the workers in the face of the
bourgeois parties.  

6. Provided the illegal organisation of the R.S.D.L.P. is recognised
and joined, the unity of worker Social-Democrats of all trends and shades
is an absolute necessity dictated by all the interests of the working-class
movement.  
 

Unification on these very principles has already been effected in the
Narva district organisation of St. Petersburg and in a number of provincial
organisations.  

7. This meeting most emphatically supports such unification and
recommends that the same thing should immediately be begun everywhere from
below, in factory committees, district groups, etc., the worker comrades
verifying whether the recognition of the illegal organisation and readiness
to hack the revolutionary struggle of the masses and revolutionary tactics
are really put into effect. Only to the extent that this unity from below
is actually established will the final unification of the Party and
complete consolidation of unity on an all-Russia scale be accomplished.

Non-Russian Social-Democratic Organisations

1. The experience of 1912 fully confirmed the correctness of the
decision which the January (1912) Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. adopted on
this

      question.[2]

The Bund’s support of the nomination of Jagiello, a non-Social-Democrat,
against the Polish Social-Democrats, and the violation of the Party
Programme in favour of nationalism by the August (1912) conference of the
liquidators, the Bund and the Lettish Social-Democrats revealed with
particular clarity the complete bankruptcy of the federalist principles of
organising the Social-Democratic Party and the great harm which the
isolation of the non-Russian Social-Democratic organisations does to the
proletarian cause.  

2. This meeting therefore calls earnestly on the workers of all the
nationalities of Russia to rebuff the militant nationalism of the
reactionaries with the utmost determination, to combat all manifestations
of a nationalist spirit among the working masses. It calls on the worker
Social-Democrats locally to display the closest solidarity, and to merge
into integral organisations of the R.S.D.L.P. working in all the languages
spoken by the local proletariat and achieving real unity from below, as has
long been done in the Caucasus.  
 

3. This meeting expresses deep regret at the split in the ranks of the
Polish Social-Democrats, which greatly weakens the struggle of the worker
Social-Democrats of Poland. The meeting is compelled to state that the
Executive of the Polish Social-Democrats, which today does not represent
the majority of the Social-Democratic organisations of the Polish
proletariat, resorts to impermissible methods in combating that majority
(for example, groundlessly suspecting the entire Warsaw organisation of
provocation). The meeting calls on all the Party organisations which come
in contact with the Polish worker Social-Democrats to help them in
establishing genuine unity among the Polish Social-Democrats.  

4. This meeting points out in particular the extreme opportunism and
liquidationism of the decisions adopted by the latest (ninth) conference of
the Bund, which with drew the slogan of a republic, pushed illegal work
into the background and was oblivious of the revolutionary tasks of the
proletariat. Equally reprehensible is the Bund’s resistance to the
unification of all worker Social-Democrats in the localities (Warsaw, Lodz,
Vilna and elsewhere), a unification which the R.S.D.L.P. has repeatedly
urged at its congresses and conferences since 1906.  

5. This meeting greets the revolutionary worker Social-Democrats of the
Lettish organisation, who perseveringly carry on anti-liquidationist
propaganda, and expresses regret that the Central Committee of the Lettish
Social-Democrats is inclined to support the anti-Party moves of the
liquidators.  

6. This meeting expresses firm confidence that the revolutionary
upswing which has begun, and the mass economic and political strikes,
street demonstrations and other forms of open revolutionary struggle by the
masses will help in completely unifying and merging the worker
Social-Democrats in the localities without any distinction between the
nationalities, thereby strengthening the onslaught against tsarism, which
oppresses all the peoples of Russia, and against the bourgeoisie of all the
nations of Russia, which is in the process of uniting.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 17, p. 481.—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 17, pp. 464–65.—Ed.  
 



[3]
The Meeting of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. and Party
functionaries, called the “February” Meeting for conspiratorial
reasons, was held in Cracow from December 26, 1912 to January 1,1913
(January 8–14, 1913). Participants in it included Lenin, N. K. Krupskaya
and the Bolshevik deputies to the Fourth Duma:

A. Y. Badayev, G. I. Petrovsky and N. R. Shagov. It was also attended by
delegates from the illegal Party organisations of St. Petersburg, the
Moscow Region, the South, the Urals and the Caucasus.  

The preparations for the Meeting were made by Lenin himself, who also
presided over it. He spoke on a number of items and wrote the
“Notification and Resolutions of the Meeting”.  

The Meeting adopted decisions on major issues of the working-class
movement, It discussed reports by delegates on the state of local Party
organisations, and the work of the editorial boards of Pravda and
Prosveshcheniye.  

The resolutions of the Meeting were endorsed by the Central Committee
and were hectographed. In the first half of February they were published
together with the Notification as a separate pamphlet in Paris. In
April 1913 the Central Committee Bureau Abroad circulated a letter to the
Party organisations, delegates of the C.C. and individual Party
functionaries, calling on them to discuss

   

the decisions of the “February” Meeting in their committees, Party nuclei
and groups. In a letter to Maxim Gorky, Lenin pointed out that the Meeting
“was a great success and will play a definite role”.





[4]
This refers to the statement which A. I. Chkhenkeli, a Menshevik member
of the Duma, made on the government declaration at the Duma sitting on
December 10 (23), 1912.





[5]
The formulation rejected by the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. was
the proposal made by Goldblatt, a Bundist, for incorporating in Clause
Eight of the Party Programme—on “the right of all the nations included
in the state to self-determination”—the following addition: “and to the
establishment of institutions guaranteeing complete freedom of their
cultural development”.





[6]
At the fourteenth sitting of the Duma on December 15 (28), 1912,
following the debate on the Government Declaration, the Cadets,
Progressists, Trudoviks and nationalists proposed draft formulas of
procedure to the next business. The Progressist formula was carried by
majority vote. It expressed confidence that the government would implement
the Manifesto of October 17, 1905. Members of the Social-Democratic group
voted for this formula. After wards they admitted their vote to have been
ill-advised.





[7]
The unpublished clauses (7, 8 and 9) of the resolution on the work of
the Social-Democratic Duma group called on the Bolshevik deputies to
achieve equality in the group with the seven Mensheviks, strike their names
off the list of contributors to the liquidationist Luch and rally
together for Party work. The text of these clauses has not been preserved.





[8]
The Bureau of the Central Committee—the Russian Bureau of
the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P., the Bolshevik Party’s practical centre for
leading revolutionary struggle in Russia. It was established by the Sixth
(Prague) All-Russia Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. in January 1912. Among its
members were members of the Central Committee G. K. Orjonikidze,
Y. M. Sverdlov, S. S. Spandaryan and J. V. Stalin, and alternate members of
the C.C. M. I. Kalinin and Y. D. Stasova. Later on, owing to frequent
arrests of Party functionaries in Russia, the composition of the Russian
Bureau underwent changes more than once, new members being co-opted to
replace those who had dropped out.  

The Russian Bureau was led by the Central Committee of the Party headed
by Lenin. Its tasks were to carry out the decisions of the Prague
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P., rally the local Party organisations to the
Central Committee ideologically and organisationally, strengthen Party
unity, and combat opportunist trends. The Bureau did a great deal in the
way of publishing and distributing Bolshevik leaflets, appeals and other
illegal literature. It was an important connecting link between the Central
Committee

   

and local Party organisations. It ceased to function after the February
bourgeois-democratic revolution of 1917.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The British Labour Movement in 1912









Lenin: The British Labour Movement in 1912







V. I.  

      Lenin
The British Labour Movement in 1912




Published:
Pravda No. 1, January 1, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 467-468.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The miners’ strike was the outstanding event of the past
year. While the railway strike in 1911 showed the “new spirit” of the
British workers, the miners’ strike definitely marked an epoch.  

Despite the “war” preparations of the ruling classes, and despite the
strenuous efforts of the bourgeoisie to crush the resistance of the
rebellious slaves of capital, the strike was a success. The miners
displayed exemplary organisation. There was not a trace of
blacklegging. Coal-mining by soldiers or inexperienced labourers was out of
the question. And after six weeks of struggle the bourgeois government of
Britain saw that the country’s entire industrial activity was coming to a
standstill and that the words of the workers’ song, “All wheels cease to
whir when thy hand wills

it”,[1] were coming true.  

The government made concessions.  

“The Prime Minister of the most powerful empire the world has ever
seen attended a delegate meeting of the mine-owners’ striking slaves and
pleaded with them to agree to a compromise.” That is how a well-informed
Marxist summed up the struggle.  

The British Government, which year after year usually feeds its workers
with promises of reform “some day”, this time acted with real
dispatch. In five days a new law was rushed through Parliament!
This law introduced a minimum wage, i.e., regulations establishing
rates of pay below which wages cannot be reduced.  

It is true that this law, like all bourgeois reforms, is a miserable
half-measure and in part a mere deception of the workers, because while
fixing the lowest rate of pay,

    

the employers keep their wage-slaves down all the same. Nevertheless, those
who are familiar with the British labour movement say that since the
miners’ strike the British proletariat is no longer the same. The
workers have learned to fight. They have come to see the path that
will lead them to victory. They have become aware of their strength. They
have ceased to be the meek lambs they seemed to be for so long a time to
the joy of all the defenders and extollers of wage-slavery.  

In Britain a change has taken place in the balance of social forces, a
change that cannot be expressed in figures but is felt by all.  

Unfortunately, there is not much progress in Party affairs in
Britain. The split between the British Socialist Party (formerly the
Social-Democratic Federation) and the In dependent (of socialism) Labour
Party persists. The opportunist conduct of the M.P.s belonging to the
latter party is giving rise, as always happens, to syndicalist
tendencies among the workers. Fortunately, these tendencies are not strong.


The British trade unions are slowly but surely turning towards
socialism, in spite of the many Labour M.P.s who stubbornly champion the
old line of liberal labour policy. But it is beyond the power of these last
of the Mohicans to retain the old line!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is quoting from the workers’ song which Georg Herwegh, a German
poet, wrote in 1863 for the General Association of German Workers.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Better Late Than Never









Lenin: Better Late Than Never







V. I.  

      Lenin
Better Late Than Never




Written: Written on January 8 (19), 1913 

Published:

      Published in Pravda No. 8, January 11, 1913.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 469-470.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

I have had to be very late in coming out with a denial of
what L. Martov wrote in Luch (No. 37, October 28, 1912). But how
can it be helped? It is easy to tell an untruth, but sometimes it takes a
long time to find out the truth.  

In Luch No. 37, L. Martov heaped upon me the choicest abuse
seasoned with the sort of “obscure” innuendoes that are usual with that
writer. Having become accustomed in ten years to these methods of struggle
used by L. Martov, I did not even read his article to the end. But some
colleagues pointed out to me that L. Martov alleges that Comrade Haase, a
member of the Central Committee of the German Social-Democrats, has said:
“Lenin is deceiving the International.”  

To get at the truth, I had to find the source of Martov’s
allegation. He referred to a certain Miners’ Newspaper
No. 225. I could not find it. Vorw\"arts (central organ of the
German Social-Democratic Party) contains no such words. I only found them
in the Bremer

B\"urger-Zeitung[1] (the organ of the Bremen Social-Democrats).


I was faced with the necessity of questioning Haase himself if I did
not want to imitate L. Martov’s frivolous attitude.  

I sent a written inquiry to the Central Committee of the German
Social-Democrats.  

Here is Haase’s reply: 

Central Committee of the German Social-Democratic
   Party
Berlin, December 31, 1912

In reply to your inquiry, I wish to inform you that the
   wording which, according to you, Luch used in reporting my speech
   in the International Socialist Bureau, is not in accord with the facts. The
   Dear Comrades,

    

   question discussed at the meeting was whether the Organising Committee can
   claim representation on the International Socialist Bureau. I said this was
   impermissible because, even according to its own statement, the Organising
   Committee is not an organisation but merely wants to be a union of groups
   for restoring the unity of the organisation. In this connection, I raised
   the question of who specifically was entitled to represent the Russian
   party in its present state, and remarked that if it was true that in its
   relations with the International Bureau the Central Committee acted as the
   “R.S.D.L.P.”, this name might give rise to misunderstandings.  

Thus there was no attack on Lenin here, and In general,
   the re mark was not an insulting one at all. I wanted only to ascertain the
   state of affairs in view of the above-mentioned assertion, and primarily to
   raise the question whether the time had not come to take steps towards
   unifying all the Russo-Polish groups. I was very sorry Lenin was absent.
   

For the sake of completeness only, I wish to point out
   that the word “deceit” never passed my lips.  

With comradely greetings, Haase 


And so, in order to heap abuse on me for the thousandth time, L. Martov
has repeated (echoing someone else) an untruth about Haase.  

Haase was against the Organising Committee being represented,
but he did not dispute the representation of the Central
Committee.  

Haase does not consider that the Central Committee represents the
entire R.S.D.L.P., including the non-Russians and the liquidators;
but then, as far as I know, the Central Committee itself has never
claimed that it represented either of these.  

The non-Russians (the Poles, the Bund, the Letts) have special
representatives of their own.  

I confine, myself to this factual denial.  

N. Lenin 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Bremer Bürger Zeitung—a Social-Democratic daily
published from 1890 to 1919. It was under the influence of the Left
Social-Democrats of Bremen until 1916, when it passed into the hands of
social chauvinists.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations









Lenin: The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat No. 30, January 12 (25), 1913.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 471-477.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

It has long since been pointed out, and recognised by all, that the
year 1912 was an outstanding landmark in the development of the strike
movement. But not all have realised and taken proper account of it.  

Let us take the data on political strikes in the first eleven months of
the year. The result is as follows: 





1905 . . . . . . . . . . .         
1,052,000


1906 . . . . . . . . . . .         
642,000


1907 . . . . . . . . . . .         
540,000


. . . . . . 
. . . .


1912 . . . . . . . . . . .         
about 900,000




The number of political strikers in the first nine months was 700,000,
according to the most conservative estimates. Strikes in connection with
clearing up the matter of the delegates in

St. Petersburg[2] involved up to 50,000 persons; the strike in protest
against the Sevastopol executions and the strike on November 15, the day
when the Duma opened, involved 188,000 persons, according to the Moscow
Manufacturers’ Society. These data are for the period
before November 20. Obviously, 900,000 is a minimum figure. Even
subtracting 100,000 that are hardly comparable with 1905–07 (factories
outside the province of the factory inspectorate), we get 800,000.


In any case, the movement definitely surpassed that in 1906 and 1907,
and fell but slightly short of that in 1905!  

What does this mean?  

The national scale of the movement at present is, of course, much
smaller than in 1905. Consequently, the beginning of the
revolutionary upswing is incomparably
    

higher today than it was before the first
revolution. Consequently, the coming second revolution even now reveals a
much greater store of revolutionary energy in the proletariat. The
proletariat has grown in numbers—by a minimum of 20 per cent. Its
concentration has increased. The purely proletarian mainstay of the
movement has become stronger due to accelerated dissociation from the
land. The size of the proletarian and semi-proletarian population in
“domestic” industry, handicrafts and agriculture has grown to an enormous
extent defying calculation.  

Lastly, there has been an increase in the political consciousness,
experience and determination of the foremost democratic class. This is
admitted by all, but not all can bring themselves to think out all the
implications. Not all can bring themselves to face the truth and admit that
we are witnessing revolutionary mass strikes, the beginning of a
revolutionary upsurge.  

This is indicated first and foremost by the fundamental and most
objective fact, one least of all permitting of subjective interpretation,
namely, the scope of the movement. In no country of the world would it be
possible, unless there were a revolutionary social situation, to rouse
hundreds of thousands of workers to political action for the most varied
reasons several times a year. But in our country this rise is taking place
spontaneously, because tens of millions of the semi-proletarian and peasant
population are passing on, if one can use this expression, to their
vanguard a sentiment of concentrated indignation, which is surging up and
overflowing.  

The Russian workers’ revolutionary strike in 1912 was national in the
fullest sense of the term. For what should be understood by a national
movement is not at all one with which—in the conditions of a
bourgeois-democratic revolution—the whole bourgeoisie, or at least the
liberal bourgeoisie, is in agreement. Only opportunists hold that view. On
the contrary, a national movement is one which expresses the objective
needs of the whole country, and aims its heaviest blows at the central
forces of the enemy opposing the country’s development. A national movement
is one which has the sympathy of the vast majority of the population.  
 

Such precisely is the workers’ political movement this year, a movement
which has the sympathy of all working and exploited people, of all
democrats, however weak, downtrodden, disunited and helpless they may
be. The more definite demarcation between liberalism and democracy
(achieved not without a struggle against those who aspired to “wrest the
Duma from the hands of the reactionaries”) is a tremendous advantage of
the new movement, If the revolution is to succeed, it must know as exactly
as possible with whom it can go into battle, which of its allies is
unreliable and who is its real enemy.  

That is why the direct actions of the liberals (Cadets) against the new
revolution are so very significant. And that is why the slogan of a
republic, which clears the minds of all democrats willing to fight from the
monarchist (as well as “constitutional”) illusions which sapped so much
the strength of the onslaught in 1905, is of the most exceptional
importance (by comparison with Europe) in Russia just now. Of historic
importance in the process of growth of the new revolution in Russia are two
factors:
firstly, the April and May strikes during which the St. Petersburg
workers—in spite of the arrest of their leading organisation, the
St. Petersburg Committee—put forward the slogan of a republic, an
eight-hour working day, and confiscation of the landed estates. Secondly,
the November strikes and demonstrations (see letters from Riga and
Moscow[3] the same thing happened in St. Petersburg, hut the arrests
swept away our correspondents). The slogans of those demonstrations were
not only “Down with the death penalty! Down with war!”, but also “Long
live the revolutionary working class and the revolutionary army!”  

In the streets of St. Petersburg, Riga and Moscow, the proletariat held
out its hand to those foremost fighters of the muzhik armed forces who had
risen heroically against the monarchy.  
 *     *  * 

The liberal bourgeoisie is against a new revolution, against
revolutionary mass strikes. But the liberals are by no means opposed to
political strikes in general, that is,

    

if these are only evidence of a “revival” and support merely the liberal
slogan of constitutional reform. And objectively, irrespective of their
“good” intentions, our liquidators are mere servants of the
counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie; they marked both historic moments of the
upswing by “pronouncements” against revolutionary strikes!! In Nevsky
Golos No. 1, on May 20, 1912, the unforgettable and incomparable
V. Yezhov rebelled against “complicating” economic strikes by political
strikes and vice versa, against their “harmful lumping together”
(cf. Sotsial-Demokrat No. 27,

p. 4)[1]


In November 1912 the liquidationist Luch, too, was up in arms
against strikes. Afterwards it tried to put inattentive people “on a false
scent” by referring to the fact that the Social-Democratic group, too, was
against the November 15 strike. But anyone who looks at all into the
meaning of the event will easily see through Luch’s trickery.


Yes, both the Social-Democratic group and the St. Petersburg Committee
found the November 15 strike inopportune. They sounded a warning against
that particular strike on that particular day. It was the duty of the
working-class press to report this. And Luch and Pravda
did.  

But Luch did something besides.  

After the event of November 15 (when the most zealous in striking was
the very same Vyborg District which until then had been most of all linked
with the Mensheviks), and after the movement had grown to the dimensions of
a demonstration, the sagacious Luch carried articles (an editorial
and, following the editorial of November 17, a feuilleton on
November 21) crying out against the “dangerous frittering away of
forces”, declaring that “if strikes are used frequently, people will stop
sympathising with them”, advancing the slogan “Let us seek a different
path” and “Nothing is to be gained by outbreaks” (!?!), and
howling against “playing at strikes”.  

That is the kind of “philosophy”, advocated by you liquidator
gentlemen, and long familiar to the St. Petersburg workers, both from
Nevsky Golos and from speeches by members of your “initiating
group”, that has gained

    

you the legitimate hatred and contempt of the St. Petersburg workers. A
particular strike may be unfortunate or take place at an unfortunate
moment. But only liberals and counter-revolutionaries are free to describe
as “playing at strikes” one of the world’s greatest movements, which
brought into action almost a million proletarians!  

Frequent strikes are apt to exhaust the workers. It may well he,
therefore, that we shall have to call for shorter strikes and for
demonstrations that have been better prepared. But the event of November 15
was remarkable precisely as a new step forward in the demonstration
movement!  

Instead of honestly admitting your mistake (for you were plainly
mistaken as to the significance of November 15), you liquidators began to
talk, like the most brazen liberals, about the “political illiteracy” of
the revolutionary appeal, you who are repeating the ABC of liberal
politics!  

Let the workers judge the worth of the liquidators’ smooth-spoken talk
about their “unity” with the Party when it happens that, at the time of
the rise and development of revolutionary strikes and demonstrations, the
liquidators launch a struggle against them, using the legal press to revile
illegal appeals!!  
 *     *  * 

However, there is a more profound reason for the liquidators’ campaign
against strikes. The liquidators are slaves of the liberals. And the
liberals have really begun to feel ill at ease because of the stubborn
character of revolutionary strikes. The “Progressist” factory owner has
begun to grumble and even to rage. The Milyukovs now fear lest their
“bloc” with Rodzyanko should be disturbed.  

Liquidationist policy serves to subject the workers to the
liberals. Marxist policy raises the workers to the role of leaders of the
peasantry. One cannot speak of this legally, liquidator gentlemen,
but one must think of it and tell about it to those who want to be
revolutionary Social-Democrats.  

In free, constitutional Europe, political strikes for the time being
(so long as the socialist revolution has not yet

    

begun) serve the struggle for individual reforms. In slave, Asiatic,
tsarist Russia, which is drawing near her next
bourgeois-democratic revolution, political strikes are the only
serious means of stirring up the peasantry and the better part of the
peasant army, of shaking them up and rousing them to a revolutionary
struggle! The time is past—fortunately for Russia—when there was no one
to “go among the people” but heroic solitary Narodniks. The time is
passing when solitary terrorists could speak of “rousing” the people by
terrorism. Russia has left those sad times behind. In 1905 the
revolutionary proletariat found for itself a different way “to go among
the people”, and a different means of drawing the masses into the
movement.  

That means is revolutionary strikes, stubborn strikes shifting from
place to place, from one part of the country to another, recurrent strikes,
strikes which rouse the back ward to a new life of struggle for economic
improvements, strikes which brand and lash every salient act of violence or
tyranny, every crime of tsarism, strike-demonstrations which unfurl the red
banner in the streets of the capital cities and bring revolutionary
speeches and revolutionary slogans to the crowd, to the mass of
the people.  

Such strikes cannot be called forth artificially, but neither can they
be stopped once they have begun to involve hundreds and hundreds of
thousands.  

Let the liberal, who is moved by being given a seat beside Rodzyanko
“himself”, tell the workers: “Brothers, no more outbreaks, seek a
different path, take up the peaceful trade union movement, prepare
yourselves earnestly for an open European party, don’t incite the muzhik to
rebel lion, don’t waste your energy on strikes or ‘we’ shall stop
sympathising with you!”  

The workers will know how to assess such talk, and will see through it
even in the garb of the “near-Marxist” expressions of any of the
Luch writers.  

The workers will concentrate on deliberately supporting,
strengthening, developing and consolidating the spontaneously growing
revolutionary strike to prepare the peas ants and the armed forces for a
rising. If strikes exhaust the workers, they should be carried out
intermittently, enabling some of the forces to rest while the forces that

    

are rested or “fresh” are roused to take up the struggle. Shorter strikes
should be called. Occasionally strikes should be replaced by
demonstrations. But the important thing is that strikes, meetings and
demonstrations should take place continuously, that the whole peasantry and
the armed forces should know of the workers’ stubborn fight, and that the
countryside—even the most out-of-the-way corners of it—should see that
there is unrest in the towns, that “their” people have risen in
revolt, that they are waging a life-and-death struggle, that they are
fighting for a better life, for higher pay, for an end to the outrages and
tyranny of the authorities, for the transfer of the landed estates to the
peasants, for the overthrow of the tsar’s landlord monarchy, for a
republic. It is essential that the smouldering resentment and subdued
murmurings of the countryside should, along with the indignation in the
barracks, find a centre of attraction in the workers’ revolutionary
strikes. We must work on this indefatigably, and we shall live to see the
day when the proletariat, jointly with the peasantry and the armed forces,
brings down the landlords and overthrows the tsarist monarchy by a people’s
uprising.  

P.S. Luch is making progress: after the unsophisticated
V. A. (No. 56) comes the diplomatic
F. D.[4] (No. 65). But for all his “diplomacy”, the meaning of F.D.’s
statements is the same—he is against revolutionary strikes! We
are faced with an out-and-out liberal to whom it never occurs that
strikes awaken the peasants and lead them to insurrection, that strikes
develop revolutionary agitation among the masses and awaken the
armed forces, and that it is necessary to pass from strikes (insofar as
they are exhausting) to street demonstrations, etch 

F.D.’s. vulgar liberal phrases about the
“struggle for the right to organise” as the “immediate task”—a
constitutional reform “on the order of the day” under Treshchenko!—is
the sole cover for Luch’s fight against revolutionary strikes. It
is not enough, liquidator gentlemen!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 116–17 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Before the delegates from the worker curia of St. Petersburg Gubernia
held their congress (October 5 [18], 1912) to elect electors to the Fourth
Duma, the government gave a so-called clarification on twenty-one of the
forty-four factories that had taken part in the elections, saying that the
election of delegates at those factories had been found null and void. In
reply to this government move, the workers in a number of St. Petersburg
factories called a political strike. The strike, which soon spread to every
district of St. Petersburg, was accompanied by mass meetings and
demonstrations.





[3]
This refers to reports from Riga and Moscow about workers’ strikes and
demonstrations, published in Sotsial-Demokrat No. 30, on
January 12 (25), 1913. On November 11 (24), 1912, the Riga workers
organised a protest demonstration against the death sentences on a group of
sailors of the battleship Ioann Zlatoust passed by a court martial
in Sevastopol, against the torturing of political prisoners, and against
the war that had begun in the Balkans. Over 1,500 workers marched through
the streets of Riga singing revolutionary songs and carrying red
flags. They were received sympathetically by the population. On November 12
(25) many large factories in the city began a political strike. On
November 8 (21) the workers in a number of Moscow factories went on strike
in protest against the Sevastopol executions. There was also a
demonstration but the police boon dispersed it.





[4]
V. A.—V. M. Abrosimov, a Menshevik liquidator, subsequently
exposed as an agent prococateur.  

F. D.—F. I. Dan, leader of the Menshevik liquidators.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Original Postscript to the Article “The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations”









Lenin: Original Postscript to the Article 'The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Original Postscript to the Article “The Development of Revolutionary Strikes and Street Demonstrations”[1]




Written: Written in January 1913 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      page 478.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We call on Social-Democrats to pay particular attention to
F.D.’s “Tactical Notes” in Luch. How rapidly the coating of
showy conciliationism and “unification” phrase-mongering in the spirit of
Trotsky has disappeared! How clearly the real trend of
Luch—barefaced liquidationism—has been revealed!  

In a legal organ, F.D. is waging a regular war not only against
revolutionary mass strikes (to say nothing of an uprising)1 but
also against all revolutionary agitation among the masses. In point of
fact, F.D. goes much further than V.A. (Luch No. 56), betraying
his complete ideological kinship with the Bund’s “deletion” of the
revolution. That is what comes of the liquidators’ refusal to make a
straightforward, clear and formal “appraisal of the situation”: it is in
fact Larin’s appraisal that F.D. upholds by denying the objective
conditions which make it imperative for the workers to organise
for revolution, for drawing the masses in general and the
peasantry in particular into the revolutionary movement.  

We shall come back to F.D.’s articles again.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The manuscript has no title. The title given here has been supplied by
the Institute of Marxism-Leninism under the C.C. of the C.P.S.U.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Split Among the Polish Social-Democrats









Lenin: The Split Among the Polish Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Split Among the Polish Social-Democrats




Published:
Sotsial-Democrat No. 30, January 12 (25), 1913.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 479-484.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The present split among the Polish Social-Democrats is the
fruit of a conflict that began several years ago. At the Sixth Congress of
the Party, in 1908, such a sharp antagonism was shown between the Executive
Committee, on the one hand, and the Warsaw and Dombrowa area organisations,
on the other, that the Congress rejected a motion of confidence in the
Executive. The conflict was organisational but had great political
significance. The two local organisations insisted on the opportunity to
influence the political position of the Party, and claimed widespread
discussion of all its steps by the organisations.  

The Executive has remained, nevertheless, in the hands of the same
people. And its majority, headed by the notorious Tyszka, sticks to its
tactics, profiting by the weakening of the Party, by failures and by the
conditions of counter revolution. In the R.S.D.L.P., Tyszka played the
master and plotted in the name of the Social-Democracy of Poland and
Lithuania, without paying the slightest attention to the will of the
latter. In the policy of the Party, an era of unprincipledness and
vacillation began, on such questions, for example, as the trade unions, the
attitude to the P.S.P., and the tactics of the Polish Social-Democrats
within the R.S.D.L.P. Comrades who laid bare the contradictions in the
policy of the Executive and demanded a consistently principled line had
their mouths shut by the Executive, which would not allow any discussion in
the press and, worse still, constantly promised to open a
discussion “in the near future”, when it would also publish the comrades’
protests against its tactics. Tyszka’s opponents on the Executive itself,
who were all old functionaries, well known to

    

the whole Party, were ousted one by one. One of them refused to stand for
re-election at the Sixth Congress, saying that it was impossible to work
with Tyszka, another was ousted in 1909, and a third refused to enter the
Executive in 1911.  

But as the movement grew and became more active, from early 1911
onwards, discontent began to show in local organisations as well. The
“rebellion” was led by the War saw organisation, which is the most
important and powerful, and above all the most consistent in the
revolutionary sense, and which, ever since 1905, has been in the Left wing
among the Polish Social-Democrats.  

The Executive, of course, became uneasy and made ready to “nip it in
the bud”. The December 1911 inter-district conference in Warsaw served as
the signal for the attack. That conference made bold to insist that the
“territory” should be represented more strongly at the next
Party conference, i.e.—the impious idea!—that the influence of
the Executive at the conference should thereby be weakened. But that would
have been half the trouble, for a similar resolution was adopted by the
Lodz conference as well. Warsaw did something more criminal: it showed that
it demanded this not haphazardly, but with a political aim in
view. It adopted several political resolutions that Tyszka did not like;
among other things, it expressed displeasure at the fact that the Executive
had submitted no report to Warsaw on its activity, and demanded that the
Executive should acquaint the Party with its activity inside the
R.S.D.L.P., that it should not make a “Russian” policy secretly from the
Polish workers, and so on.  

An open struggle began. Tyszka gave vent to a series of “circulars”
and “explanations”. He “explained” that
(1) the Warsaw organisation had trampled the Party Rules underfoot and
resorted to a split;
(2) that its resolutions were an indication of boycottism, otzovism and
anarchism;
(3) that it had no ideological differences with the Executive and hence the
split had no political basis;
(4) that the Warsaw organisation did not exist, the conference had been
fictitious, and consequently there was and had been no split;
(5) that the Warsaw organisation had been unable to publish a single sheet
on its own and had left all

    

literary work to the Executive; that it had, unlawfully devised a
disruptive technique of its own and was publishing its own sheets. He also
gave a personal description, complete with family details, of a couple of
Warsaw “intellectualist

 warchols”,[1]

and explained that they had brought about a split but did not work in the
organisation and never had.  

Finally, seeing that the Warsaw organisation held its ground, Tyszka
made up his mind to take
“heroic”measures. 
He decided to call a fictitious conference and not to allow it to
be attended by the opposition, i.e., the vast majority of the comrades
active in the territory. To that end he announced the “dissolution” of
the strongest organisation—Warsaw—and formed a separate “Warsaw
organisation” of splitters out of two or three agents of his own.  

But the most outrageous thing is the “grounds” on which Tyszka
“dissolved” the Warsaw organisation. He announced that the organisation,
which refused to submit to him, was nothing but a tool of police
provocation. So far he has not cited a single serious fact, even of the
very smallest kind, to support his allegation. Nor has he published the
name of a single person he suspects. What is more, to leave the way to
retreat open, he wrote like a coward, in a statement to the International
Bureau, that provocation could very easily have ensconced itself in Warsaw
as in any other organisation functioning under the present
conditions.  

Nevertheless, Tyszka saw fit to “dissolve” the Warsaw organisation,
and even to declare it to be outside the R.S.D.L.P. The reader will see
that this is no longer a factional struggle but in fact something of a
criminal nature.  

Needless to say this reckless step by Tyszka’s caused indignation ten
times as great. The committee which he himself had appointed to inquire
into the provocation came out against him. Tyszka replied by expelling from
the Party three leaders of the Polish Social-Democracy who had been members
of the Party for many years and who enjoyed universal
confidence. Forty-four veteran functionaries published a most emphatic
protest against the

    

Executive’s actions, which are humiliating to any revolutionary. Both in
the territory and abroad, people insist that the “Executive” should be
called to account. It goes without saying that the Warsaw organisation did
not dissolve itself to please Tyszka but continues its work, which is so
difficult under present conditions. It was the “opposition” that achieved
signal success in the elections for the worker curia of Warsaw. The
elections gave the Social-Democrats an absolute majority over all the other
parties. Of the 34 Social-Democratic delegates, 31 support the opposition,
2 are vacillating, and only one backs Tyszka. On the other hand, in the
provinces, where the “work” is carried on by the Executive and its
supporters, the election campaign was lost everywhere.  

It is to be hoped that the petty and unseemly squabble caused by
Tyszka’s conduct will soon be a thing of the past and that differences of
principle will stand out more clearly. The Polish worker Social-Democrats’
desire to establish closer organisational links with their Russian comrades
will also find a more specific expression. Tyszka’s conduct in the
R.S.D.L.P. has resulted in the Executive becoming completely divorced from
the life of the Party as a whole and having not a single ally in the
R.S.D.L.P., and both sides (the liquidators and anti-liquidators) alike are
shrugging their shoulders over the strange and unprincipled “tactics” of
Tyszka and his “Executive”.  

The Polish Social-Democrats are passing through hard times. But already
there are signs of a way out. All the sound elements of the Polish
Social-Democratic movement are rallying together. And the time is already
near when the Polish Social-Democracy will be an organisation of pro-Party
worker Social-Democrats who have principles and tactics of their own and
are not a plaything in the hands of an unscrupulous plotter.  


We think it necessary to complete the report on the split among the
Polish Social-Democrats with certain data on the subsequent history of the
accusation of “provocation”. Here is what we have been told: 
 

Rosa Luxemburg (member of the International Socialist Bureau from the
Polish Social-Democracy) wrote a note to the I.S.B. alleging that the
Warsaw Committee was made up of splitters and was in the hands of the
secret police, stating that this was not to be published!  

Yet Tyszka himself published this abomination in the Polish
Social-Democratic press!!  

Lenin, upon receiving a copy of Tyszka’s note from Huysmans, Secretary
of the International Socialist Bureau, sent a letter to Huysmans, of
course, saying that it was a “most perfidious” act of vengeance, that
Malecki and Hanecki, ex-members of the Central Committee, were known to all
in the Party; that the committee of inquiry appointed by Tyszka himself had
discovered no provocation; that to publish anything about
provocation among political opponents, without giving names, was a most
foul and mean thing to

 do.[2]


The Executive replied with mere abuse.  

The Basle Congress met. The delegation of the Warsaw Committee was
unanimously recognised by all
R.S.D.L.P. delegates—liquidators, Letts, Vperyodists, Bundists and
Trotskyists alike!  

The Warsaw election resulted in both electors being worker
Social-Democrats who supported the Warsaw Committee and were
opposed to Tyszka and Co.  

The fictitious nature of Tyszka’s parallel organisation has been
demonstrated to all. The honest course—of with drawing the accusation of
provocation—is more than Tyszka and his Executive can adopt.  

But best of all are our liquidators and their Organising Committee, who
love “unity”. Luch, which officially adheres to the
August conference, has twice printed Tyszka’s foul lie!!  

On the first occasion it was done by a gentleman who hid behind
initials. The second time it was done by

Mr. Avgustovsky.[3] 

And see how brave they are! They put about a foul story—and take
cover behind the back of the Executive. We’ve got nothing to do with it,
they seem to say, we cannot be

    

held responsible, we aren’t putting about any foul story, we are
“only” reporting the fact that something (a foul story)
was printed on behalf of the Executive!!  

Martov, Trotsky, Lieber, the Letts and Co. are anonymously
putting about Tyszka’s foul story—in the legal press, where documents
cannot be quoted—hiding behind Tyszka’s back!!  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Trouble-makers.—Ed.  

[2]
See pp. 276–277 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[3]
Avgustovsky—pseudonym of S.O. Zederbaum, a Menshevik
liquidator.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On Bolshevism









Lenin: On Bolshevism







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Bolshevism[3]




Written: Written in the first halt of January 1913 

Published:

      First published in 1913, in the book: N. A. Rubakin, Among Books, Vol. II, Second Ed., Moscow.

      Published according to the text in the book.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 485-486.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The origin of Bolshevism is inseparably linked with the
struggle of what is known as Economism (opportunism which rejected the
political struggle of the working class and denied the latter’s leading
role) against revolutionary Social-Democracy in 1897–1902. Economism,
supported by the Bund, was defeated and eliminated by the well-known
campaign of the old
Iskra[4] (Munich, London and Geneva, 1900–03), which restored
the Social-Democratic Party (founded in 1898 but later destroyed by
arrests) on the basis of Marxism and revolutionary Social-Democratic
principles. At the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (August 1903), the
Iskrists split: the majority stood for the principles and tactics
of the old Iskra, while the minority turned to
opportunism, and was backed by the one-time enemies of Iskra, the
Economists and the Bundists. Hence the terms Bolshevism* and

      Menshevism[1]

(Bolsheviks and Mensheviks). In 1903–04 the struggle was mainly over the
Mensheviks’ opportunism in questions of organisation. From the end of 1904
on, tactical differences became the most important. The “plan for the
Zemstvo

campaign”[5] put forward (autumn 1904) by the new Iskra,
which had deserted to the Mensheviks, took up the defence of the tactics of
“not intimidating the liberals”. The year 1905 saw the tactical
differences take final shape (the Bolshevik Congress, Third Congress of the
R.S.D.L.P. in London, May 1905, and the Menshevik “conference” held in
Geneva at the same time). The Mensheviks strove to adapt working-class
tactics to liberalism. The Bolsheviks, however, put forward as the aim of
the working class in the bourgeois-democratic revolution: to carry it
through to the end and

    

to lead the democratic peasantry despite the treachery of the liberals. The
main practical divergencies between the two trends in the autumn of 1905
were over the fact that the Bolsheviks stood for boycotting the Bulygin
Duma while the Mensheviks favoured participation. In the spring of 1906,
the same thing happened with regard to the Witte Duma. First Duma: the
Mensheviks stood for the slogan of a Duma (Cadet) Ministry; the Bolsheviks,
for the slogan of a Left (Social-Democratic and Trudovik) Executive
Committee that would organise the actual struggle of the masses, etc. This
could be set forth in greater detail only in the press abroad. At the
Stockholm Congress (1906) the Mensheviks won the upper hand, and at the
London Congress (1907), the Bolsheviks. In 1908–09 the Vperyod
group (Machism[6] in philosophy and otzovism, or boycotting the Third
Duma, in politics—Bogdanov, Alexinsky, Lunacharsky and others) broke away
from the Bolsheviks. In 1909-11, in fighting against them (cf. V. Ilyin,
Materialism and Empirio-Criticism, Moscow,

 1909[2]

),

as well as against the liquidators (Mensheviks who denied the need for an
illegal Party), Bolshevism came close to the pro-Party Mensheviks
(Plekhanov and others), who had declared a resolute war on
liquidationism. The Bolshevik organs were:
Vperyod and Proletary (Geneva, 1905), Novaya
Zhizn (St. Petersburg, 1905), Volna, Ekho,
etc. (St. Petersburg, 1906), Proletary in Finland (1906–07),
Geneva (1908) and Paris (1909), Sotsial-Demokrat in Paris
(1909–12). Some of the principal writings of Bolshevism are collected in

V. Ilyin’s’[7] Twelve Years, St. Petersburg, 1908, which also
gives a more detailed bibliography. The main Bolshevik writers:
G. Zinoviev, V. Ilyin, Y. Kamenev, P. Orlovsky and others. In recent years
Bolsheviks have been the main contributors to the newspapers
Zvezda (1910–12), Pravda (1912), St. Petersburg, and to
the periodicals Mysl (1910), Moscow, and Prosveshcheniye
(1911–13), St. Petersburg.  

 

Notes
 

[1]
From the Russian words for majority and
minority.—Tr.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 14.—Ed.  
 



[3]
The article “On Bolshevism” was written by Lenin for the
second volume of N. A. Rubakin’s book Among Books. On January 12

   

(25), 1913, Lenin sent the article to Rubakin in Clarens, Switzerland, with
a letter stipulating that the article “should not be altered
in any way” (see present edition, Vol. 35, Russian ed.,
p. 45). The article was published in full.





[4]
Iskra (The Spark)—the first all-Russia illegal
Marxist newspaper. It was founded by Lenin in December 1900 abroad, from
where it was secretly sent to Russia. It played a tremendous part in
uniting the Russian Social-Democrats ideologically and paving the way for
the unification of scattered local organisations in a revolutionary Marxist
party. After the split into Bolsheviks and Mensheviks that took place at
the Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1903, Iskra passed into
the hands of the Mensheviks (beginning with No. 52) and came to be called
the “new” Iskra as distinct from the “old” Iskra,
edited by Lenin.





[5]
The Zemstvo campaign was conducted by bourgeois liberals
between the autumn of 1904 and January 1905. It consisted of a series of
congresses, public meetings and banquets at which speeches were made and
resolutions passe din support of moderate constitutional demands. Lenin
sharply criticised the Menshevik attitude of sup port for the campaign in
his article “The Zemstvo Campaign and Iskra’s Plan”





[6]
Machism—a reactionary, subjectivist-idealist philosophical
trend which became widespread in Western Europe in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth century. It was founded by Ernst Mach, an Austrian
physicist and philosopher, and Richard Avenarius, a German philosopher.


Machism was particularly dangerous to the working class as a trend of
bourgeois idealist philosophy, for while professing to be opposed to
idealism it referred to contemporary natural science, a circumstance which
gave it a “scientific” semblance. In Russia, Machist influence was strong
among a section of the Social-Democratic intelligentsia. It was
particularly widespread among the Menshevik intellectuals, such as
N. Valentinov and P. S. Yushkevich. Some Bolshevik writers, too, including
V. Bazarov, A. Bogdanov and A. V. Lunacharsky, adopted the standpoint of
Machism. Under the pretence of developing Marxism, the Russian Machists
tried to revise the fundamental tenets of Marxist philosophy. Lenin in his
book Materialism and Empirio-criticism exposed the reactionary
nature of Machism. He upheld Marxist philosophy against revisionist attacks
and elaborated dialectical and historical materialism in the new historical
conditions.  

The defeat of Machism struck a powerful blow at the ideological
positions of the Mensheviks, otzovists and god-builders.





[7]
V. Ilyin—one of Lenin’s pseudonyms.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Significance of Poincare’s Election









Lenin: The Significance of Poincare's Election







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Significance of Poincare’s Election




Published:
Pravda No 11, January 15, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 487-488.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The new President of the French Republic is being
effusively congratulated. Take a look at the Black-Hundred-pogromist
Novoye Vremya and the liberal Rech: how touchingly
unanimous they are in congratulating President Poincare and expressing
their delight!  

The appraisal of foreign policy issues and of the state of affairs in
the Western countries is particularly indicative of the profound inner
kinship of our Black Hundreds and our liberals. The fact that both of them
hail the “national” President, Poincaré, who has been elected by
an alliance of the big bourgeoisie and clerical and feudal reaction in
France, makes it clear to anyone that the Black Hundreds and liberals
disagree only over methods of combating socialism.  

But Poincaré’s election is of greater interest than the zealous
“congratulators” think. Class-conscious workers, in pondering on the
significance of this election, note three circumstances.  

Firstly, Poincaré’s election means another step forward in
aggravating the class struggle confronting France. Poincaré was
Premier in a Chamber having a Radical majority. But he has been
elected President against the Radical candidate, Pains, with the
aid of clerical and feudal reaction, and by the Right
bloc.  

What does that mean? Power in France is in the hands of the
last bourgeois party, the

Radicals.[1] It is becoming less and less distinguishable from
“reaction”. The whole bourgeoisie—from radical to
reactionary—is uniting ever more closely against the socialist
proletariat, and the boundary between the two sections of the bourgeoisie
is becoming

    

more and more obliterated. This was revealed all the more vividly by the
election of Poincaré. This sort of unity is an unmistakable sign of
the extreme aggravation of class antagonisms.  

Secondly, Poincaré’s career is worthy of note, being that of a
typical bourgeois businessman who sells himself in turn to all parties in
politics, and to all rich men “outside” politics. Poincaré has
been a lawyer by profession since the age of twenty. At twenty-six he was a
chef de cabinet and at thirty-three, a Minister. Rich men and the
big-wigs of finance in all countries think highly of the political
connections of such dexterous careerists. A
“brilliant” lawyer-deputy and a political trickster are synonyms
in the “civilised” countries.  

Worthy of note, thirdly, is the demonstration made by the French
Socialists during Poincaré’s election. The vote in favour of
Vaillant was a demonstration in honour of the Commune. Vaillant is a living
memory of it. One has only to see the welcome which Parisian workers give
the white-haired Vaillant when he appears on the platform to realise this.


And now, in the very same Versailles where bourgeois France in 1871
sold its country to Bismarck in order to crush the revolt of the
proletariat, and in the very same hail where forty-two years ago was heard
the beastly howling of the reactionary landlords of France who were longing
for a king, the working-class deputies voted for a veteran Communard.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The Republican Party of Radicals and Radical-Socialists—a
French bourgeois party which took organisational shape in 1901. In reality

   

it has existed since the 1880s. Before the First World War it represented
mainly the interests of the petty and middle bourgeoisie. Between the First
and the Second world wars the big bourgeoisie increased its influence in
it. Its leaders have repeatedly headed French governments.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Frankly









Lenin: Frankly







V. I.  

      Lenin
Frankly




Published:
Pravda No. 13, January 17, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 489-490.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

This newspaper has already noted the failure, in the
Council of State, of the Duma Bill to introduce a Zemstvo in Archangel
Gubernia. But it is well worth dwelling once more on the importance of this
fact, which, for all its in significance, is highly characteristic.  

For almost half a century there has existed a Zemstvo of the nobility,
one which guarantees the absolute preponderance of the feudal type of
landlord. And only in some gubernias, such as Vyatka Gubernia,
where there is hardly any landed nobility, the Zemstvo has more of a muzhik
character. However, there it is enmeshed even more in all kinds of
bureaucratic bans, impediments, restrictions and specifications. It would
seem that it is this sort of harmless, curtailed Zemstvo that Archangel
Gubernia, too, has been seeking for over a half century.  

And now the resolution of the Black-Hundred, landlord and bourgeois
Third Duma to introduce a Zemstvo in Archangel Gubernia has been
rejected by the Council of State. What a glaring light this
“trifle” sheds on the essence of our “renovated” system! What
a splendid lesson on the class roots of politics!  

The arguments of the opponents of the Zemstvo on the Council of State
are frank—there is no nobility there, you see. “Private” landownership
in the whole gubernia amounts to a mere 2,660 dessiatines, exclaimed
Mr. Stishinsky, the reporter in the Council of State.  

It follows that where there is no landed nobility, the “people” are
not mature enough even to deal with the repair of roads and the building of
hospitals. But if there are no landlords, they should be implanted,
directly or indirectly.  
 

Implanted from where? From central Russia, where they are numerous
enough. The landlords of the black-earth central region where the vestiges
of serfdom are freshest, where more is left of the corvée (labour
service) system than anywhere else, and where diehards like those in Kursk
Gubernia rule and reign and govern—those are the ones to rely on where
government and public affairs are concerned. In this sense, the attitude of
the Council of State to the question of a Zemstvo in Archangel Gubernia is
a most instructive and graphic lesson in our statehood.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Briand Cabinet









Lenin: The Briand Cabinet







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Briand Cabinet




Published:
Pravda No. 14, January 18, 1913.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 491-492.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The well-known renegade Briand, once an extreme
revolutionary and an advocate of the “general strike”, finds himself
again at the head of the French Ministry. Like John Burns in Britain, he
has betrayed the working class and sold himself to the bourgeoisie.  

The composition of his new Cabinet is of interest. It is dominated by
the trio of Jonnart, Etienne and Baudin. What sort of men are they?  

Take a look at the liberal papers, such as Rech No. 11.  You
will find there a most detailed account of where the Ministers were
educated and where they were employed.  You will find shameless advertising
and the desire to curry favour: Jonnart is said to be a friend of King
Edward, and Baudin, the nephew of a Communard!  

“Zhomini this, Zhomini that—and not a word about

vodka.”[1] Rech says nothing about the crux of the
matter. And the crux of the matter is very simple: this trio is a most
arrant and shameless band of financial sharks and swindlers. Etienne has
had a hand in all the dirty scandals involving millions, from Panama
onwards. He is an old hand at financial transactions in the colonies,
like the one concerning our own Bashkir lands. Jonnart took part in what
was a no less “clean” business—securing the rich iron ore deposits of
Ouenza, Africa, as a concession. His kith and kin sit on the boards of some
of the largest joint-stock companies. Baudin is a lieutenant of
capitalists, contractors and shipyard owners. The Naval Ministry is just
the place for him—it is so much closer to contracts and to deliveries for
the Navy!  
 

Marx’s statement that bourgeois governments are the lieutenants of the
capitalist
class[2] has nowhere been confirmed more clearly than in France. And
the great progress made by France is that the working class has torn off
all sham coverings, that it has made the unclear clear, and “cast off from
the chains the false flowers adorning them—not in order that mankind
might continue to bear these chains in their form, bare of all joy and all
delight, but in order that it might cast off the chains and reach for the
living

flower”.[3] 

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is quoting from D. Davydov’s poem, “The Song of an Old Hussar”.





[2]
This refers to the following statement of the Communist Manifesto:

“The executive of the modern state is but a committee for managing the
common affairs of the whole bourgeoisie.” (Marx and Engels, Selected
Works, Moscow, 1958, Vol. 1, p. 36.)





[3]
Lenin is quoting from Karl Marx’s Zur Kritik der Hegelschen
Rechtsphilosophie (K. Marx, F. Engels, Werke, Bd. 1. S. 379.
Berlin. Dietz Verlag, 1958).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Results of the Elections









Lenin: Results of the Elections








V. I.  

      Lenin
Results of the Elections




Written: Written in January 1913 

Published:

      Published in Prosveshcheniye No. 1, January 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the magazine text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 493-518.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents




I..


Manipulating the Elections
  493

II..


The New Duma
  495

III..


Changes Within the June Third System
  498

IV..


What Was the Issue in the Elections?
  502

V..


The Election Slogans Tested by Experience
  505

VI..


“End” of the Illusions About the Cadet Party
  510

VII..


Concerning an “Enormous Danger to the Landownership of the Nobility”
  513

VIII..


Covering Up the Defeat
  514

 
 
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Experience Teaches









Lenin: Experience Teaches







V. I.  

      Lenin
Experience Teaches




Published:
Pravda No. 15, January 19, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 519-521.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Anyone who is sincerely interested in the fortunes of the
emancipation movement in our country cannot fail to be interested primarily
in our working-class movement. The years of upswing, as well as
those of counter-revolution, showed beyond all doubt that the working class
is marching at the head of all the liberation forces and that
therefore the fortunes of the working-class movement are most closely
interwoven with those of the Russian social movement in general.  

Take the curve indicating the workers’ strike movement during
the past eight years! And try to draw a similar curve showing the growth
and decline of Russia’s entire emancipation movement in general during
these years. The two curves will coincide perfectly. There is a very close,
an inseparable connection between the emancipation movement as a whole, on
the one hand, and the working-class movement, on the other.  

Look closely at the data on the strike movement in Russia since 1905.






Year
Number of strikes
Number of strikers (thousands)




1905 
13,995
2,863


1906 
6,114
1,108


1907 
3,573
740


1908 
892
176


1909 
340
64


1910 
222
47


1911 
466
105


1912 
approximately 1,500,000, strikers (economic and
    political)



 

Surely these data show most clearly that the Russian workers’ strike
 movement is the best barometer of the entire nation-wide emancipation
 struggle in Russia.  

There were about three million strikers in the peak year (1905). In
1906 and 1907 the movement ebbed but continued at a very high level,
averaging one million strikers. Then it headed downwards and kept on
declining to 1910 inclusive: the year 1911 was the turning-point, for the
curve began to rise, even though timidly. The year 1912 saw a new major
upswing. The curve rose confidently and steadily to the 1906 level, making
plainly for the year when, at the figure of three million, it established a
world record.  

A new epoch has come. This is now beyond all question. The
beginning of 1913 is the best evidence of it. The mass of the
workers is advancing from individual partial issues to the point
where it will raise the general issue. The attention of the widest
masses is now centred on something more than particular defects in our
Russian life. It is now a question of the totality of these
defects, taken as a whole:
it is now a question of reform, not reforms.  

Experience teaches. The actual struggle is the best solver of the
problems which until recently were so debatable. Take a look now, after
1912, at, say, our disputes over the “petitioning campaign” and the
slogan “freedom of association”. What has experience shown?  

It turned out to be impossible to collect even a few tens of thousands
of workers’ signatures to a very moderate petition. On the other hand, it
is a fact that political strikes alone involved a million
people. The talk that one should not go beyond the slogan “freedom of
association”, because if one did the masses would allegedly not understand
us and would refuse to mobilise, turned out to be meaningless and idle talk
by people isolated from the realities of life. The living, real millions of
the masses, however, mobilised precisely in support of the broadest, the
old, uncurtailed formulas. It was only these formulas that fired the masses
with enthusiasm. It has now been shown convincingly enough who has actually
been advancing with the masses and who without or against them.  

A fresh, vigorous and mighty movement of the masses themselves is
sweeping aside as worthless rubbish the artificial

    

formulas hatched in government offices, and marches on and on.  

That is what constitutes the historic significance of the great
movement taking place under our own eyes.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## New Democrats









Lenin: New Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
New Democrats




Published:
Pravda No. 15, January 19, 1913.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 522-523.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In his “Motley Encounters” published in the New-Year issue of
Rech, Mr. Tan touched on an important question to which the
workers should pay serious attention. It is the question of the growing
numbers of new democrats.  


   “For about a year or perhaps more,” wrote Mr. Tan,
   “the river of life has been changing and shifting again. Instead of the
   water decreasing, there has been an increase, coming from God knows where,
   probably from the bowels of the earth and from distant springs. All was
   quiet and empty for three years. Now there are people appearing, crawling
   one after another out of various crevices and dark corners....  

   “People of peasant stock who have come up from below are
   the most interesting. Their name is legion. They have flooded the middle
   walks of life and are even aiming at the higher ones, especially in the
   provinces. Technicians, accountants, agronomists, teachers, all sorts of
   Zemstvo clerks. They are all alike—grey-faced, broad-boned,
   uncouth-looking; they are not liable to reflexes, and are, indeed, as tough
   as cats.... Life must have taken yet another step upwards, for we commoners
   compared with them are as the nobility were compared with us.”  


This is very apt and true, although we should not forget that the old
as well as the new commoners, those “of peasant stock”, the democratic
intelligentsia and semi-intelligentsia, represent the bourgeoisie as
distinct from the semi-feudal nobility.  

But the bourgeoisie consists of different strata having different
historical possibilities. The upper ranks of the bourgeoisie and of the
wealthy bourgeois intelligentsia—lawyers, professors, journalists,
deputies, etc.—almost invariably gravitate towards an alliance with the
Purishkeviches. Thousands of economic threads link this
bourgeoisie to them.  

On the other hand, the peasant bourgeoisie and the new intelligentsia
“of peasant stock” are linked by a thousand

    

threads to the mass of the disfranchised, downtrodden, ignorant,
starving peasantry, and by virtue of all their living conditions are
hostile to all Purishkevichism, to any alliance with it.  

This new democratic element, which is more numerous and stands closer
to the life of the millions, is rapidly learning, gaining strength and
growing. It is for the most part full of vague opposition sentiments and
feeds on liberal trash. One of the great and responsible tasks of the
politically-conscious workers is to help these democrats to get rid of the
influence of liberal prejudices. Only in so far as they over come these
prejudices, cast off the wretched burden of liberal illusions, break with
the liberals and hold out their hand to the workers are they, Russia’s new
democrats, destined to do something real for the cause of freedom.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On Narodism









Lenin: On Narodism







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Narodism




Published:
Pravda Nos. 16 and 17, January 20 and 22, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 524-528.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. A. V. P.[1] has contributed to Russkoye Bogatstvo No. 12 a
“leading” article on a “current” subject, headed “Socialism—Popular
or Proletarian?”  

The article is quite shallow and pointless in itself. It is quite a
long time since we encountered in the “leading” articles of a Narodnik
publication that considers itself important, such a meaningless set of
words, such a spate of evasive, bald phrases, or such a hotchpotch of
(eclectic) views.  

But the characteristic thing about the article is that it raises the
highly important and topical question of the disintegration of
Narodism. Narodism is the ideology of Russia’s peasant democrats. That is
why every class-conscious worker should carefully watch the changes this
ideology is undergoing.  
I

Narodism is very old. It is considered to have been founded by Herzen
and Chernyshevsky. Effective Narodism reached its peak when, in the
seventies, revolutionaries began to “go among the people” (the
peasantry). The Narodniks’ economic theory was developed in its more
integral form by V. V. (Vorontsov) and
Nikolai —on,[2] in the eighties of the last century. In the early
twentieth century, the views of the Left Narodniks were expressed in the
most definite form by the Socialist-Revolutionaries.  

The revolution of 1905, which showed all the social forces of
Russia in an open, mass action of the classes, made a general test of
Narodism and defined its place. The only real

    

content and social significance of Narodism is peasant democracy.  

The Russian liberal bourgeoisie is compelled, by virtue of its economic
position, to strive not for the abolition, but for the
division of the privileges of Purishkevich and Co. between the
feudal landlords and the capitalists. On the other hand, the bourgeois
democrats in Russia—the peas ants—are compelled to strive for the
abolition of all these privileges.  

For the Narodniks, phrases about “socialism”, “socialisation of the
land”, equalised tenure, and so on, are mere words covering up the fact
that the peasants are striving for complete equality in politics and for
the complete abolition of feudal landownership.  

The revolution of 1905 finally revealed this social essence of
Narodism, this class nature of it. The movement of the masses—in the form
of the peasant unions of 1905, the local peasant struggles in 1905 and
1906, and the elections to the first two Dumas (the formation of
“Trudovik” groups)—all these great social facts, which showed us
millions of peasants in action, swept aside Narodnik, professedly
socialist, phrase mongering like so much dust and revealed the core: a
peasant (bourgeois) democratic movement with an immense, still unexhausted
store of energy.  

Those whom the experience of the greatest epoch in new,
modern, Russia has not taught to distinguish between the real content of
Narodism and its verbal trappings are hope less and cannot be taken
seriously, they may be writers playing with words (like A. V. P. of
Russkoye Bogatstvo), but not politicians.  

In our next article we shall look more closely at the disintegration of
Narodism and at that writer.  
II

The experience of 1905 is vastly important precisely because it
compelled the testing of Narodnik theories by the
movement of the masses. And that test at once brought about the
decay of Narodism and the collapse of Narodnik theories.  
 

At the very first congress of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, in
December 1905, the Popular Socialists began to break away from them, and
they had seceded completely by the autumn of 1906.  

Those Popular Socialists forestalled our liquidators. They chanted in
exactly the same way about an “open party”, and in the same way they
abolished the slogans of consistent democracy and made renegade speeches
(see, for example, Mr. Peshekhonov’s articles in Russkoye
Bogatstvo No. 8, 1906). Those were peasant Cadets, and the Second Duma
(which was not boycotted by the Narodniks, nor even by the
Socialist-Revolutionaries) proved that the majority of the peasant
deputies followed the opportunists of Russkoye Bogatstvo, with the
minority following the Socialist-Revolutionaries. The Second Duma finally
confirmed what was evident already from the Narodnik newspapers of the
“days of freedom” (autumn 1905 and spring 1906), namely, that the
Socialist-Revolutionaries could be nothing but the Left wing of Russia’s
peasant democrats and that outside it they were nothing.  

The disintegration of Narodism is bearing this out more and more
clearly. While the counter-revolution was ram pant, this disintegration
progressed rapidly: the Left Narodniks “recalled” themselves from the
ranks of the Duma Trudoviks. The old party was virtually liquidated but no
new one was founded. Renegacy (which went as far as Ropshin’s disgraceful
writings “The Pale Horse” and “That Which Was Not”) obtained a wide
path for itself even to the “Left” Narodniks. Some of them (the
Pochin group) are abandoning the boycott. Others gravitate towards
Marxism (N. Sukhanov, for example, although he is still exceedingly
muddled). Still others gravitate towards anarchism. All in all, the
break-up is far greater than among the Social-Democrats, for while there
are official centres, there is no clear, consistent, principled
line capable of combating decadence.  

And now Mr. A. V. P. presents us with an example of this ideological
decadence. Once the Narodniks had a theory of their own. What is left now
is nothing but “reservations” on Marxism picked up at random. Any
unprincipled feuilleton-writer for a glib bourgeois sheet could subscribe
to Mr.

    

A. V. P.’s article in defence of “popular” socialism without risking
anything, without committing himself in any way, and without professing
anything. For “popular” socialism is a meaningless phrase serving to
evade the question of which class or social stratum is
fighting for socialism throughout the world.  

It suffices to quote two specimens of Mr. A. V. P.’s twaddle.  


   “It appears,” he wrote, “that the party which has made
   the doctrine of proletarian socialism its own is in reality prepared to
   develop its forces also at the expense of other, ‘semi-proletarian’, or
   even ‘bourgeois’, strata.”  


An objection fit for a fourth-year schoolboy, isn’t it? Both
semi-proletarians and bourgeois are to be found in the socialist parties of
the Whole world, so what follows? It follows,
Mr. A. V. P. concludes, that one may side-step the fact that only
the proletariat all over the world
(1) wages a sustained struggle against the capitalist class and
(2) provides a mass support for the Social-Democratic parties.


Another example: 


   “Take the students,” wrote the glib Mr. A. V. P. “Why,
   they are the most genuine bourgeoisie, and yet the socialists among
   them—I cannot say how it is now—until recently were almost a
   majority.”  


Now isn’t that inimitable? Isn’t that an argument worthy of a
naïve Socialist-Revolutionary schoolgirl? He does not notice, after
1905–07, how tens of millions of peasants and millions of workers took
sides in the arena of all political actions, while attaching importance
(as if it were an argument against “proletarian socialism”!) to
the fact that the liberal and democratic student youth in Russia
sympathises with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Social-Democrats! Look
here, Mr. A. V. P., have a sense of proportion!  

Class-conscious workers must follow a straightforward and clear policy
with regard to the Narodniks. They must ruthlessly ridicule would-be
socialist phrases and not allow the only serious question, that of
consistent democracy, to be hidden behind them.  

“Popular” socialism, equalised tenure, socialisation of the land,
co-operation, the labour principle? All that is not even worth
refuting. Experience and the revolution have long

    

since swept it altogether out of the sphere of serious political
issues. You are merely hiding the serious question, that of
democracy, behind that sort of twaddle. You must say clearly and
plainly whether you are loyal to the slogans of consistent
democracy. Are you willing and able to transform these slogans into
regular work among the masses of a clearly specified
social stratum? If so, the worker democrat will be your ally and friend
against all enemies of democracy. If not, go away, you are just a twaddler.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
A. V. P.—pseudonym of A. V. Peshekhonov, one of the leaders
of the Popular Socialist Party.





[2]
Nikolai–on –pseudonym of N. F. Danielson, an ideologist of
the liberal Narodism of the 1880s and 1890s.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## To the Social-Democrats









Lenin: To the Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
To the Social-Democrats[1]




Written: Written on January 22 (February 4), 1913 

Published:

      Hectographed in leaflet form in Cracow, late January, 1913.

      Published according to the leaflet text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 529-531.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We reprint in full the leading article of the latest issue
of the St. Petersburg newspaper Luch (January 19, 1913,
No. 15–101): 


   “THE MASS OF THE WORKERS AND THE
   UNDERGROUND 

   “The authorities have again refused to register the
   metalworkers’ union. Despite all the concessions which the workers were
   willing to make, the department found every single clause unacceptable. It
   makes no difference whether the force operating here was the association of
   factory-owners, which insisted, as the newspapers once reported, that the
   metalworkers should not be allowed to set up a new trade union, or whether
   the department itself decided to prevent the rise of such a union. The most
   progressive and most cultured section of the St. Petersburg workers is
   being deprived even of the miser able right they enjoyed under the
   provisional regulations on unions and associations!  How much energy has
   been spent, how many lives have been lost in the struggle to win this bit
   of a right, which is now reduced to nought with a wave of the hand!  

   “Strangest of all is the fact that the wide mass of the
   workers do not at all react to this disfranchisement. Indeed, as a result
   of the latest persecution of legal organisations, sympathy for the
   ‘underground’ is reviving and growing here and there among the workers. We
   are far from shutting our eyes to this fact, which we find deplorable. But
   not being accustomed to worship spontaneity, we are trying to realise the
   meaning of this fact.  

   “The present talk about the ‘underground’ is largely
   reminiscent of the old disputes—now thoroughly forgotten, it
   seems—about terrorism. Terrorism, too, was ‘worshipped’ by many who
   wanted to mask their own worthlessness. It is well, they seemed to say,
   that there exist heroes; as for us, we’ll trail somehow behind them. The
   same thing is happening now. We are too lazy to think, to seek new paths,
   and we are waiting for the underground to decide for us, and then we shall
   act at other people’s risk. If we succeed, well and good, and if not, we
   shall know who is to blame.  

   “It is exactly this psychology—which, we admit, is
   rooted in our present political situation and is sufficiently explained by
   the heavy sacrifices already made for the sake of an open movement—

    

   this psychology of irresponsibility, of a subconscious desire to prove
   one’s absence in the event of failure, that inspires certain sections of
   the mass of the workers with a resurgent respect for the underground. We
   say respect for the underground, not flight into it, be cause it is always
   single individuals alone who have actually been underground—the masses
   have nothing to do underground—and those individuals, who are accountable
   to no one, have had command over mass actions.  

   “But, it is said, ‘legal opportunities’ have all been
   exhausted, resulting in an almost complete destruction of the legal
   organisations. And it is this that is wrong, to say that all
   opportunities have been exhausted. Actually, the main opportunity,
   without which any victory of the working class is unthinkable, has been
   used very little so far. We have spoken of the masses’ methodical
   participation in upholding their organisations. What has been done so far
   has been done neither methodically enough nor with the
   masses participating in sufficient measure. Thousands of
   signatures put to a petition for freedom of association are nothing
   compared with the hundreds of thousands of factory workers. The dozens and
   rarely hundreds of members of our trade union, educational and various
   other associations are but a drop in the bucket compared with the huge
   numbers of workers engaged in a given trade, living in a given district,
   and so on. And the fact is that those who take a real interest in unions
   and work in them are still fewer.  

   “The masses, who assign the pick of the working-class
   intelligentsia the most dangerous posts in legal organisations, readily
   give up, and are willing to abandon the cause itself, when those foremost
   champions have been snatched out of their ranks. Herein lies the root of
   the weakness of the working-class movement today, and it is here that there
   is a virgin field for stubborn and persevering Social Democratic work.”
   



It would be hard to imagine a more complete, more exact and more
eloquent document shedding light on the vexed questions of our
Social-Democratic Party than this article. The leading article in
Luch No. 101 with remarkable accuracy summed up all the hundred
issues of Luch and all the five years’ propaganda of the
liquidators, P. B. Axelrod, F. Dan, V. Yezhov, Levitsky, Potresov, Martov,
Martynov and others.  

To comment on this leader in detail, one would have to write a whole
volume repeating what Marxists of all trends have said against the
liquidators in the press during 1909–12.  

Let us only point out certain things. Sympathy for the underground is
reviving and growing among the mass of the workers, and respect for it is
resurgent. He who considers this fact deplorable is a liberal and not a
Social-Democrat, a counter-revolutionary and not a democrat.

    

Comparing the underground with terrorism is an unheard-of affront to
revolutionary work among the masses. Only the underground poses and solves
problems of the growing revolution, directing revolutionary
Social-Democratic work and attracting the mass of the workers precisely by
this work.  

The underground has been and is today drawn from the finest and most
class-conscious of the foremost workers, those dearest to the masses. The
link between the underground and the masses now can be, and often is, even
broader and closer than before, chiefly owing to the greater
class-consciousness of the masses, and in part also to “legal
opportunities”. The talk of an open party is stupid and base, but as far
as our Social-Democratic Party nuclei are concerned, “legal
opportunities” for their work among the masses have by no means been
exhausted, and cannot be “exhausted”.  

Is it possible that the leading article in Luch No. 101 will
not rouse the ire of all Social-Democrats? Will there be even a
single “trend” among the Social-Democrats tolerant of such propaganda?


Can this summarising leading article fail to assist in settling the
vexed question of the unity of the Social-Democratic
Party?  

The diplomats of liquidationism have been completely exposed in
Luch No. 101. They stand unmasked. From now on, only hypocrites
can talk about unity with the liquidationist group of Luch and
Nasha Zarya.  

It is time those Social-Democrats who so far have wavered for various
reasons, who have given no explicit answer to the question under
discussion, who have in an evasive form permitted “agreement” with
Luch and sought to cloak their solidarity with Luch by
talk about “unity”—it is high time they stopped wavering and spoke out
plainly.  

Unity with Luch is impossible, while unity against
Luch is perfectly possible and urgently necessary. For the point at
issue is unity of the “underground”, of the illegal
Social-Democratic Party, the R.S.D.L.P., and of its revolutionary work
among the masses.  

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The article “To the Social-Democrats”, intended only for
Party members, was published in Cracow as a hectographed leaflet.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In the World of the Azefs









Lenin: In the World of the Azefs







V. I.  

      Lenin
In the World of the Azefs[1]




Published:
Pravda No. 20, January 25, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 532-533.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The nationalist press raised a terrible clamour over the
Alyokhin “incident”. What! The Austrians had insulted Russia by arresting
an innocent Russian engineer on a charge of espionage and by outraging the
arrested man! There were endless “patriotic” sallies against Austria.


And now the whole background has come to light—the simple, old,
long-familiar background of the affair. Mr. Alyokhin was a victim of
Weissmann, an Austrian police agent, who had been shadowing Russian spies
in Austria for 2,000 kronen (800 rubles) a month.  

The Russian engineer, who knows no German and is evidently a
semi-savage as well, na\"ively fell for the bait of the agent
provocateur, who showed him round the arsenals.  

Novoye Vremya and our other papers of a Black-Hundred and
government trend defend Russian Azefs with all their might. But
when an Azef turned out to be in the Austrian service, those
well-intentioned Russian patriots were fired with “righteous”
indignation.  

But it turned out, in addition, that Weissmann is a former
Russian spy and agent provocateur. The career of this
Weissmann is most instructive.  

His father kept a brothel. The son, after this sort of schooling,
became a Russian spy in Vienna, Austria, where he also spied on Russian
political exiles. Thus, from 1901 to 1905, Weissmann was in the service of
the Russian police, being simultaneously a military and a political spy.


Subsequently Weissmann fell out with the Russian police and passed into
the service of the Austrian police.  
 

All very simple.  

Poor Alyokhin was the victim of a former Russian spy.  Now how can the
servile Russian newspapers help being indignant at this “treachery” on
the part of Austria?  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Azef, Y. F. (1869-1918)—-one of the founders of the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party, became a secret police agent in 1892. He
made preparations for and carried out several acts of terrorism to win the
confidence of the S. R. leadership. On the other hand, he betrayed members
of the S. R. Party to the police. He was exposed in 1908.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Bourgeoisie and Reformism









Lenin: The Bourgeoisie and Reformism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Bourgeoisie and Reformism




Published:
Pravda No. 23, January 29, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 534-535.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The arguments of Rech concerning the urgent issue
of strikes deserve the greatest attention on the part of the workers.  

That liberal paper cited the following official data on the strike
movement: 





Year
Strikes
Workers (thousand)




1905 
13,995
2,863


1906 
6,114
1,108


1907 
3,573
740


1908 
892
176


1909 
340
64


1910 
222
47


1911 
466
105


1912 
1,918
683




We would note in passing that the figures for 1912 are plainly
understated, since the number of political strikers is given as only
511,000. Actually their number was about twice as great. We would, also
recall that as late as May 1912 Rech denied the political
character of our working-class movement, asserting that the whole movement
was only economic. But we intend to deal now with another aspect of the
matter.  

How does our liberal bourgeoisie assess this fact?  


   “The main requirements of the political consciousness
   [why only consciousness??] of Russian citizens have yet to be
   met,” wrote Rech.  

   “The working class everywhere is the most mobile and
   most sensitive section of the urban democrats ... the most active section
   of the people.... Given constitutional conditions ... given a normal
   political situation ... there would not have been the loss of tens of
   thousands of working days [because of the Putilov strike] in an industry
   which today is of extreme importance in view of external complications”
   (No. 19).  

 

The point of view of the bourgeoisie is clear. “We” want an
imperialist policy, the conquest of foreign territory. “We” are
handicapped by strikes. “We” lose surplus value because of the “lost”
working days. “We” want to exploit the workers as “normally” as they do
it in Europe.  

Splendid, liberal gentlemen! Your desire is legitimate, and we are
willing to support your effort if—if it is not futile and dead!  

Rech continued: “It was not out of sympathy for liberties
that Prussian statesmen [it ought to have said “Prussian landlords”]
granted ‘the legalisation of the Social-Democratic Party’. Reforms
bear proper fruit when granted in good time.”  

Such is the consummate reformism of our bourgeoisie. It confines itself
to wistful sighs; it wants to persuade the Purishkeviches without hurting
their feelings, to make peace with them without removing them. It should be
clear to any intelligent person that by virtue of its objective
meaning (that is, regardless of the good intentions of individual little
groups), the slogan of “legalisation of the Social-Democratic Party” is
an inseparable component of this wretched and impotent bourgeois reformism.


We would make only one remark. Bismarck succeeded in his reforms only
because he went further than reformism. As we know, he carried out a series
of “revolutions from above”; he robbed one of the world’s richest
countries of five thousand million francs, and he was in a
position to give universal suffrage and genuine legality to a people
intoxicated with a stream of gold and unprecedented military successes.


Do you imagine, liberal gentlemen, that something of the kind could
happen in Russia?? Why, then, did you declare reforms in Russia to be
hopeless even in the case of the Archangel Zemstvo (a “reform”,
indeed!)??  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Apropos of the Open Party









Lenin: Apropos of the Open Party







V. I.  

      Lenin
Apropos of the Open Party




Published:
Pravda No. 24, January 30, 1913.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 536-538.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Luch, a newspaper which succeeds in making the more
“clamour” among circles of the intelligentsia the less the workers read
it, continues its advocacy of an open workers’ party with
a zeal worthy of a better cause.  

In the New-Year leading article of the paper we read an old untruth,
namely, that the year 1912 “put forward, as its current slogan and as the
militant banner of the Russia of the workers, the struggle for freedom of
association and the struggle for the open existence of the
Social-Democratic Labour Party”.  

Anyone who really came into contact with the workers’ mass movement in
1912 and carefully observed its political character knows very well that
the liquidators of Luch are telling an untruth. What the workers
did put forward as their current slogan and militant banner was
something else. This was particularly evident, for example, in
May, when the foremost workers of different trends (even with a Narodnik
minority participating along with the Social-Democratic majority)
themselves put forward a different slogan and unfurled a
different “militant banner”.  

The intellectuals of Luch know that, but they are trying to
impose their want of faith, their narrow understanding
and their opportunism on the workers. A familiar picture with
nothing new about it! In Russia, however, the authors of this distortion
are able to put it forward all the more easily because it has the monopoly
of “open” expression in certain fields.  

For all that, the untruth of Luch remains an untruth. And it
becomes worse when Luch continues: 
 


   “It is this slogan that will form the pivot of the
   political mobilisation of the mass of the workers in 1913....”  


In other words, in defiance of the mass of the workers, who
have already advanced a different slogan, the intellectuals of
Luch are going to dock and curtail it! You are free to do that,
gentlemen, but what you are promoting is a liberal and not a
Social-Democratic cause.  

Let the reader recall the recent controversy between Luch and
Pravda over an open party. Why is it that even the Cadets were
unable to found an open party?—Pravda

asked.[1]

And F. D., writing in Luch, replied: 


   “The Cadets recognised that their desire was utopian”
   when they failed to get their Rules approved; as for the liquidators, they
   carried an “stubborn methodical work, winning one position after another”
   (see Luch No. 73).  


You see: F. D. evaded giving a reply! The Cadets, too, carried on
stubborn work and they, too, were “winning positions” in legal
publications and legal unions. But even the Cadets have no open
party.  

Why, then, do the Cadets continue to dream and talk of an open party?
Because they are the party of the counter revolutionary liberal
bourgeoisie, which is willing to make peace with the
Purishkeviches for certain little concessions to the liberals, for the
little concession of a “peaceful” open Cadet party.  

That is the objective significance—which does not depend on good
wishes and fine words—of the talk about an open party under the June
Third regime. This talk is a repudiation of consistent democracy,
and an advocacy of peace with the Purishkeviches.  

It is unimportant what aims the liquidators pursue by their
advocacy of an open party, or what their intentions and expectations
are. That is a subjective question; it is well known that the road to hell
is paved with “good” intentions. What is important is the objective
significance of the advocacy of an open workers’ party under the June Third
regime, with a non-open liberal party, etc.  
 

This objective significance of the liquidators’ talk about an open
party is a repudiation of the popular and fundamental conditions and
demands of democracy.  

That is why every politically-conscious worker reacts adversely to the
liquidators’ propaganda, for the issue of an open party” is a
fundamental question, one that concerns the very
existence of the working-class Party. It is the very existence of a
genuine workers’ party that is being radically undermined by liquidationist
propaganda.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 432–34 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Mobilisation of Peasant Lands









Lenin: Mobilisation of Peasant Lands







V. I.  

      Lenin
Mobilisation of Peasant Lands




Published:
Pravda No. 26, February 1, 1913.

      Signed: T..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 539-540.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mobilisation of land is the transfer of landownership from
one person to another. With regard to our peasants, both our legislation
and our “public” opinion (even liberal opinion, as expressed by the
Cadets) still maintain the feudal view that mobilisation of
peasant lands is harmful and should be prohibited or restricted.  

From the democratic point of view, the very assumption that
peasants—adult persons and full-fledged citizens—may be prohibited from
or impeded in selling their land is a most shameless affront to the
peasantry. Only in a country like Russia, where all government officials
and the bulk of the liberals still cling to the old, feudal view of the
“muzhik” as being slow-witted, underprivileged and requiring tutelage,
can this attitude to mobilisation persist.  

From the economic point of view, the harm caused by all prohibition and
restriction of mobilisation is enormous. Given living conditions that are
at all tolerable, the peasant will never sell his land. On the
other hand, when want or other conditions (resettlement, death of the
breadwinner, and so on) compel a peasant to sell his land, no
law can stop him. The law will always be bypassed, and bans
will merely worsen the terms of sale of the land.  

In the January issue of Russkaya Mysl, the mouthpiece of the
extreme Right-wing Cadets, a cross-breed of liberals and Black Hundreds, a
certain Prince V. Obolensky, who apparently shares the usual Black-Hundred
and liberal view on mobilisation, was compelled to cite facts
proving the stupidity and harm of all restrictions on it. Non-peasants are
prohibited from buying allotments. So they register as peasants! Or a
person is prohibited from buying more than

    

six per capita allotments. So he signs fictitious, fraudulent deeds in the
name of his relatives, and so on! Or he is prohibited from mortgaging
allotment land. This makes speculative deals all the easier and the
purchase of land by middle peasants all the more difficult!  

Only feudal-minded people and hypocrites can expect restrictions on
mobilisation to “relieve” the peasantry. As far as the
politically-conscious peasants are concerned, they seek an entirely
different solution.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Word About Strikes









Lenin: A Word About Strikes







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Word About Strikes




Published:
Pravda No. 27, February 2, 1913.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 541-542.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Luch has carried a number of articles against mass
strikes. It is obvious that we cannot reply to Luch here in the
way it deserves.  

We shall limit ourselves to a few purely theoretical comments on the
nature of the arguments of Luch. Those who write for
Luch and who diligently cite examples from Western countries,
repeating the catchword “anarcho-syndicalism” and so on in a thousand
variations, thereby betray their complete incomprehension of the historical
peculiarity of the strikes in Russia in 1912.  

Nowhere in Europe have strikes in the twentieth century had, and
nowhere do they have or can they have, such importance as in the Russia of
the period we are passing through. Why?  

For the simple reason that while the period of radical democratic
changes has long been absolutely over through out Europe, in Russia it is
just such changes that are on the order of the day—in the historical
sense of the phrase.  

Hence the nation-wide character of the economic, and still more of the
non-economic, strikes in Russia. Strikes in Europe, where they herald
entirely different changes, do not possess such a nation-wide
character (from the stand point of democratic changes in the
country). Moreover, the relation between the strikes in Russia and the
position of the agricultural small producers (peasants) is quite unlike
what it is in the Western countries.  

Putting all this together, we shall see that the arguments of
Luch leave out of account precisely the national, democratic
significance of the economic and non-economic strikes in the Russia of
1912. The most important and historically

    

distinctive feature of our strikes is the fact that the proletariat comes
forward as the leader despite the anti-democratic sentiments of
the liberals. And it is just this that the Luch writers do not
understand, and cannot understand from their liquidationist standpoint.


Of course, the point is not at all to appraise the advisability of any
particular strike. It is not at all that the most methodical preparations
are necessary and sometimes even the replacement of a strike by an action
of the same kind. The point is the liquidators’ general
incomprehension of this particular significance of strikes in
general which makes the slogan of “freedom of association” or of an
“open party” unsuitable, out of keeping with the existing situation.


What the liquidators see as a disadvantage is the entire character of
the movement and not particular cases, while the Marxists and all
class-conscious workers see it as an advantage. That is why the workers
have been incensed, and continue to be incensed, by Luch’s
propaganda.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Russians and Negroes









Lenin: Russians and Negroes







V. I.  

      Lenin
Russians and Negroes




Written: Written late January–early February 1913 

Published:

      First published in Krasnaya Niva No. 3, 1925.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 543-544.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

What a strange comparison, the reader may think. How can a
race be compared with a nation?  

It is a permissible comparison. The Negroes were the last to be freed
from slavery, and they still bear, more than anyone else, the cruel marks
of slavery—even in advanced countries—for capitalism has no “room”
for other than legal emancipation, and even the latter it curtails in every
possible way.  

With regard to the Russians, history has it that they were “almost”
freed from serf bondage in 1861. It was about the same time,
following the civil war against the American slaveowners, that North
America’s Negroes were freed from slavery, 

The emancipation of the American slaves took place in a less
“reformative” manner than that of the Russian slaves.  

That is why today, half a century later, the Russians still
show many more traces of slavery than the Negroes. Indeed, it
would be more accurate to speak of institutions and not merely of
traces. But in this short article we shall limit ourselves to a little
illustration of what we have said, namely, the question of literacy. It is
known that illiteracy is one of the marks of slavery. In a country
oppressed by pashas, Purishkeviches and their like, the majority of the
population cannot be literate.  

In Russia there are 73 per cent of illiterates, exclusive of
children under nine years of age.  

Among the U.S. Negroes, there were (in 1900) 44.5 per cent of
illiterates.  

Such a scandalously high percentage of illiterates is a disgrace to a
civilised, advanced country like the North

    

American Republic. Furthermore, everyone knows that the position of the
Negroes in America in general is one unworthy of a civilised
country—capitalism cannot give either complete
emancipation or even complete equality.  

It is instructive that among the whites in America the proportion of
illiterates is not more than 6 per cent. But if we divide America into what
were formerly slave-holding areas (an American “Russia”) and
non-slave-holding areas (an American non-Russia), we shall find 11–12
per cent of illiterates among the whites in the former and 4–6
per cent in the latter areas!  

The proportion of illiterates among the whites is twice as
high in the former slave-holding areas. It is not only the Negroes
that show traces of slavery!  

Shame on America for the plight of the Negroes!  
 

Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Discovery









Lenin: A Discovery







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Discovery




Published:
Pravda No. 29, February 5, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 545-546.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Bourgeois society lives and subsists exclusively by the
wage labour of the millions. Failing this, neither the in comes of the
landlords, nor the profits of the capitalists, nor yet the various
derivative” sources of a life of plenty, such as royalties, salaries,
etc., would be possible. And the force which drives the millions into the
ranks of wage labourers is hunger.  

This is an old, universally known, hackneyed fact. The bourgeois public
gets used to it and “does not notice” it. But from time to time glaring
cases of want and poverty side by side with luxury compel “discoveries”
to be made, particularly if the health and well-being of the bourgeois
gentlemen are endangered! Once in a while they “discover”, in every big
city and any rural backwoods, appalling, abominable squalor, want and
neglect unworthy of human beings. They “discover” them, inform the public
through the “big” newspapers, comment on the fact for a day or two, and
then forget it. The sated do not understand the hungry, 

Recently in St. Petersburg a Dr. Kozlovsky, who inspected 251 lodging
rooms in Rozhdestvensky District, acquainted the public with a
“discovery” of this kind.  


   “Dark, damp rooms, suffocating air, squalor, people
   sleeping on trunks or on the floor, horrible overcrowding (3,578 tenants in
   251 lodging rooms), crushed bugs on the walls—an appalling picture”
   (Novoye Vremya, No. 13236).  


The public health society which heard the report resolved to study the
problem, to make representations ... to ask for an investigation—i.e., it
did all it could.  
 

A few figures from St. Petersburg statistics for 1911. The Special
Department for the Investigation and Accommodation of Paupers had 16,960
paupers entrusted to its care. Of these, 1,761 were handed over to the
courts—next time they will know better than to disturb clean
people!—1,371 were sent back to their native parts (the countryside is
“accustomed” to having paupers on its hands). 1,892 remained to be cared
for in the institutions of the Department, and 9,694 were
released.  

People did work hard in the Department, after all—they
“investigated”; they do not get their salaries for nothing.  

The same year 1911 saw 43,156 unskilled workers apply for employment to
the city labour exchange (beyond Moskovskaya Zastava). Work was found for
6,076 men.  

The “released” (those freed from “care “in the case of the paupers
and from jobs in the case of unskilled labour) spend the night in the
street, in doss-houses, in lodging rooms.... They are material for
discoveries.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The British Labour Party Conference









Lenin: The British Labour Party Conference







V. I.  

      Lenin
The British Labour Party Conference




Published:
Pravda No. 30, February 6, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 547-548.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Thirteenth Conference of the British Labour Party was held in
London from January 29 to 31 (new style). It was attended by 500 delegates.


The Conference passed a resolution against war, and by a considerable
majority passed another resolution calling on the Party’s representatives
in Parliament to vote against any electoral reform Bill that does not
extend the franchise to women.  

The British Labour Party, which exists side by side with the
opportunist Independent Labour Party and the Social-Democratic British
Socialist Party, is something in the nature of a broad labour
party. It is a compromise between a socialist party and non-socialist
trade unions.  

This compromise resulted from the peculiarities of British history and
the segregation of the labour aristocracy in non-socialist,
liberal trade unions. These unions have begun to turn towards socialism,
and this gives rise to a host of intermediate, confused situations.  

On Party discipline, for example, a resolution was adopted threatening
expulsion from the Party for violation of the decisions of the Party or of
the Parliamentary group.  

Disputes arose that would be impossible in any other country—as to
whether this resolution is directed against the Liberals or against the
Socialists?  

The fact is that out of forty Labour M.P.s, 27 are
non-Socialists!! In opposing the resolution, the Socialist Will
Thorne said they wanted to tie the hands of the thirteen
Socialists by subordinating them to the non-Socialists.  Even
Bruce Glasier, of the I.L.P., while supporting the

    

resolution, admitted that there are about hail a dozen Labour
M.P.s whose place is among the Conservatives.  

The resolution was carried.  

A resolution that not only the posters of the opportunist Daily
Herald[1] be displayed in Party premises was defeated by 643,000
votes to 398,000. The voting here is calculated according to the number of
members which each delegation represents.  

The majority at the Conference consisted of non-Socialists and
extremely bad Socialists. But definite voices were heard indicating that
the mass of the workers are dissatisfied with such a party and they demand
that their M.P.s should do less playing at legislation and more socialist
propaganda.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
A line seems to be missing in this passage in Pravda. The
draft resolution analysed by Lenin proposed hanging up posters of The
Daily Herald as well as of The Daily Citizen, which was in
the hands of opportunists, on the premises occupied by Party organisations.


The Daily Herald was founded in April 1912 by George Lansbury
as a Left-wing Labour newspaper. In 1922 it became the organ of the British
Labour Party.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Constitutional Illusions Shattered









Lenin: Constitutional Illusions Shattered







V. I.  

      Lenin
Constitutional Illusions Shattered




Written: Written late January-early February 1913 

Published:

      Published for the first time.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 549-550.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“We have a constitution, thank God!” exclaimed
Mr. Milyukov after June 3, 1907. The leader of the liberal bourgeoisie
sought comfort in amusing assertions of this kind, while concealing its
distrust of the people and its reluctance, its fear, to depart from the
“constitutional” path.  

Most characteristically, it is just now, when the same Mr. Milyukov or
his prim, official-minded liberal Rech acknowledges the
“beginning of a social upswing” (No. 26), that the collapse of these
constitutional illusions is becoming obvious. Underlying these illusions is
the desire to dismiss an unpleasant reality (and the unpleasant necessity
of taking a path that does not resemble the “constitutional” one), the
desire to lull oneself and others with “constitutional” catchwords.  

And now look what the liberals have to say of the present situation!



   “It is dull in the Duma because there is no struggle
   going on” (No. 25).  


Well, gentlemen, it was you who said we had a constitution!  


   “All the words have been spoken. What is needed now is
   deeds, but there is no faith in them. Hence the apathy” (ibid.).
   


You lulled yourselves with faith in words, which you addressed
chiefly to the Octobrists. Now you admit that

    

you spoke those words to cover up lack of faith in deeds.  You
have condemned yourselves, liberal gentlemen.  Democrats in general, and
workers in particular, have had no faith in words (about the

   constitution)—[1]

 
Notes
 

[1]
Part of the MS. has been lost.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Thank You for Your Frankness









Lenin: Thank You for Your Frankness







V. I.  

      Lenin
Thank You for Your Frankness




Published:
Pravda No. 35, February 12, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 551-552.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We wish to thank the Black-Hundred Novoye Vremya
for publishing a frank statement by Kobylinsky, leader of the Rights on the
Council of State. We also wish to thank the “leader” himself.  


   “Every now and again,” Mr. Kobylinsky exclaimed,
   “members of the Duma betray ignorance and inability to legislate
   ... Only shopkeepers draft laws like that....  

   “We have been attacked for rejecting the Bill to
   introduce the Zemstvo in Archangel Gubernia.... The Duma did not stop for a
   moment to think that awing to the absence of cultured elements and the
   sparse population in Archangel Gubernia, people there would have to elect,
   as a wit put it, a muzhik, a reindeer and a bear to the Zemstvo
   council....  

   “Be that as it may, we shall not allow the
   establishment of a muzhik Zemstvo, as the Third Duma envisaged
   it.”  


Well, how can we help thanking the leader of the Rights on the Council
of State, i.e., the leader of the Council of State, for being so frank?


We wholeheartedly recommend to the reader this clear and truthful
argument for the Council of State instead of the hackneyed,
non-committal liberal phrases against the Council of State.  

Shopkeepers in the Duma ... muzhiks and bears in the Zemstvo ... we
shall admit no shopkeepers or muzhiks. There you have the plain language of
a feudal-minded landlord.  

And mind you, he is right, is this feudal lord, in saying that there is
no majority in the Duma without the “shopkeepers”, i.e., without
the bourgeoisie, to use the language of a class-conscious worker
(and not of a wild
landlord[1]). He is right, is this feudal lord, in saying that
self-government would in fact be peasant self-government (the
class-conscious

    

workers prefer the term peasant to muzhik,
which is current among wild landlords). The peasants are a majority.  

The Council of State is by no means an accidental political institution
but a class organ—this is what Kobylinsky’s truthful speech
implies. The class in question is that of the big landlords. They will
admit no “shopkeepers or muzhiks”.  

Really, Russian liberal “shopkeepers”, and Octobrist and Cadet
gentlemen, you must learn from Kobylinsky how to pose political questions
seriously!  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The wild landlord, a character in M. Saltykov-Shchedrin’s
fairy-tale of the same name.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Question of Unity









Lenin: The Question of Unity







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Question of Unity




Published:
Pravda No. 39, February 16, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 553-554.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The letter which Shagov, the Kostroma workers’ deputy, wrote to
Pravda (No. 22–226) indicated very clearly the terms on which the
workers think Social-Democratic unity feasible. Letters from a number of
other deputies for the worker curia (Pravda Nos. 21–28) confirmed
this view. The workers themselves must bring about unity “from below”.
The liquidators should not fight the underground but should form part of
it.  

It is amazing that after the question has been posed so clearly and
squarely we come across Trotsky’s old, pompous but perfectly meaningless
phrases in Luch No. 27 (113).  Not a word on the
substance of the matter! Not the slightest attempt to cite precise
facts and analyse them thoroughly!  Not a hint of the real
terms of unity! Empty exclamations, high-flown words, and haughty
sallies against opponents whom the author does not name, and impressively
important assurances—that is Trotsky’s total stock-in-trade.  

That won’t do, gentlemen. You speak “to the workers” as though
they were children, now trying to scare them with terrible words
(“the shackles of the circle method”, “monstrous polemics”, “the
feudal-serf-owning period of our Party history”), now “coaxing” them, as
one coaxes small children, without either convincing them or explaining
matters to them.  

The workers will not be intimidated or coaxed. They themselves
will compare Luch and Pravda; they will read, for
example, the leading article in Luch No. 101 (“The Mass of the
Workers and the Underground”), and simply shrug off Trotsky’s verbiage.

 

“In practice the question of the underground, alleged to be one of
principle, is decided by all Social-Democratic groups absolutely
alike....” Trotsky wrote in italics. The St. Petersburg workers know from
experience that that is not, so. Workers in any corner of Russia, as soon
as they read the Luch leading article mentioned above, will see
that Trotsky is departing from the truth.  

“It is ridiculous and absurd to affirm,” we read in his article,
“that there is an irreconcilable contradiction between the political
tendencies of Luch and Pravda.” Believe us, my dear
author, that neither the word “absurd” nor the word “ridiculous” can
frighten the workers, who will ask you to speak to them as to adults on
the substance of the matter.  

just expound those tendencies and prove that the leading article in
Luch No. 101 can be “reconciled” with Social-Democracy!  

You cannot satisfy the workers with mere phrases, no matter how
“conciliatory” or honeyed.  


   “Our historic factions. Bolshevism and Menshevism, are
   purely intellectualist formations in origin,” wrote Trotsky.  


This is the repetition of a liberal tale. In fact, however, the whole
of Russian reality confronted the workers with the issue of the attitude to
the liberals and the peasantry. Even if there had been no intelligentsia,
the workers could not have evaded the issue of whether they should
follow the liberals or lead the peasantry against the
liberals.  

It is to the advantage of the liberals to pretend that this
fundamental basis of the differences was introduced by
“intellectuals”. But Trotsky merely disgraces himself by echoing a
liberal tale.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Goes On Among the Narodniks and What Goes On in the Countryside









Lenin: What Goes On Among the Narodniks and What Goes On in the Countryside







V. I.  

      Lenin
What Goes On Among the Narodniks and What Goes On in the Countryside




Published:
Prosveshcheniye No. 2, February 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the text in Prosveshcheniye.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 555-561.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The magazine Russkoye Bogatstvo shows us the two
streams of the Narodnik or Trudovik current or trend in Russian life that
can also be traced by drawing on other, more direct and immediate sources
of political knowledge.  

Let us recall, for example, the debates in the First and Second
Dumas. Unfortunately, the verbatim reports of both have been withdrawn from
sale. Nevertheless, the immense political material they provide for
studying the views and aspirations of the Russian peasantry and Russian
Trudoviks has in part already become, and in part will in the future
become, known to every educated person. The chief conclusion to be drawn
from this material is that the Trudovik intellectuals (including
the Socialist-Revolutionary intellectuals) and the peasant
Trudoviks represent essentially distinct political trends.  

The intellectual Narodniks gravitate towards conciliatory or
“philanthropic” phrases. One always senses the liberal in them. The
standpoint of the class struggle is wholly foreign to them. They are given
to moralising. They are pulling the democratic peasantry bade from
the real and direct struggle against its class enemy to vague, forced,
impotent, quasi-socialist phrase-mongering.  

The peasant Narodniks in both of the early Dumas were full of fire and
passion. They were eager for direct and resolute action. They were
ignorant, uneducated and unsophisticated, but they rose against their class
enemy so straightforwardly, uncompromisingly and implacably that one
sensed what an impressive social force they were.  
 

In other words, the Narodnik intellectuals are very bad socialists and
lukewarm democrats. The peasant Trudoviks are far from playing at
socialism, which is quite alien to them, but they are honest, sincere,
ardent and strong democrats. No one can foretell whether peasant democracy
will win in Russia, for this depends on much too complicated objective
conditions. But it is beyond doubt that the Trudovik peasantry
could win only in spite of the tendencies which the
Narodnik intelligentsia brings into the movement of the Trudovik
peasantry. A vigorous, fresh and sincere democratic movement can
win, given a favourable historical situation, whereas “socialist”
phrase-mongering and Narodnik moralising can never win.  

I consider this conclusion to be one of the most important lessons of
the Russian revolution, and I cherish the hope that some day I may be able
to substantiate it by a detailed analysis of Narodnik speeches in the first
two Dumas and by other political evidence from the 1905–07 period. For the
time being I should like to note the remarkable confirmation of this
conclusion to be found in the latest issue (No. 12, 1912) of Russkoye
Bogatstvo, the chief and most authoritative Narodnik organ.  

Two articles in that issue produce an impression that is undoubtedly
typical. Mr. A.V.P.’s article (“Socialism—Popular or Proletarian?”) is
a specimen of the intellectualist arguments of the “Popular Socialists”
and Socialist-Revolutionaries.  

If it had been inevitable for the massive force of the Russian
peasantry to be directed in the way that “results” from the
arguments of Messrs. A.V.P. and Co., the cause of Russia’s
bourgeois democrats would have been hopelessly lost. For phrase-mongering
and moralising can never result in history-making
action. The impotence of this kind of Narodism is
complete.  

In Mr. Kryukov’s article, “Without Fire”, the peasantry and peasant
life and psychology are described by a honey-tongued little priest, who
portrays the peasantry in just the way it itself has acted, and
continues to act. If this portrayal is accurate, Russia’s bourgeois
democrats—in the shape of the peasantry—are destined to carry out a
major historical action that has every

    

chance of success provided the situation is at all favourable.  

To make this point clear, we shall briefly describe Mr. A. V. P.’s
“ideas” and quote a few passages from the portrayal of the Russian
peasantry given by the little priest.  

Mr. A. V. P. defends the foundations of Narodism against Sukhanov, a
writer for Zavety, who surrenders a whole series of
cardinal theoretical premises of Narodism to Marxism, advocating a kind of
unity between Marxists and Narodniks.  

Mr. A. V. P. has no objection to unity but does not pro pose to
“surrender” the principles of Narodism. And it is precisely this
defence of the purity of the principles and of the solidity of
Narodism by such an unquestionably competent and noted Narodnik as
Mr. A. V. P. that shows most clearly that his position is quite
hopeless and that this kind of Narodism is absolutely
lifeless.  

Mr. Sukhanov went as far as to say that the proletariat was the only
class which was socialist by nature. Of course, if we were to reason with
any degree of consistency, this means recognising Marxism and completely
giving up Narodnik socialism as a bad job.  

Mr. A. V. P. is up in arms against Mr. Sukhanov, but his arguments are
exceptionally lame. They are nothing but so many little reservations,
rectifications, question marks, and eclectic comments to the effect that
revisionism “over emphasises” life’s corrections to theory, while
orthodoxy wastes its time disputing them. The hotchpotch dished up by
Mr. A. V. P. exactly resembles the objections of the “humanitarian”
bourgeois to the class struggle and class socialism—objections common in
all European countries.  

Mr. A. V. P. does not venture to deny the fundamental and well-known
fact that throughout the world it is only the proletariat that wages a
systematic, daily struggle against capital, and that it alone constitutes
the mass bulwark of the socialist parties. And Mr. A. V. P. cannot but knew
that the freer a country is politically, the less the
peasantry shows even feeble socialist leanings. And he simply
plays on fragments of ideas expressed by European bourgeois
professors and opportunists in order to confuse the issue,

    

without even trying to set against Marxism anything at all like an
integral, straightforward and clear social theory.  

That is why nothing could be more boring than Mr.  A. V. P.’s
article. And nothing could be more indicative of the total ideological
death of Narodnik socialism in Russia. It is dead. You can find
Mr. A. V. P.’s “ideas” in full in any bourgeois social-reformist
publication in the West, so there is no point in refuting them.  

But while Narodnik socialism is dead in Russia, having been
killed by the revolution of 1905 and buried by people like A. V. P., and
while nothing is left of it but rotten phrases, Russia’s peasant
democracy—a democracy that is by no means socialist but as bourgeois as
was democracy in America in the 1860s, in France at the close of the
eighteenth century, in Germany in the first half of the nineteenth century,
etc., etc.—is alive.  

The honey-tongued priest’s story of the countryside, re corded by
Mr. Kryukov, fully confirms this. And let us note in passing that what
Kryukov reports perhaps stands out even more vividly and precisely from the
observations which the Vekhi-minded Bulgakov, an admitted enemy of
democracy, published in Russkaya Mysl (No. 11, 1912—“At the
Elections”).  


   “Servility and cowardice have always been there!” says
   Kryukov’s little priest, speaking of the Russian clergy. “But the
   difference now is that there has never been so appallingly calm
   and tacit a falling-away from the church as today. It is as if the spirit
   of life were dead in the church. I repeat that it isn’t the intellectuals
   alone who have left—so have the people.... I must admit it—after all,
   I’ve been a country priest for two years.”  


The honey-tongued priest recalled the year 1905. At that time
he was busy explaining the manifesto to the peasants.  


   “I had looked forward,” he wailed, “to understanding,
   close unity, love, sobriety, a sound mind, an awakening,
   vigour.... But while understanding did seem to come, we had hatred and
   internecine strife instead of solidarity and unity. And I was the very
   first man to be hit by the countryside, and pretty roughly, too. Why,
   didn’t I stand for it heart and soul? I told them all about those liberties
   and all that sort of thing. And you should have seen how they listened! I
   imagined you just couldn’t make things any clearer than I did, but
   no—there were other ideas that found their way into the

    

   countryside. Besides, the new explainers made a much spicier stew—they
   talked about the land and equality and the landlords. Of course, the
   muzhiks saw it and swallowed it at once. First of all they came to
   tell me that they would pay me for tithes not two hundred rubles but one
   hundred....  

   “However, what vexed me particularly wasn’t
   that fact—about that hundred rubles—but the totality of the things
   which so unexpectedly reshaped the countryside. Didn’t they all try to open
   its eyes for it, to rid it of its ignorance, to lighten its darkness! And
   to tell the truth, they succeeded too. A bit of light did dawn on the
   blind, and they have no longer been blind since then, even though they
   haven’t really recovered their eyesight. But with that half-vision came
   only the most sorrowful knowledge and the most choking hatred.... Some day
   they may sigh regretfully thinking of their past ignorance. There’s so much
   hatred in the countryside that you’d say the very air is saturated with it
   nowadays.... They are quick with the knife and the cudgel and the
   fire-brand. There’s a feeling of helplessness, the sting of unavenged
   grievances, internecine quarrels, indiscriminate hatred, envy of all who
   are better off, who live more comfortably and own more. To be sure, there
   was envy and hatred and sorrow and vile sin in the past as well, but people
   had faith in the divine will and realised the futility of worldly
   benefits. They had faith and were therefore able to bear it,
   hoping to be rewarded in the hereafter. That faith is no more. What people
   there believe in today is that we are oppressors and they are the
   oppressed. Weeds and thornapples have sprouted in the countryside from all
   that talk about freedom.... And now this new law about the land—brother
   has risen up against brother, son against father and neighbour against
   neighbour! The hatred and discord now are such that the country side will
   choke with it. it certainly will.”  


We have underlined certain particularly characteristic words in this
characteristic description of the countryside by the mealy-mouthed little
priest (a genuine Narodnik intellectual!).  

The priest is a partisan of “love” and an enemy of “hatred”. In
this respect he fully shares the Tolstoyan (we may also say Christian),
thoroughly reactionary point of view which our Cadets and Cadet-like people
are constantly promoting. Such a priest would hardly mind dreaming of some
sort of “socialisation of the land” or prattling about the “socialist”
significance of co-operation and about “standards of landownership”. But
when it came to hatred instead of “love”, he at once recoiled, went limp
and whimpered.  

There is any amount of verbal, loud-mouthed “socialism” (“popular
and not proletarian”), and in Europe too any

    

literate philistine approves of it. But when it comes to “hatred” instead
of “Jove”, that is the end. Socialism as humane phrase-mongering—yes,
we are for it; revolutionary democracy—no, we are against it.  

What the honey-tongued little priest says on the hackneyed subject of
“hooliganism” in the countryside is absolutely nothing new from the
factual point of view. But it is evident from his own story that
“hooliganism” is a concept introduced by the feudal
landlords. “Burning, unavenged grievances” is what the sugary priest
notes. And this, of course, is a very far cry from “hooliganism”.  


In the struggle against Narodism, Marxists have long regarded it as
their task to smash Manilovism, cloying phrases, a sentimental supra-class
point of view, and vulgar “popular” socialism worthy of a French
“Radical Socialist” skilled in shady business deals. But, at the same
time, Marxists have long considered it just as much their indispensable
task to extract the democratic core of Narodnik views. Narodnik
socialism is a putrid and evil-smelling corpse. Peasant democracy in Russia
is a living force, if Kryukov’s honey-tongued priest has depicted it
accurately. Indeed, it cannot help being a living force so long as the
Purishkeviches are in the saddle, and so long as there are some thirty
million who are starving.  

“Indiscriminate hatred”, we are told. First of all, this is not the
whole truth. It is the Purishkeviches and government officials and amiable
intellectuals who see no “discrimination”. Secondly, even at the
beginning of the working-class movement in Russia there was a certain
element of “indiscriminate hatred”; such as that, for instance, which
took the form of destroying machinery during the strikes of the sixties,
seventies and eighties of the last century. That did not last. Nor was that
the point. It would be banal to demand that people in this situation who
were losing their patience should use “kid gloves”.  

The important thing is the far-reaching break with the old, hopelessly
reactionary world outlook, the thorough assimilation of just that doctrine
about the “enslaved” that is an earnest of real life and not of the sleep
of death.  
 

Narodnik socialism is rotten even in its most Left-wing section. What
is alive and vital is the task of purifying, enlightening, arousing and
unifying the democratic movement through a deliberate break with doctrines
of “love”, “patience”, and so on. The honey-tongued little priest is
sad We, however, have every reason to rejoice in the ample opportunities
for vigorous work.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Increasing Discrepancy









Lenin: An Increasing Discrepancy







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Increasing Discrepancy
NOTES OF A PUBLICIST




Written: Written on February 6–9 (19–22), 1913 

Published:

      Published in Prosveshcheniye Nos. 3 and 4, March and April 1913.

      Signed: V. Ilyin.

      Published according to the magazine text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 562-579.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I

Recently the Cadet deputies conferred again with local leaders of that
party.  

As might have been expected, they discussed the features of the present
political situation. The liberals appraised the situation as follows: 


   “Attention was drawn to the increasing discrepancy
   between the country’s requirements for basic legislation and the
   impossibility of meeting them under the present system of legislative
   institutions and in view of the present attitude of the authorities towards
   popular representation.”  


The style is as tangled as a ball of wool with which a kitten has been
playing for a long time. Our poor liberals—they have nowhere to express
their ideas clearly!  

But take a closer look: the trouble is not so much that the liberals
have nowhere to talk as that they have nothing to
say. The discrepancy is growing not only between the country’s requirements
and the hopelessness of the “present system”, etc., but also between the
country’s requirements and the liberals’ helplessness.  

Why is it impossible for you, liberal politicians, to meet the
requirements of the country? The Cadets reply: because the present system
of legislative institutions and the present attitude of the authorities
towards popular representation hinder it.  

Consequently, we need a different system and a different attitude of
the authorities. We shall see in what way

    

they must be different when we analyse in subsequent articles the “four
theses” of the Cadet meeting.  

But we must first put the main question: What is the reason for the
“present” “system and attitude”? Where could anything
different come from? The Cadets did not even think of it! Their
reticence on this fundamental question amounts to hardened,
Asiatic philistinism, like saying that there were bad advisers but there
can be good advisers.  

Is there no connection, Cadet gentlemen, between the “present” and
the interests of some class, such as the class of the big
landlords? Or the richest section of the bourgeoisie? Is not there complete
accord between the “present” and the interests of definite
classes? Is it not clear that any one who sets about discussing the
political situation without taking into account the relations between all
the classes engages in useless talk?  

Alas! The Cadets have nothing but empty talk to cover up the
“increasing discrepancy” between their policy and the requirements of the
country.  
II

Our liberals in general—and they are followed by the liberal labour
politicians (liquidators)—like to talk at length about the
“Europeanisation” of Russia. A tiny little truth serves here as a cover
for a big untruth.  

There can be no doubt that Russia, speaking generally, is becoming
Europeanised, i.e., reorganised in the image of Europe (moreover, in
“Europe” we should now include Japan and China, in spite of
geography). But this Europeanisation has been going on since Alexander II,
or perhaps even since Peter the Great; it went on not only during the
upswing (1905), but also during reaction (1908–11); it has been
going on in the police and among the Markov-type landlords, who are
“Europeanising” their methods of fighting the democratic movement.  

The catchword “Europeanisation” turns out to be so general that it
serves to obscure matters, to obscure urgent political issues.  
 

The liberals want a Europeanised Russia. But the Council of the United
Nobility, too, sought Europeanisation by its law of November 9,
1906 (June 14, 1910).  

The liberals want a European constitution. But the constitutions
established in various countries of Europe were the result of long and
strenuous class struggles between feudalism and absolutism, on the one
hand, and the bourgeoisie, the peasantry and the workers, on the
other. Written and unwritten constitutions, with which the liberals
“shame” our reactionaries, are merely a record of the results of
struggle obtained through a series of hard-won victories of the new over
the old and a series of defeats inflicted on the new by the old.  

The liberals want the results to make their appearance in our country
without the sum total of advantages and disadvantages of which the
results consist! The liberal programme and liberal tactics amount to this:
let a European way of life take shape in our country without the
hard struggle which brought it into being in Europe!  

It is understandable that our Kobylinskys greet the liberals’ wishes
and arguments with contemptuous sallies against “shopkeepers” and
“muzhiks”. “You want, liberal gentlemen,” say the Kobylinskys, “to
register on paper victories that you have not yet won in reality.”  
III

The Cadet meeting approved four theses on tactics. The first reads:



   “The tactic of united action by the entire opposition
   front, while being a necessary condition for the execution of the
   Duma’s current business, does not, however, guarantee either the securing
   of a solid and lasting majority in the Duma for the Bills of the opposition
   or the actual realisation of the Bills whose adoption in the Duma the
   opposition could secure, with the aid of the Duma Centre.”  


Translated into plain Russian, this gibberish means the following: 

It is only with the Octobrists that the liberals can form a majority in
the Duma. Such a majority is not permanent and its decisions are not put
into effect.  
 

Quite so. But this leads to the conclusion that to call those decisions
“necessary”, “current” and “business” (!??) is to deceive oneself and
the people.  

In defeating the Rights by voting with the Octobrists, we must not
adopt the standpoint of legislating in the Fourth Duma, must not sow
constitutional illusions—that is what the Cadets should have said to the
people had they wanted to be democrats, not in words alone.  

The first “thesis” of the Cadet meeting is strikingly illogical. It
describes as “business” the approval by an inconstant and unstable
majority in the Fourth Duma of Bills that are not put into effect!! The
Cadets themselves have on a hundred occasions described this as
“vermicelli” and a nuisance, and justly so.  

But the Cadet tactics, extremely stupid from the stand point of logic,
become comprehensible from the standpoint of class interests. Let us recall
what the Social-Democrats have been saying in the Third and Fourth Dumas
ever since 1907. “There are two possible majorities in the Duma,” they
said, “a Right-wing and Octobrist and an Octobrist Cadet one. Both take a
counter-revolutionary stand” (cf. Prosveshcheniye, 1913, No. 1,

       p. 13).[1]


The Cadets’ February 1913 meeting confirmed what we had been saying in
our official decisions since 1907.  

“The tactic of united action by the entire opposition front ...  with
the aid of the Duma Centre” is indispensable to the Cadets
precisely because, like the Octobrists, they take a counter-revolutionary
stand. In view of the inner kinship of the Cadets and Octobrists, it is
understandable that they gravitate towards joint ‘business’, despite its
hopelessness today.  

The Octobrists are always whimpering in their press, railing at the
revolution, railing at the government, the Rights and the Council of State,
but in the Duma they con fine themselves to a desire for reforms and follow
the government.  

The Cadets whimper even more in their press, railing at the revolution,
railing at the government, the Rights, the

    

Council of State and the Octobrists, but in the Duma they confine
themselves to a desire for reforms and try to adapt their opposition to the
Octobrists.  
IV

The second thesis of the Cadet meeting reads: 


   “The Duma can be substantially strengthened as a
   legislative and political factor only by fulfilling three fundamental
   conditions:
   democratisation of the electoral law (universal suffrage), a radical reform
   of the Council of State, and a responsible Ministry.”  


The gist of the tactics set out here may be expressed by one word:
reformism.  

Historical science tells us that the distinction between a reformist
and a non-reformist change in a given political form is, generally
speaking, that in the former case the old ruling class retains power, while
in the latter case power is transferred from the old class to a new
one. The Cadets do not understand the class basis of historical
changes. This is their basic error from the point of view of theory.  

From the point of view of practice, the above theoretical distinction
depends on whether the particular is changed while the general and basic is
left unchanged, or whether it is the latter that is changed.  

In different countries and in different periods of history, the
bourgeoisie has been reformist or has gone further than that. On the other
hand, the working class, which has never considered reforms capable of
bringing about radical changes, under certain conditions by no means
refrains from advancing immediate demands in the shape of reforms.  

The point is, consequently, that the Cadets regard the retention of
power by the present ruling class, i.e., the big feudal-type landowners, as
indisputable. The Cadets persist in their standpoint of an opposition in
the possessive case, continuing to hold the view that “there is a
constitution in Russia, thank God”.  

In other words, the Cadets’ “three basic conditions” are those
proposed by the liberal bourgeoisie for an amicable division of
economic and political privileges between the feudal landowners and the
capitalists.  
 

The Octobrists have the same standpoint (“reconciliation of the
government and the country”, as phrased by Maklakov, who is half Octobrist
and half Cadet), except that the Octobrists propose conditions for division
that are more “subservient” with regard to the landowners.  

The big subservience of the Octobrists has proved a fiasco. What
reasons are there for expecting a different result from the little
subservience of the Cadets? From the point of view of reformism, the
Octobrists are much more consistent, for those who adopt this point of view
must take into account the acceptability of reforms, and the
Octobrist “reforms” are much more “acceptable”.  

The only conclusion to be drawn is that the discrepancy between liberal
reformism and the requirements of the country is growing.  
V

The third thesis of the Cadet meeting reads: 

“Preparing these conditions should become the main tactical task
of the Constitutional-Democrats, and current legislative activity,
jointly with the other opposition groups and with the Centre, should be
utilised as far as it proves feasible but should not run counter to the
realisation of these main tasks” (Rech No. 34, February 4).  

The previous “thesis” was a concession to the Left Cadets, or rather
a bait for the democrats, as if to say: support us Cadets, for we are
“democrats” and are for universal suffrage!  

After the nod to the left comes a serious turn to the right; the third
thesis, translated from gibberish into plain Russian reads: we Cadets
recognise joint current legislative activity with the
Progressists and Octobrists!  

But does not this “current” legislation produce unrealisable
Bills, as the first thesis admits? The Cadets make a little reservation:
“as far as feasible”. Speaking more plainly, this is equivalent to
saying: we shall busy ourselves with vermicelli, but the responsibility for
it falls on the Octobrists! Really, they are good jokers, are our Cadets.


To proceed. Neither the Progressists, nor the Octobrists, who are more
consistent than the Cadets in their

    

adherence to the reformist point of view, agree to such
“excessively” liberal demands as universal suffrage, radical reform of
the Council of State, etc. That being so, how can the Cadets, who continue
to pose as democrats, proclaim joint current legislative activity
with these admitted opponents of democracy?  

Here, too, the Cadets have a little reservation—to the effect that
they, the Cadets, are busy preparing for universal suffrage,
preparing, jointly with the Octobrists, for activity that “should
not run counter to the realisation” of universal suffrage!  

It is a simple loophole—they declare Rodzyanko’s speech to be
“constitutional”, and they vote (not by mistake, as do the
Social-Democrats, but by conviction) for the Octobrist formula of procedure
with regard to the declaration of the Minister, for all this does not
run counter to “preparing” for universal suffrage!!  

Here we cannot say that the Cadets are good jokers. In this case we
should have to use a different word.  

In all European countries, the counter-revolutionary liberal
bourgeoisie, which has turned its back on the democratic movement,
continues to assert that it is busy preparing (jointly with the
national-liberals in Prussia and with all the Progressists in France) for
“basic” democratic reforms.  

The bourgeoisie which has definitely taken the reformist path is a
rotten bourgeoisie, impotent in its liberalism, hopeless in the matter of
democratic changes, and hostile to the workers, a bourgeoisie which has
deserted to the Rights from the people.  
VI

The fourth, and last, thesis of the Cadet meeting reads: 


   “This meeting considers it opportune, along with
   advancing the three slogans mentioned above, to raise the question of
   adopting more active tactical measures of parliamentary struggle.”  


Only parliamentary? And only “to raise the question”?  

Just what is meant by “more active tactical measures of parliamentary
struggle”, Allah alone knows. One might

    

think the Cadet meeting had deliberately formulated its theses in the most
incoherent terms.  

In speaking of more active measures, the Cadets clearly want to show
that they are moving to the left. But it is nothing more than a
show, for nothing definite can be read into it.  

What are the kind of “measures” of parliamentary struggle that can,
generally speaking, be called more active?  

Refusal to vote for the Octobrist and Progressist formulas of
procedure.  

Refusal to make speeches about “reconciliation of the government and
the country”.  

Refusal to be silent whenever a Right-wing and Octobrist majority puts
through anti-democratic measures.  

Refusal to agree to the closure or curtailment of general debates on
matters of principle.  

We advise anyone who comes into contact with the Cadets to make a point
of asking them whether they have “raised” the question of more active
measures, how they have decided this question since they are going to raise
it, and how they actually adopt “more active measures”.  

The country is moving to the left. The new democratic movement is
awakening to life. The Cadets’ show of a slight swing to the left has a
very definite political meaning, namely, to deceive this new democratic
movement, to impose its leadership upon it, to make themselves out to be
its spokesmen.  

The urgent task of the democrats is to prevent this deceit. Anyone who
has not drawn from the hard lessons of the past the conclusion that even
partial leadership of the democratic elements by the Cadets inevitably
results in vacillation, betrayals, and inglorious defeats without struggle,
has learned nothing. He should he regarded as an enemy of democracy.  
VII

Taken as a whole, the Cadet meeting was an interesting document of the
political activity of our “Centre”. Normally the press in our country
pays little attention to such documents, to the precise and formal
decisions of organised

    

parties. It has a distaste for “resolutions”. It prefers interviews and
gossip.  

But those who take a serious view of politics must care fully analyse
party decisions, and Marxists will do all in their power to make such an
analysis.  

We have described the Cadets as the “Centre”. It is
customary, however, to apply this term to the Octobrists, who
stand midway between the Rights and the opposition.  

However, both from the point of view of the class basis of the
political parties and from that of the nature of contemporary
politics in general, we must not limit ourselves to the Duma in analysing
the parties, must not consider the Octobrists alone to be the “Centre”.


Look at the class basis of our parties—the Rights and nationalists,
in general, are semi-feudal landlords. They stand for the
preservation and “aggravation” of the present regime.  

Among the Octobrists, Progressists and Cadets, we see landlords of an
undoubtedly more bourgeois type, and then the bulk of the big
bourgeoisie. All these parties want reforms. They all form a
real centre between the semi-feudal landlords and the democrats
(peasants and workers).  

The bourgeoisie is more afraid of democracy than of reaction; this
applies both to the Progressists and to the Cadets. The oppositional nature
of these two parties has, of course, to be taken into account in the
practical tasks of everyday politics, but this oppositional nature should
not make us close our eyes to the class kinship of these par ties and the
Octobrists.  

The semi-feudal landlords rule both by themselves and in a bloc with
the upper ranks of the bourgeoisie. The feudal landlords are against
reforms. The bourgeoisie in general is in favour of reforms, and it
confines itself to a reformist stand, which is more than we can say of the
peasant, let alone of the worker, democrats.  

The Cadet meeting clearly showed us the Cadets’ reformism as
their exclusive tactics. The most important thing is to see the
connection between these tactics and the class interests of the
bourgeoisie, and the inadequacy of these tactics, the “increasing
discrepancy” between them and the requirements of the country. The most
important thing is

    

to see the fundamental kinship of the Cadets and the Octobrists, and the
absolute impossibility of any democratic successes whatever under Cadet
leadership.  
VIII

This article was finished when I received Golos Moskvy No. 30,
with an editorial under the heading “What Next?”, devoted to the Cadet
meeting.  

Taken in conjunction with the Duma votings on February 6 (adoption of
the formula of procedure with regard to Kasso’s
explanation[3]), that editorial is so important and sheds so vivid a
light on the Cadets’ attitude to the Octobrists that it is absolutely
necessary to comment on those votings.  

The official Octobrist organ, Golos Moskvy, represents the
Cadet meeting (for some reason the paper calls it a “conference”) as a
victory of the Left Cadets, headed by Milyukov, over the Right Cadets.



   “Legislative activity,” said Golos Moskvy,
   expounding the Cadet resolution, “can be utilised only insofar as it does
   not run counter to these main tasks [i.e., universal suffrage, a reform of
   the Council of State, and a responsible Ministry].  

   “To put it more simply, the adoption of this formula is
   tantamount to renouncing all legislative work within the bounds of what can
   actually be accomplished, and the Cadet opposition is henceforward assuming
   a frankly irresponsible character.”  


Golos Moskvy infers that there is nothing for it but to
dissolve the Duma, for the Octobrists will never adopt the Cadets’
attitude, which is so “uncompromising” (don’t laugh!), there is no
majority in the Duma, things are “utterly hopeless”....  

See how history is written!  

That brings out remarkably well the profound kinship of the Cadets and
the Octobrists, and the true nature of their “quarrel”: a lovers’
quarrel.  

On February 6, in Moscow, the official Octobrist organ announced, as we
have seen, the complete break-up of the Octobrist-Cadet bloc following the
Cadet meeting, which took place before February 4 (when
Rech reported the meeting).  

On the very same day, February 6, the Octobrists and Cadets in
the Fourth Duma, in St. Petersburg, together
    

adopted by 173 votes to 153 the Octobrist-Cadet formula of
procedure with regard to Kasso’s explanation, a formula subsequently
rejected by chance when a confirmatory vote was taken!!  

That’s good, isn’t it?  

We have here a classical example of how the Octobrists and the
Cadets fix their political “affairs”. They have nothing to do
with any “bloc”, God forbid! But they distribute the roles among
themselves—to fool the public—so “skilfully” that no formal bloc
could provide them with any thing so “convenient”. The Cadets see that
the country is moving to the left, that a new democratic movement is
arising, and so they play at leftism by putting in circulation, through
their meeting, several phrases which say absolutely nothing and are
completely meaningless, but which sound like Left phrases. The
Octobrists support this feeling or impression among the public
that the Cadets have gone left; they bolster it up by officially
declaring, in the Golos Moskvy editorial, that the Cadets’
attitude is uncompromising and that it is impossible to form a majority in
the Duma by an alliance of the Octobrists and Cadets; they fulminate
against the Cadets for their leftism, clamour for the dissolution of the
Duma, and so on and so forth.  

But in reality under cover of this clamour they haggled with the
Cadets, and at the very time when they were making their sharpest attack on
the Cadets’ leftism they struck a bargain with them on a common
formula!!  

“The wolves had their fill and the sheep kept their skins.” The
democrats were hoodwinked, they were deceived and decoyed into the Cadet
fold (the Cadets are so Left-wing—see how the Octobrists rail at them for
their leftism!), and the Octobrist-Cadet bloc in the Black-Hundred Duma was
preserved, strengthened and expanded.  

One feels very much like exclaiming: 0 God, when will the Russian
democrats see through this simple stratagem of liberal Cadet bamboozling!
For liberal bourgeois politicians in all European countries use, in one
form or another, the very same trick: when facing the people, they shout
and swear in their official election speeches that they are democrats and
radicals (the German “freethinkers”, Lloyd George and Co. in Britain),
and even socialists (the Radical

    

Socialists in France). But in reality, in their actual
policy, they make common cause with unquestionably anti-democratic
governments and parties, with the Octobrists of various shades and various
nationalities.  

How old this story is and how infinitely often the Cadets repeat it!

IX

Golos Moskvy asserts that prior to the elections the Cadets



   “carried on bitter polemics against the Lefts, trying to
   prove the need for legislative work within the bounds of the actual
   conditions. It was this that warranted the hope that agreement could be
   reached between the Duma Centre and the opposition. But after the elections
   the views of the leaders of the Cadet Party underwent an important
   change. The resolution on Duma tactics proposed by Milyukov and adopted by
   the conference is entirely at variance with all that was said during the
   elections—evidently to win the votes of the big urban bourgeoisie. The
   latter would scarcely have agreed to back the Cadets on the platform which
   the conference has now put forward.”  


In this specimen of reasoning, you wonder which is the more
astounding—its na\"ive cunning or naive ignorance.  

The views of the Cadets have not changed in the least. The
Cadets have always been, and remain, a liberal party leading the democratic
movement by fraud. At the 1912 elections, too, they showed the big
bourgeoisie their “true” face, their “solidarity” of smart dealers,
their “sobriety” as servants of the capitalist class. But at the same
time, in front of the democratic voters, they took great pains to suggest
that they were democrats and that their Duma tactics did not differ in any
essential from Social-Democratic tactics.  

These two aspects of the Cadet policy are an indispensable “adjunct of
the attire” of every liberal party in any civilised country. To be sure,
individual party members often specialise, some in playing at democracy,
others in sobering up the “over-zealous” and pursuing a “respectable”
bourgeois policy. But then this is true of all countries. For example,
Britain’s well-known liberal charlatan, Lloyd George, poses in his speeches
to the people as a regular revolutionary and all but a socialist, but in
reality this Minister follows the policy of his leader, Asquith, who is no
different from a Conservative.  
 

The fact that the article in Golos Moskvy describes
Mr. Milyukov as a representative of the Left Cadets can only call forth a
smile. Mr. Milyukov in fact represents official Cadet diplomacy, which is
trying to reconcile the undemocratic nature of the party with democratic
phrase-mongering.  

Golos Moskvy said: 


   “This new ‘post-election’ attitude of Mr. Milyukov’s was
   approved by the conference anything but unanimously. A considerable number
   of participants insisted on the tactic of agreement with the Duma Centre
   for the purpose of securing the adoption of various Bills and cultural
   reforms. The advocates of this point of view argued that in discussing
   various Bills the group should compromise, trying to have them adopted in a
   liberal spirit, and by no means making them unacceptable.” There followed
   a sally against “the famous Cadet discipline” and “unquestioning
   submission” of the Cadets to Mr. Milyukov’s “autocratic will”.  


The game is obvious. It is transparent. The Octobrists “tease” the
Right Cadets, whom they are trying to represent as defeated and provoke to
a more determined struggle against the Left Cadets. But this Octobrist game
(which would have been impossible had the Cadets and Octobrists not been
members of one and the same little family) does not eliminate the
indisputable fact that there are differences of shade between the Left and
the Right Cadets, between the Lloyd Georges and the Asquiths of our
liberalism.  

Look at Russkaya Molva. This Progressist organ, which
advocates a compromise between the Octobrists and the Cadets, is attracting
an increasing number of official members of the Cadet
Party. Mansyrev and Maklakov and Obolensky and Gredeskul and Alexandrov
proved to be contributors—not all at once, but gradually, following the
Vekhi leader, Struve. It is beyond doubt that these people urged
closer links with the Octobrists. Nor could it have been otherwise. But it
is just as doubtless that Milyukov is trying to reconcile them with the
“Left Cadets” on a platform with a democratic facade and an Octobrist
essence.  
X

The various parties’ Duma formulas of procedure with regard to Kasso’s
explanation are very interesting. They supply us with accurate material for
political analysis, material

    

officially confirmed by the deputies of the various parties. It is analysis
that this material usually lacks most of all. It gets lost amid the
comments of the daily press or in the pile of the Duma’s verbatim
reports. Yet it is well worth dwelling on if we want to understand the true
nature of the various parties.  

A leading article in Rech declared on the day following the
adoption of the formula of no-confidence: “Thus Russian society has
obtained from the Duma what it was entitled to expect” (No. 37,
February 7). This sounds as though all that “society” had to know was
whether the Duma trusts Mr. Kasso!  

That is not true. The people and the democrats have to know the
motives of no-confidence so as to understand the causes
of a development considered abnormal in politics, and be able to find a
way out to the normal. Unity of the Cadets, Octobrists and
Social-Democrats on just the phrase “we have no confidence” is too little
as far as these very serious issues are concerned.  

Here is the Octobrists’ formula of procedure: 


   “The Duma ... considers:
   (1) all involvement of secondary school pupils in political struggles is
   ruinous to the spiritual development of Russia’s young forces and harmful
   to the normal course of the life of society;
   (2) it is necessary, whenever the authorities are informed in good time of
   undesirable developments in secondary schools, to take preventive measures
   and not to wait until developments assume an abnormal
      character[2]

;
   (3) emphatically declares against the application to pupils of police
   measures, such as were adopted on December 10, 1912, without the knowledge
   of the school authorities, instead of natural educational influence;
   (4) considers anti-educational the slowness with which the fate of pupils
   removed from schools is decided on, and expecting this incident to be dealt
   with immediately in a sense benevolent to the pupils, proceeds to the next
   business.”  


What are the political ideas of this vote?  
 

Politics are harmful at school. The pupils are to blame. But it is
their teachers who should punish them and not the police. We are
dissatisfied with the government for its lack of “benevolence” and its
slowness.  

These are anti-democratic ideas. This is liberal opposition, for it
implies: let the old system of authority remain, but it should be
applied more mildly. You may flog, but within reason, and without
publicity.  

Look at the Progressist formula of procedure: 


   “The Duma finds that
   (1) the Ministry of Education, being in formed of what had lately taken
   place in the secondary schools of St. Petersburg, adopted an impassive
   attitude to its duties and failed to protect the secondary schools against
   incursion by the police;
   (2) the methods used by police officers, methods which were resorted to
   without protest on the part of the Ministry of Education and consisted in
   searching the schools, seizing children and holding them under arrest at
   police-stations, and in applying impermissible methods of investigation,
   were utterly unjustifiable, all the more since in this case it was a matter
   not of safeguarding state security, but of restoring order in the secondary
   schools;
   (3) the whole set of measures adopted by the Ministry of Education,
   measures directed to wards estranging the school from the family, creates,
   through its callous formalism which hampers the moral and intellectual
   growth of the young generation, conditions favourable to developments that
   are abnormal in school life. The Duma considers the explanation offered by
   the Minister of Education to be unsatisfactory and proceeds to the next
   business.”  


This formula was introduced on January 30, and the Progressists
declared there and then that they would vote for the Octobrists provided
the latter added no-confidence. We have seen above the results of this
haggling.  

On what basis could that haggling take place? On the basis of
agreement in the main.  

The Progressists, too, consider politics in the schools abnormal and
they, too, call for “restoring order” (feudal order). They, too, are in
opposition in the possessive case—opposition not to the old system of
authority but to its application—“impassive, callous”, and so on. In
the 1860s Pirogov agreed that there must be flogging, but he insisted on
the flogging not being done impassively or callously. The
Progressists have no objection to the present social elements “restoring
order”, but they advise the latter to do

    

it more “sympathetically”. What progress has been made in our country in
five decades!  

The Cadets’ formula of procedure: 


   “Having heard the explanation offered by the Minister of
   Education and considering:
   (1) that it shows a complete confusion of the educational point of view
   with that of the police;
   (2) that this explanation is a complete denial of the normal foundations on
   which relations of friendly co-operation can be established between school
   and family;
   (3) that the policy of the Ministry, by giving rise to deep resentment
   among the pupils and to legitimate annoyance in society, itself promotes
   the creation of an atmosphere making for the early involvement of school
   youth in political pursuits and hence itself creates conditions which it
   should prevent from arising;
   (4) that treating pupils as being guilty of crimes against the state
   cripples the lives of the most gifted among the rising generation, snatches
   numerous victims from its ranks and constitutes a threat to the future of
   Russia, the Duma considers the explanation offered by the Minister to be
   unsatisfactory and proceeds to the next business.”  


Here, too, “early” involvement in politics is condemned but
in much milder terms and in a form veiled by phrases. This is an
anti-democratic point of view. Octobrists and Cadets alike condemn police
measures only because they want prevention instead. The system
should prevent meetings, not disperse them. Obviously, such, a reform would
only embellish the system but not change it. “We are dissatisfied with the
policy of the Ministry,” say the Cadets, and from what they say it
follows, exactly as with the Octobrists, that it is possible to
wish for a change in this policy without something much more radical.


The Cadets pronounce themselves against the government much more
sharply than the Octobrists, and because of the sharp language politically
immature elements overlook the complete identity of the liberal,
anti-democratic, presentation of the issue by the Cadets and the
Octobrists.  

The Duma should earnestly teach the people politics. Those who learn
their politics from the Cadets are corrupting and not developing their
political consciousness.  

It is not an accident that the Octobrists, Progressists and Cadets
haggled and struck a bargain on a common formula; it is a result of their
ideological and political solidarity in the main. Nothing could be more
paltry than the policy of the Cadets, who agree to a direct condemnation of

    

politics in the schools for the sake of finding the explanation offered
unsatisfactory. But the Cadets agreed to this because they themselves
condemn “early” involvement.  

The formula of the Trudovik group: 


   “Whereas:
   (1) the brute force used on December 9, 1912, against secondary school
   pupils, which shocked society by the disgraceful participation of the
   secret police in educational supervision over pupils of secondary schools,
   was fully a p proved in the explanation offered by Mr. Kasso, the Minister
   of Education, who sneered maliciously at public opinion;
   (2) the system of secret police and spying, which is a result of the entire
   policy of the combined Ministry, and in particular of Kasso, the Minister
   of Education, leads to complete havoc, and threatens in the future to cause
   a severe shock to the rising generation, the Duma insists that all those
   discharged on December 9 should be immediately reinstated and, considering
   the explanation offered by Kasso, the Minister of Education, to be
   unsatisfactory, demands his immediate resignation, and proceeds to the next
   business.”  


This formula is, strictly speaking, a markedly liberal one; but it does
not contain what a democrat, as distinct from a liberal, should
have said. A liberal, too, may find it disgraceful to enlist the assistance
of the secret police in educational supervision, but a democrat should say
(and teach the people) that no “supervisors” have a right to
encroach on the free organisation of political circles and talks. A
liberal, too, may condemn “the entire policy of the combined Ministry”,
but a democrat in Russia should make clear that there are certain general
conditions by virtue of which any other Ministry would have had to pursue
practically the same policy.  

The democracy of the Trudovik formula shows only in its tenor,
in the sentiment of its authors. There is no denying that sentiment is a
political symptom. But it would not be amiss to insist that the formula of
procedure should contain a well-thought-out idea and not merely
“heart-warming” sentiment.  

The Social-Democrats’ formula of procedure: 


   “Having heard the explanation offered by the Minister of
   Education and considering that it indicates:
   (1) a determination to combat the natural and encouraging desire of school
   youth to extend their mental horizons through self-education and to hold
   comradely intercourse;
   2) a justification of the system of official formalism, spying and police
   investigation that is being implanted in the higher,

    

   secondary and elementary schools, a system which cripples youth mentally
   and morally, ruthlessly stamps out all signs of independence of thought and
   character, and results in an epidemic of suicides among pupils, the Duma
   considers the explanation unsatisfactory. Considering, at the same time,
   that
   (1) there is an inseparable connection between the domination of the police
   standpoint in the matter of public education and the domination of the
   secret police over the whole of Russian life, the suppression of all forms
   of organised and independent activity by the citizens, and the latter’s
   lack of rights, and that
   (2) only a radical change in the political organisation and the system of
   state administration can free the citizens from police fetters and also
   free the school from them, the Duma proceeds to the next business.”  


This formula, too, can hardly be considered impeccable. One cannot help
wishing it bad presented the matter in more popular language and in greater
detail and regretting that it does not stress the legitimacy of engaging in
politics, and so on and so forth.  

However, our criticism of all the formulas is by no means
aimed at details of formulation, but exclusively at the fundamental
political ideas of their authors. A democrat should have said the
important thing, namely, that political circles and talks are natural
and to be welcomed. That is the point. All condemnation of involvement
in politics, even if only of “early” involvement, is hypocrisy and
obscurantism. A democrat should have raised the level of the question
from the “combined Ministry” to the political
system. He should have pointed out the “inseparable connection”, firstly,
with the “domination of the secret police” and, secondly, with the
domination of the class of big land lords of the feudal type in the
economic sphere.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 496–97 of this volume.—Ed.  

[2]
This text was introduced at the January 25 sitting. At the sitting of
   February 1, Clause 2 was edited as follows: “It is noted with reference
   to this particular case that a formal and indifferent attitude to pupils
   prevails in secondary schools, that teaching staffs are estranged from
   the families, and that it is necessary to establish a general benevolent
   view on the rising generation.”  —Lenin
 



[3]
The explanation offered by Kasso, the Minister of Education, in the
Duma was prompted by a question of forty-four members of the Duma tabled on
December 14 (27), 1912, regarding the arrest of thirty-four
secondary-school pupils in St. Petersburg during a meeting at Witmer’s
private gymnasium. The pupils were suspect ed by the secret police of being
members of an illegal political group. The question was discussed at five
sittings of the Duma. On February 6 (19), 1913, the majority voted for a
formula of procedure to the next business that considered the tsarist
Minister’s explanation unsatisfactory.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Some Results of the “Land Distribution” Policy









Lenin: Some Results of the 'Land Distribution' Policy







V. I.  

      Lenin
Some Results of the “Land Distribution” Policy




Published:
Pravda No. 45, February 23, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 580-581.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

What are the results of the new agrarian policy? All
workers take an interest—a very legitimate one—in this
question. Government statistics are kept so poorly and are so biassed that
they are not to be trusted. The new land policy is no doubt a
bourgeois policy, but it is wholly managed by the Purishkeviches,
Markovs and Co., i.e., feudal landlords of the old type. One could hardly
expect anything but failure from this kind of “management”.  

We wish to note the conclusions drawn by Mr. V. Obolensky in the latest
issue (No. 2, 1913) of Russkaya Mysl. This is a Black-Hundred and
Cadet periodical. The author of the article, too, is a
counter-revolutionary, which means that be is a witness partial to the
landlords rather than to anyone else. He has discovered in Samara Gubernia
an uyezd (Novouzensk) which has made “tremendous” progress in “land
distribution”, more than fifty per cent of the householders having been
allotted land in one piece.  

Nevertheless, the conclusion which the author had to draw was
this: 


   “As regards the immediate results of the new agrarian
   reform they can hardly be considered encouraging at all.... A considerable
   amount of allotment land has passed for a song from peasant
   semi-proletarians to well-to-do peasants and speculating
   buyers-up.... Rents have increased.... The difference in cultivability
   between integral farms and communal strip holdings is quite
   negligible.... The new law ... has helped to aggravate the contradictions
   between the conditions of economic activity and its inner
   content.... Perhaps the minds of the peasants are now working harder than
   they did at the height of the recent revolution.”  

 

It is no use at all asking the liberal of Russkaya Mysl
which way the minds of the peasants are working. It is not for
nothing that he has left out altogether the question of feudal farming on
the landed estates.  

But it is worth giving some thought to the conclusions drawn by the
liberal landlord. All the contradictions have become sharper, exploitation
has increased, rent has risen, and progress in farming is quite
negligible. Not “perhaps” but quite certainly the minds of the
peasants are working.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Historical Destiny of the Doctrine of Karl Marx









Lenin: The Historical Destiny of the Doctrine of Karl Marx







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Historical Destiny of the Doctrine of Karl Marx




Published:
Pravda No. 50, March 1, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 582-585.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription:
Zodiac
HTML Markup:
B. Baggins and D. Walters
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (1996).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The chief thing in the doctrine of Marx is that it brings
out the historic role of the proletariat as the builder of socialist
society. Has the course of events all over the world confirmed this
doctrine since it was expounded by Marx?  

Marx first advanced it in 1844. The Communist Manifesto of Marx and
Engels, published in 1848, gave an integral and systematic exposition of
this doctrine, an exposition which has remained the best to this day. Since
then world history has clearly been divided into three main periods:
(1) from the revolution of 1848 to the Paris Commune (1871);
(2) from the Paris Commune to the Russian revolution (1905);
(3) since the Russian revolution.  

Let us see what has been the destiny of Marx’s doctrine in each of
these periods.  
I

At the beginning of the first period Marx’s doctrine by no means
dominated. It was only one of the very numerous groups or trends of
socialism. The forms of socialism that did dominate were in the main akin
to our Narodism: in comprehension of the materialist basis of historical
movement, inability to single out the role and significance of each class
in capitalist society, concealment of the bourgeois nature of democratic
reforms under diverse, quasi-socialist phrases about the “people”,
“justice”, “right”, and so on.  

The revolution of 1848 struck a deadly blow at all these vociferous,
motley and ostentatious forms of pre-Marxian

    

socialism. In all countries, the revolution revealed the various classes of
society in action. The shooting of the workers by the republican
bourgeoisie in Paris in the June days of 1848 finally revealed that the
proletariat alone was socialist by nature. The liberal bourgeoisie
dreaded the independence of this class a hundred times more than it did any
kind of reaction. The craven liberals grovelled before reaction. The
peasantry were content with the abolition of the survivals of feudalism and
joined the supporters of order, wavering but occasionally between
workers’ democracy and bourgeois liberalism. All doctrines of
non-class socialism and non-class politics proved to be sheer
nonsense.  

The Paris Commune (1871) completed this development of bourgeois
changes; the republic, i.e., the form of political organisation in which
class relations appear in their most unconcealed form, owed its
consolidation solely to the heroism of the proletariat.  

In all the other European countries, a more tangled and less complete
development led to the same result—a bourgeois society that had taken
definite shape. Towards the end of the first period (1848–71), a period of
storms and revolutions, pre-Marxian socialism was
dead. Independent proletarian parties came into being:
the First International (1864–72) and the German Social-Democratic Party.

II

The second period (1872–1904) was distinguished from the first by its
“peaceful” character, by the absence of revolutions. The West had
finished with bourgeois revolutions. The East had not yet risen to them.


The West entered a phase of “peaceful” preparations for the changes
to come. Socialist parties, basically proletarian, were formed everywhere,
and learned to use bourgeois parliamentarism and to found their own daily
press, their educational institutions, their trade unions and their
co-operative societies. Marx’s doctrine gained a complete victory and
began to spread. The selection and mustering of the forces of the
proletariat and its preparation for the coming battles made slow but steady
progress.  
 

The dialectics of history were such that the theoretical victory of
Marxism compelled its enemies to disguise themselves as
Marxists. Liberalism, rotten within, tried to revive itself in the form of
socialist opportunism. They interpreted the period of preparing
the forces for great battles as renunciation of these battles. Improvement
of the conditions of the slaves to fight against wage slavery they took to
mean the sale by the slaves of their right to liberty for a few pence. They
cravenly preached “social peace” (i.e., peace with the slave-owners),
renunciation of the class struggle, etc. They had very many adherents among
socialist members of parliament, various officials of the working-class
movement, and the “sympathising” intelligentsia.  
III

However, the opportunists had scarcely congratulated themselves on
“social peace” and on the non-necessity of storms under “democracy”
when a new source of great world storms opened up in Asia. The Russian
revolution was followed by revolutions in Turkey, Persia and China. It is
in this era of storms and their “repercussions” in Europe that we are now
living. No matter what the fate of the great Chinese republic, against
which various “civilised” hyenas are now whetting their teeth, no power
on earth can restore the old serfdom in Asia or wipe out the heroic
democracy of the masses in the Asiatic and semi-Asiatic countries.  

Certain people who were inattentive to the conditions for preparing and
developing the mass struggle were driven to despair and to anarchism by the
lengthy delays in the decisive struggle against capitalism in Europe. We
can now see how short-sighted and faint-hearted this anarchist despair is.


The fact that Asia, with its population of eight hundred million, has
been drawn into the struggle for these same European ideals should inspire
us with optimism and not despair.  

The Asiatic revolutions have again shown us the spinelessness and
baseness of liberalism, the exceptional

    

importance of the independence of the democratic masses, and the pronounced
demarcation between the proletariat and the bourgeoisie of all kinds. After
the experience both of Europe and Asia, anyone who speaks of non-class
politics and non-class socialism, ought simply to be put in a cage and
exhibited alongside the Australian kangaroo or something like that.  

After Asia, Europe has also begun to stir, although not in the Asiatic
way. The “peaceful” period of 1872–1904 has passed, never to return. The
high cost of living and the tyranny of the trusts are leading to an
unprecedented sharpening of the economic struggle, which has set into
movement even the British workers who have been most corrupted by
liberalism. We, see a political crisis brewing even in the most
“diehard”, bourgeois-Junker country, Germany. The frenzied arming and the
policy of imperialism are turning modern Europe into a “social peace”
which is more like a gunpowder barrel. Meanwhile the decay of all
the bourgeois parties and the maturing of the proletariat are making steady
progress.  

Since the appearance of Marxism, each of the three great periods of
world history has brought Marxism new confirmation and new triumphs. But a
still greater triumph awaits Marxism, as the doctrine of the proletariat,
in the coming period of history.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Big Landlord and Small Peasant Landownership in Russia









Lenin: Big Landlord and Small Peasant Landownership in Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
Big Landlord and Small Peasant Landownership in Russia




Published:
Pravda No. 51, March 2, 1913.

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 586-587.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In connection with the recent anniversary of February 19,

1861,[1]

a reminder of the present distribution of land in European Russia will not
be out of place.  

The last official statistics of land distribution in European Russia
were published by the Ministry of the Interior and date from 1905.  

According to these statistics there were (in round numbers) about
30,000 big landlords owning over 500 dessiatines each, their total land
amounting to about 70,000,000 dessiatines.  

Some 10,000,000 poor peasant households owned the same amount
of land.  

[ GRAPHIC / IMAGE ] 
 

It follows that an the average there are about 330 poor peasant
families for each big landlord, each peasant family owning about 7
(seven) dessiatines, while each big landlord owns about 2,300
(two thousand three hundred) dessiatines.  

To show this graphically, we have drawn the above diagram.  

The large white rectangle in the middle stands for the estate of a big
landlord. The small squares around it represent the small peasant holdings.


Altogether there are 324 squares, and the area of the white rectangle
equals 320 squares.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
Anniversary of the abolition of serfdom in Russia.—Tr.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## False Notes









Lenin: False Notes







V. I.  

      Lenin
False Notes




Published:
Pravda No. 55, March 7, 1913.

      Signed: V.I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 588-589.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. Milyukov’s Duma speech on universal suffrage was of
outstanding interest because he had to touch on a number of subjects of
prime importance to democrats.  

Our press in general, including the liberal press, is becoming more and
more addicted to the abominably unprincipled habit of disposing of Duma
speeches by commenting on them in glowing (Mr. Litovtsev in Rech)
or abusive terms, without ever analysing their
ideological content!  

The workers do not believe in bourgeois political chicanery. They want
to learn politics. In response to this desire of theirs, we shall
attempt an analysis of Mr. Milyukov’s speech.  


   “You,” said Mr. Milyukov, addressing himself all
   the time to the Octobrists, “are not linked with authority either by
   specific commitments or even by gratitude”, 


for the elections, you say, were rigged against you.  

Mr. Milyukov, one of the most educated Cadets, a professor, editor,
etc., put forward this argument in the most earnest way, and even added:



   “Apparently there is no social stratum in Russia
   supporting the present government policy...” (Rossiya No. 2236).
   


The falsity of this argument is glaring. None other than Mr. Milyukov
himself went on to quote the Frenchman Chasles, who very justly says that
the “crux of the matter” “is the agrarian questions”.



   “To obtain a conservative Third Duma,” says Chasles,
   “the majority had to be shifted from the peasants to the landlords.... The
   landed proprietors and the aristocracy of wealth can form a bloc of
   five-eighths

    

   of the votes [in the elections to the Duma under our electoral law] and the
   minority can literally be crushed: the peasants, the middle classes and the
   town democrats are invited by the legislator to look on at the elections
   and not make them, to attend but not participate in them.”  


The reactionary Chasles argues cleverly and correctly. We thank
Mr. Milyukov for his interesting quotations which defeat
Mr. Milyukov’s phrase-mongering! In Russia there evidently is a
social “stratum” (the class of landlords—feudal lords or feudal-minded
landlords) which supports the policy of the government and is linked
“with authority” by the bonds of class interests. As for being
linked by “commitments” and “gratitude”, it is perfect
nonsense. Remember that, learned Cadet!  

In our next
       article[1]

we shall show how this learned Cadet circled—like a cat round hot
milk—about the “crux of the matter” (i.e., the agrarian
question), which the reactionary Chasles correctly pointed out.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 590–91 of this volume.–Ed.  —Lenin
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “The Crux of the Matter”









Lenin: 'The Crux of the Matter'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“The Crux of the Matter”




Published:
Pravda No. 56, March 8, 1913.

      Signed: V. I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 590-591.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

We have seen that Chasles, the French reactionary quoted by
Mr. Milyukov, correctly considers that the agrarian question is the “crux
of the matter” confronting
       Russia.[1]


Mr. Milyukov quoted a clever statement by a clever reactionary but he
does not understand it at all!  


   “Can the peasant whom you [i.e., the Octobrists and the government,
   for it is to them that Mr. Milyukov talks!] have brought into this
   body with your own hands be made dependent?  After all, he speaks of the
   land from this rostrum, and he says the same thing as the independent
   peasant said in the First and Second Dumas. There is no element in Russian
   life, gentlemen, more independent or more stable than the Russian
   peasant.” (Applause on the right and voices: “Hear, hear”.)  


Those handclaps must have come from the hypocritical Cadets alone, for
everyone knows, firstly, that in the Third and Fourth Dumas the peasants
have been saying not quite “the same thing” but something weaker
than they said in the First and Second Dumas; and secondly, there
is in Russian life an element that is more independent and more
stable. Mr. Milyukov himself was compelled to admit in his speech
that it is the workers who have done “most” for political
liberty in Russia. Or can “independence” be measured with a different
yardstick?  

But this is not the point. The point is, can the interests of 130,000
landlords and of the mass of the peasantry be reconciled now?
Mr. Milyukov “talked round and round” this question to evade an
answer.  
 

But Mr. S. Litovtsev, hired by Rech to praise P. Milyukov,
wrote that Milyukov’s speech had 


   “dispelled the fog shrouding this sharp and debatable
   question.  To many people, universal suffrage is still a sort of bogey, the
   height of revolutionism”.  


There you have yet another specimen of phrase mongering!  

Learn from the reactionary Chasles, liberal wind-bags! The crux of the
matter lies in the agrarian question. Can the interests of 130,000 landlord
families and 40,000,000 peasant families be reconciled on this question
now? Yes or no?  

That is the “crux” of the matter as far as universal
suffrage is concerned, Mr. Milyukov, while you corrupt the
political consciousness of the people by muddling up with phrases
this main point, which is obvious to any intelligent person.  

If your answer to the question is yes, I shall refute you by
means of your own admission that the peasants in the Third and
Fourth Dumas have been saying (if less emphatically) the “same
thing” as they said in the First and Second Dumas.  

If, however, your answer is no, then all your talk
about the conciliatory, non-“one-sided” character of universal
suffrage in the Russia of today falls to the ground.  

And your learned references to Bismarck are sheer childishness, for
Bismarck “granted” universal suffrage at a time when the bourgeois
development of Germany had already reconciled the interests of the
landlords and all the well-to-do peasants, and even a section of the middle
peasants.  

The shrewd reader may ask: does it not follow that universal suffrage
is impossible in Russia? No, we will answer the shrewd reader, it only
follows that a reformist point of view is impossible in Russia.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See pp. 588–89 of this volume.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Liberal Embellishment of Serfdom









Lenin: Liberal Embellishment of Serfdom







V. I.  

      Lenin
Liberal Embellishment of Serfdom




Published:
Pravda, No 57, March 9, 1913.

      Signed: I..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 592-593.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Mr. Milyukov, a liberal historian, leader of the Cadet
Party, wrote in a recent leading article in Rech: 


   “Social inequality in Russia [serfdom] turned out to be
   more fragile and accidentally established than anywhere else in the
   civilised world. It gave way without resistance [!!!] at the very first
   stroke of the pen. Milyutin and Solovyov accomplished without difficulty
   something the feasibility of which Count Stroganov predicted as long ago as
   the reign of Alexander I.”  


We are used to seeing all liberal and some Narodnik historians
embellish serfdom and the serf-owning state power in Russia. But not all
went to the length of such disgraceful “gems” as the one we have just
quoted.  

Serfdom and the serf-owning landlord class in Russia were not fragile
and accidentally established but much “stronger”, more firm, powerful and
omnipotent “than any where else in the civilised world”. It did not cede
even a small part of its privileges “without resistance”, but did it with
the greatest resistance. Or perhaps the liberal gentleman could point out
in the “civilised world” examples comparable to the fate of
Chernyshevsky?  

Milyutin and Solovyov themselves upheld the privileges of the
feudal landlords and the exceedingly onerous “compensation” for
these privileges. By saying nothing about this, Mr. Milyukov distorts
history, which testifies to half a century of “tenacious” feudal
privileges, omnipotence and unlimited power after Milyutin and Co., after
“their” feudal reform.  

Why do liberal historians embellish serfdom and feudal reforms? Because
they see in the activity of the makers of

    

such reforms a servility to the feudal lords that is gratifying to them, a
fear of democracy that they find encouraging, a desire for a bloc with
reaction that they appreciate, and an embellishment of the class struggle
that is familiar to them.  

The question relates to the distant past. And yet the attitude to the
class struggle adopted then and now by the liberals (liberals “without and
bureaucrats

within”[1]) is a phenomenon of one and the same nature.  

By embellishing serfdom, Mr. Milyukov has splendidly portrayed his own
self, his party and all Russian bourgeois liberals, who class themselves
among the democrats in order to fool simpletons.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
The words quoted by Lenin are a paraphrase of two lines in
N. Nekrasov’s “Cradle Song”, which read as follows: 

You will be an official without
 And a scoundrel within....











Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A “Scientific” System of Sweating









Lenin: A 'Scientific' System of Sweating







V. I.  

      Lenin
A “Scientific” System of Sweating




Published:
Pravda No. 60, March 13, 1913.

      Signed: W..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 594-595.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

U.S. capitalism is ahead of all. The greatest development
of technology and the most rapid progress are facts which make old Europe
emulate the Yankees. But it is not the democratic institutions that the
European bourgeoisie is borrowing from America, nor political liberty, nor
yet the republican political system, but the latest methods of exploiting
the workers.  

The most widely discussed topic today in Europe, and to some extent in
Russia, is the “system” of the American engineer, Frederick Taylor. Not
so long ago Mr. Semyonov read a paper on this system in the assembly hall
of the Railway Engineering Institute in St. Petersburg. Taylor himself has
described his system under the title of “scientific”, and his book is
being eagerly translated and promoted in Europe.  

What is this “scientific system”? Its purpose is to squeeze out of
the worker three times more labour during a working day of the same length
as before. The sturdiest and most skilful worker is put to work; a special
clock registers—in seconds and fractions of a second—the amount of time
spent on each operation and each motion; the most economical and most
efficient working methods are developed; the work of the best worker is
recorded on cinematographic film, etc.  

The result is that, within the same nine or ten working hours as
before, they squeeze out of the worker three times more labour, mercilessly
drain him of all his strength, and are three times faster in sucking out
every drop of the wage slave’s nervous and physical energy. And if he dies
young? Well, there are many others waiting at the gate!  
 

In capitalist society, progress in science and technology means
progress in the art of sweating.  

Here is an example from Taylor’s book.  

Speaking of the operation of loading cast iron on to hand-carts for
further processing, the author compares the old and the new,
“scientific”, system: 





 
Old
New


system




Number of workers engaged in loading . . . . . . 
500
140


Average number of tons loaded by one worker (a ton

    equals 61 poods) . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
16
59


Average earnings of worker (rubles) . . . . . . . . 
2.30
3.75


Expenditure incurred by factory owner per ton of

    load (kopeks) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
14.4
6.4




The capitalist cuts his expenditure by half or more. His
profits grow. The bourgeoisie is delighted and cannot praise the Taylors
enough!  

The workers get a wage increase at first. But hundreds of workers get
the sack. Those who are left have to work four times more intensively,
doing a back-breaking job. When he has been drained of all his strength,
the worker will be kicked out. Only young and sturdy workers are taken on.


It is sweating in strict accordance with all the precepts of science.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Our “Achievements”









Lenin: Our 'Achievements'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Our “Achievements”




Published:
Pravda No. 61, March 14, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 596-597.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Minister of Finance, in his explanatory note on the
Budget, and all the government parties assure themselves and others that
our Budget is firmly based. They refer, among other things, to the
“achievements” of industry, which indubitably has been on the upgrade in
the last few years.  

Our industry, as well as our entire national economy, has been
developing along capitalist lines. That is indisputable, and needs no
proof. But anyone who limits himself to data on “development” and to the
smugly boastful statement that “there is an increase of so-and-so many
per cent” shuts his eyes to Russia’s incredible
backwardness and poverty, which these data reveal.  

The output of our entire factory industry was worth 4,307 million
rubles in 1908 and about 4,895 million rubles in 1911, says the Minister of
Finance exultantly.  

But see what these figures mean. In America a census
is taken every ten years. To come upon a figure similar to ours,
we must go back to 1860, when America still had Negro slaves.


In 1860 the output of America’s manufacturing industry was valued at
3,771 million rubles, and in 1870 it was worth as much as 8,464 million
rubles. In 1910 its value was already as high as 41,344 million rubles,
i.e., almost nine times as much as in Russia. Russia has a
population of 160 million, while America had 92 million in 1910 and 31
million in 1860!  

In 1911 the Russian factory worker earned an annual average of 251
rubles, or 8.2 per cent more (in terms of the wages total) than in 1910,
exults the Minister of Finance.  
 

In America the average pay of the industrial worker in 1910 was
1,036 rubles, i.e., more than four times that of his
Russian counterpart. In 1860 it was 576 rubles, i.e., double the
present amount in Russia.  

Twentieth-century Russia, the Russia of the June Third
“Constitution”, is in a lower position than slave-owning
America.  

In Russia, annual productivity per factory worker was 1,810 rubles in
1908, while in America it was 2,860 rubles in 1860 and 6,264 rubles in
1910.  

These few figures suffice as a brief illustration of modern
capitalism and of the medieval oppression of serfdom which fetters it, and
which accounts for the sorry plight of the bulk of the peasantry.  

As a matter of fact, the plight of the peasantry is inevitably reducing
the home market to miserable dimensions and dragging down the worker, who
in 1911 earned half the amount earned by the American worker in the period
of slavery. Besides, the conditions of the world market confront Russia
with the alternative of either being crushed by competitors among whom
capitalism is advancing at a different rate and on a truly broad basis, or
of getting rid of all the survivals of serfdom.  

 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Agreement or Split?









Lenin: Agreement or Split?







V. I.  

      Lenin
Agreement or Split?
Concerning the Differences Within the Social-Democratic Duma Group




Published:
Pravda No. 62, March 15, 1913.

      Signed: B. B..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 598-600.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Social-Democratic opinion is alarmed by the threat of a
split in the group that sounded in the letter of the seven deputies. The
matter has justly aroused keen interest among the workers. It is essential
to make an accurate and clear-cut appraisal of the situation.  

On one side are all six deputies from the worker curia, i.e.,
representatives of the vast majority of Russia’s working class, as everyone
realises. On the other side are the remaining seven deputies, who command
an accidental majority of one vote inside the group.  

On the face of it, the point at issue is that the seven deputies want
to force the other six to become contributors to the newspaper
Luch, and declare for merging Pravda and
Luch. These demands of the seven deputies seem to us simply
unreasonable, to put it plainly. Can anyone be compelled by a majority
vote” to contribute to a newspaper whose trend he does not share? (It goes
without saying that any self-respecting editorial board would refuse to
have “contributors” who have been dragged in by force, against their
will.) Can one speak seriously of merging Pravda and
Luch? Of course not! And we declare plainly that we
should consider it a betrayal of the proletarian cause for
Pravda to renounce its struggle against liquidationism, and hence,
for Pravda and Luch to be merged, so long as
Luch has not renounced liquidationist propaganda—against the
“underground”, against political strikes, etc. A serious
Social-Democrat would hardly believe it if he were told that
Pravda and the six workers’ deputies had decided to commit suicide
merely because Luch insisted on it. That is out of

    

the question, and the seven deputies will do well to cease harking back to
their absolutely unacceptable and unrealistic “plan” 

However, this does not exhaust the issue of the differences within the
group. Everyone senses that behind the outward dispute over the forced
collaboration with Luch there is some other, more serious and
important dispute. The point of this dispute is the attitude of either
section of the group to liquidationism.  

And we think that in this matter the workers are entitled first of all
to insist on the seven deputies stating their attitude to
liquidationism—in plain, precise, clear and definite
terms. It is the duty of the seven deputies to do this as openly as
the six workers’ deputies did it. In the Third Duma group, the overwhelming
majority of the deputies were Mensheviks. But their attitude to
liquidationism was markedly negative. Now what is the attitude of
the seven deputies today? They have themselves raised the question of
Luch, i.e., of liquidationism. They are, therefore, doubly obliged
to say openly and exactly what they think of the propaganda of
Luch against the underground (see Luch No. 101 and other
issues), against political strikes, against the hegemony of the working
class in the emancipation movement, etc. Unless this is done, not a single
step can be taken towards finding a way out of the situation.  

We say plainly: if the Social-Democratic group were found to include
even one deputy who would make speeches from the Duma platform like the
article in Luch No. 101 (which said that the growing sympathy for
the “underground” was a “deplorable” fact, etc.), a break with that
deputy would be unavoidable. And any Social-Democratic deputy who did
not get up and say that that speaker did not express the opinion of the
Social-Democrats would fail in his duty towards the working class.  

Are we right or wrong in expressing this opinion? We shall calmly leave
it to the workers to answer this question.  

In view of the serious differences between the two halves of the group,
unity can be preserved only if both sides alike strive for
agreement. To “settle” questions bearing on the Party Programme by
an accidental majority of one vote means inviting a split. That is
obvious to anyone. People

    

who are earnest in their desire for unity will never adopt this way of
“settling” questions.


Is such an agreement possible in the group as it now stands? Until recently it
was. The declaration of the group, read at the beginning of the Fourth
Duma’s work, is an example. The group rejected liquidationist claims, and
thus made an agreement between the two sections possible. Given goodwill, and
provided the seven deputies are not preparing for a split, this will
be possible in the future as well on all important political questions.


The declaration is an example of what should be done to avoid a
split. On the other hand, the example of “cultural national autonomy” is
an example of what should not be done, to avoid a split. To put forward
this demand, as did Comrade Chkhenkeli, means cancelling the
Social-Democratic Programme. Hitherto the liquidators have asserted that this
demand “does not contradict” the Programme, but now they have been
exposed even by the Bundists them selves, who (see Die Zeit

No. 9[1]) congratulate Chkhenkeli precisely for having
“abandoned the rigid standpoint of official theory on the national
question”. To cancel the Programme by seven votes to six means
paving the way for a split. That is obvious to any class-conscious
worker.


And so, the alternative is agreement or split!


What do we propose? Agreement!


Is agreement possible? Yes!


Is it desirable? Yes!


What is needed to bring it about? What is needed is not to cancel the Programme,
not to revile the “underground”, to remain loyal to the old banner!
Our demands are modest, as the reader will see.


For agreement between the seven and six, against a split! This is what all
class-conscious workers should demand.


 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Die Zeit (Time)—a daily newspaper published by the
Bund in Yiddish in St. Petersburg from December 20, 1912 (January 2, 1913)
to May 5 (18), 1914.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Spare Cash”









Lenin: 'Spare Cash'







V. I.  

      Lenin
“Spare Cash”[2]




Published:
Pravda No. 62, March 15, 1913.

      Signed: V..

      Published according to the Pravda text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      [1975],

      Moscow,

      Volume 18,

      pages 601-602.

      Translated: Stepan Apresyan

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The government newspapers, headed by the sycophantic Novoye Vremya, are
extolling our government for the splendid results achieved by the national
economy. Just think:
450 million rubles of “spare cash”! Bringing money into the house and not
taking it out—that, please note, is how “we” manage our household.


And Novoye Vremya, newspaper of the Black-Hundred landlords and
Octobrist merchants, comes to the conclusion that there is no risk at all even
in waging war when you have such a nest-egg as 450 million rubles.


Let us, however, lock at the explanatory note of the Minister of Finance to the
Budget for 1913. Perhaps we can find in it, besides self-praise (of which the
note is chock-full!), exact data on the origin of the vaunted
“spare cash”?


We open the Minister’s explanatory note and read (Part I, p. 15) that in
the five years from 1908 to 1912 loans brought the Treasury 339,500,000
rubles. During the same period, loans were paid off to the value of 252,100,000
rubles.


Hence loans have increased by a total of 87,400,000
rubles. There you have the first “source” of the “spare
cash”. It is a simple one, as you see.


But to proceed. It is known that on October 1, 1908, the
price of state-monopoly vodka was raised to the limit, that is, from
8 rubles to 8.40 per
vedro[1]

(meaning the standard vedro, for the price per table
vedro went up from 11 to 12 rubles).


As a result of this “financial measure”, the price of state-monopoly
vodka in the five-year period 1908–12 averaged 8.48 rubles per vedro,
i.e., exactly 42 kopeks more than in the previous four years (in
1904–07 it was 8.06 per

vedro).

 

Altogether the Treasury sold 440,500,000 vedros of 40% vodka in five
years (1908–12). The 42-kopek increase in profit per vedro added up to
185 million rubles.  

There you have the second source of the “spare cash”!  

The third source—the state railways—yielded in four years
(1908–11) 53 million rubles of “net profit”, if one leaves
out of account payment of interest and amortisation of Treasury
capital expenditure, which totalled 2,250 million rubles!! Let us assume
that in 1912 this “profit” was as high as in 1911, i.e., 105 million
rubles. We get a “profit” of 158 million rubles during the five
years. Obviously, a national “economy” in which interest and amortisation
on thousands of millions spent are not taken into account is more like
national juggling. Let us note that it was not some “Left wing
journalist” (God forbid!) but the State Control itself that
estimated at 397,600,000 rubles in four years (1908–11) the
interest and amortisation on the investments made by the Treasury in the
railway system. In terms of the five years from 1908 to 1912, it adds up to
500 million rubles! This is a specimen of predatory
economy.  

We shall now sum up the three sources of the “spare cash”: 





(1) Loans 
87,400,000 rubles


(2) Increased price of state-monop- oly vodka 
185,000,000 ”


(3) State railways (leaving out of account 500 million
      rubles inter- est and amortisation on capital expenditure)
158,000,000 ”


Total 
430,400,000 rubles




This would seem to he enough. No need to indicate the less important
“sources”.  

Is it not clear that our feudal-minded landlords are the greatest
financial geniuses? Borrowing money, raising the price of vodka, “leaving
out of account” interest and amortisation on thousands of millions spent
(on the “economy”)—are not these indications of genius?  

Are not they proof of the “stability” of our Budget?  

 

Notes
 

[1]
Twenty-one pints.—Tr.

 



[2]
In the present edition, the article “Spare Cash” includes—between
the phrase “national juggling” and the sentence “This is a specimen of
predatory economy”—an insertion discovered in 1941, which was missing in
the text of the article as it first appeared in Pravda No. 62, on
March 15, 1913, and in the second and third editions of Lenin’s
Collected Works.











Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 18

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





