# Volume 30

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 30







Lenin 
      Collected Works: Volume 30



 
Lenin Collected Works: Volume 30
September 1919 - April 1920


Preface




1919


Speech at a Non-Party Conference of the
      Workers and Men of the Red army of Basmanny, Lefortovo
      alexeyevskoye and Sokolniki Districts.
    
September 3, 1919 . 36k

How the Bourgeoisie Utilises Renegades44k

To the American Workers12k

The Tasks of the Working Women’s
      Movement In the Soviet Republic
    
Speech Delivered at the Fourth Moscow City Conference of Non-Party Working Women. September 23, 1919 20k

The Example of the Petrograd Workers 23k

Answers to Questions Put By a Chicago Daily News Correspondent 16k

Greetings to Italian, French and German Communists 32k

The Workers’ State and Party Week 16k

Speech to Mobilised Worker
  Communists Delivered From the Balcony of Moscow Soviet of
  Workers’ and Red army Deputies
    
October 16, 1919. Newspaper Report 8k

To the Workers and Red army Men of Petrograd 8k

To the Red army Men 16k

Results of Party Week In Moscow and Our tasks 16k

Speech to Students of the Sverdlov
  University Leaving for the Front
    
October 24, 1919 4k

To Comrade Loriot and all the French Friends Who adhered to the 3rd International4k

Letter to the Central Committee of
  the Communist Party of Germany Regarding the Split
    
to Comrades Paul Levi, Clara Zetkin, Eberlein and the Other Members of the C.C. of the Communist Party of Germany . 6k

To the Communist Comrades Who Belonged to the United Communist Party of Germany and Have Now formed a New Party 6k

To Comrade Serrati and to all
  Italian Communists

8k

Interview with
    the Manchester Guardian
    
Three Questions and the Answers: The Bullitt Peace Terms still
hold good Bolsheviks and Propaganda among Western peoples

      

20k
      

The Dictatorship of the
  Proletariat
    
   I (A) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat as New forms Of the Class Struggle of the Proletariat
   II (B) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat as the Destruction of Bourgeois Democracy and the Creation of Proletarian Democracy
   III (C) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat and the Distinguishing Features of Imperialism
   IV (D) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat and Soviet Power24k

Economics and Politics In the Era of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat28k

Greetings to the Workers of Petrograd4k

Soviet Power and the Status of Women12k

Two Years of Soviet Power12k

Two Years of Soviet Power Two Years
  of Soviet Rule
    
Speech at a Joint Session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red army Deputies, the All-Russia Central Council of trade Unions, and Factory Committees, On the Occasion of the Second anniversary of the October Revolution. November 7, 191928k

To the Communists of Turkestan16k

The Fight to Overcome the Fuel
  Crisis
    
Circular Letter To Party Organisations15k

Speech Delivered at the First
  All-Russia Conference On Party Work In the Countryside
    
November 18, 191923k

 Address to the Second All-Russia
  Congress of Communist Organisations of the Peoples of the
  East
    
November 22, 191931k

Draft Resolution of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) On Soviet Rule In the Ukraine11k

Eighth All-Russia Conference of the
  R.C,P.(B)
    
December 2-4,1919 
    Speech at the Opening of the Conference. December 22
    Political Report of the Central Committee. December 23
    Concluding Speech On the Political Report of  The Central Committee. December 24
    Draft Resolution on foreign Policy
    Speech Summing Up the Debate on Soviet Power in the Ukraine. December 372k

Speech Delivered at the First
  Congress of Agricultural Communes and Agricultural Artels.
    
December 4, 191923k

Seventh All-Russia Congress of
  Soviets
    
December 5-9, 1919
  1. Report of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee
  and the Council of People’s Commissars.    December 5-9. 1919
  2. Concluding Speech On the Report of the  All-Russia Central  Executive Committee and the Council     of People’s Commissars. December 5
  3. Speech In the Organisation Section. December 8.
  4. Speech Delivered On the Closing of the Congress. December 9120k

The Constituent Assembly Elections and  The Dictatorship of the Proletariat64k

To the Younger Generation8k

Speech at a Meeting in Presnya
  District On the Anniversary of the December Uprising, 1905
    
December 19, 191920k

Report on Subbotniks Delivered to a
  Moscow City Conference of the R.C.P.(B.).
    
December 20, 191924k

Letter to the Workers and Peasants of the Ukraine apropos of the Victories Over Denikin24k

Stop Spoiling the Russian Language. Some thoughts at Leisure, i.e., While Listening to Speeches at Meetings3k

1920


To the Bureau of the Women’s Congress in Petrograd Gubernia7k

Remarks on and addenda to “Drafts for Rules for the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection’”7k

Speech Delivered at a Non-Party
  Conference of Workers and Red army Men of Presnya
  District. Moscow
    
  January 24, 1920. Newspaper Report15k

Draft Decisions and Directives On Co-Operatives12k

Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils
    
  January 27, 1920. Newspaper Report16k

To Members of the Council of Defence 7k

Report on the Work of the All-Russia
  Central Executive Committee and the Council of People’s
  Commissars Delivered at the First Session of the All-Russia
  Central Executive Committee, Seventh Convocation
    
  February 2, 192064k

Draft (Or theses) of the R.C.P.’s Reply to the Letter of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany 22k

Speech at a Meeting of the
  Railwaymen of Moscow Junction. February 5, 1920
    
  Brief Newspaper 10k

Report À La Guerre Comme À La Guerre! 12k

Speech Delivered at a Non-Party
  Conference InBlagusha-Lefortovo District
    
  February 9, 1920 Newspaper Report15k

A Publicist’s Notes31k

Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
  February 1031k

Telegram to
  J. V. Stalin
    
  February 185k

In Reply to Questions Put By Karl Wiegand, BerlinCorrespondent of Universal Service7k

In Reply to Questions Put By a Correspondent of the Daily Express Telegram7k

To J. V. Stalin
    
  February 20 3k

To the Working
    Women7k

Telegram to J. V. Stalin
    
  February 223k

Speech at the Third All-Russia
  Conference of Directors of Adult Education Divisions of
  Gubernia Education Departments
    
  February 25, 192019k

Speech Delivered at the First
  All-Russia Congress of Working Cossacks
    
  March 1, 192059k

Speech Delivered at the Second
  All-Russia Congress of Medical Workers
    
  March 1, 1920. Minutes 9k

Letter to R.C.P. Organisations On Preparations For the Party Congress14k

On International Women’s Day8k

Speech at a Meeting of the Moscow
  Soviet of Workers’s and Red army Deputies
    
  March 6, 192019k

Speech at a Meeting of the Moscow
  Soviet in Celebration of the First anniversary of the Third
  International
    
  March 6, 192024k

Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Congress of Water Transport Workers
    
  March 15, 192020k

Speech at a Meeting in Memory of
  Y. M. Sverdlov
    
  March 16, 1920. Brief Newspaper Report4k

Two Recorded Speeches
    
  1. Work for the Railways 
  2. Labour Discipline10k

Ninth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)
    
  March 29-April 5, 1920
  
  1. Opening Speech. March 29
  2. Report of the Central Committee. March 29 
  3. Reply to the Discussion On the Report of the Central Committee. March 50
  4. Speech On Economic Development. March 31
  5. Speech On the Co-Operatives. April 5 
  6. Speech Closing the Congress. April 5 116k

On Compromises9k

Telegram to G. K. Orjoniridze3k

Speech Delivered at the First (Inaugural) All-Russia Congress of Mineworkers19k

Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Trade Union Congress
    
  April 7, 192039k

From the Destruction of the Old Social System to the Creation of the New7k

Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Congress of Textile Workers
    
  April 19, 192024k

Speech Delivered at a Meeting
  Organised By The Moscow Committee Of The Rc.P.(B.) In Honour
  Of Lenin’s Fiftieth Birthday
    
  April 23 1920 16k

 


Volume 30  Transcription/Mark-up: Brian Baggins, David Walters, Sally Ryan, Robert Cymbala,  and J.J. Plant,
     2000—2002 







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Non-Party Conference of the
      Workers and Men of the Red army of Basmanny, Lefortovo
      alexeyevskoye and Sokolniki Districts.











Speech at a Non-Party Conference of the Workers and Men of the Red Army of Basmanny, Lefortovo, Alexeyevskoye and Sokolniki Districts September 3, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Non-Party Conference of the Workers and Men of the Red Army of Basmanny, Lefortovo, Alexeyevskoye and Sokolniki Districts[1]
September 3, 1919


Delivered: 3 September, 1919, 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 201, September 11, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 15-26
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, permit me to greet your non-party conference of workers and men of the Red Army, together with Red Commanders graduating from the artillery courses. This conference has been called to discuss problems of strengthening our state system and our state machinery.
In all countries the working-class masses are oppressed. They do not enjoy the benefits of capitalist civilisation, although the working people should by rights constitute the basis of all state life. In our country, comrades, the working people are the basis, the foundation of the Soviet Republic. After the triumph of the working people in February 1917, Soviets made their appearance throughout Russia. The idea of the Soviets did not originate in 1917 for they were born as far back as 1905. Even then Soviets of Workers’ Deputies existed. After the October Revolution Soviet power met with the sympathy of workers in all countries, something that can be explained by profound internal causes.
Allow me, comrades, to say something about the main principles of political life in Soviet Russia. I am not in possession of exact material demonstrating the economic situation of our Republic; other speakers will no doubt deal with this, especially with the food policy of the workers’ and peasants’ government; I shall deal only with the political aspect.
 To get a better picture of the basic principle of Soviet power we must take a backward glance, we must examine the course taken by our revolution, beginning from 1917. There were two periods in our revolution—one was the period of the Kerensky policy and the Kornilov revolt that preceded Soviet power, the other was the period of Kaledin, Kolchak and Denikin[2] who tried to destroy Soviet power. Non-party workers, members of the working classes, must ask themselves why these two periods occurred and why they are interconnected.
Comrades, every worker, every man of the Red Army, every member of the working classes must give thought to the reason our Soviet power is accused of terrorism, why it is said that the Bolsheviks are dictators, that the Bolsheviks are cut-throats. On the other hand, every member of the working classes should ask himself why the power of Kerensky, Kaledin and Kolchak collapsed so easily. You all know that at the time Kerensky was in power, Russia was covered with a network of Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies, and that side by side with them, the bourgeoisie held all power in their own hands. The bourgeoisie were supported by the Allies, who wanted Russia to continue the war; the Russian bourgeoisie, too, wanted to continue the war in order to get hold of the Dardanelles. That is why Kerensky’s bourgeois government, supported by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, did not want to and could not publish the treaties concluded between the government of Nicholas the Bloody and the Allies. In this way the bourgeoisie, by a fraud and with the aid of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, maintained their power over the masses of the working people.
You all remember that there were very few Bolsheviks in the Soviets at the beginning of the 1917 revolution. I remember that at the time of the First Congress of Soviets in June, the Bolsheviks did not make up even a seventh part of the delegates. The bourgeoisie and the so-called socialist parties of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries said of us that the Bolsheviks might have a corrupting influence on the masses. But what was Kerensky’s bourgeois government doing at this time? They were feeding the working people with promises that were never fulfilled. The land law was never promulgated. But when the land committees tried to take over the landed estates for distribution among the poor peasant, the committees were arrested. It became obvious to the working people that this government would give them nothing. They began to realise that only their own power, the power of the workers and poor peasants, would give them anything.
It was at this time that Kornilov launched his attack on petrograd. It was not something casual, it derived from the fraudulent policy of Kerensky’s government that had all the time tried to reconcile landowners and peasants, working people and exploiters, labour and capital. And then the landowners, officers and capitalists wanted to take all power into their own hands. That is why the Kornilov revolt broke out. The Soviets realised the danger and mustered their forces against Kornilov. And when Kerensky’s bourgeois government continued its policy of deception even after this, the workers soon became more politically conscious and at the same time the number of Bolsheviks in the Soviets began rapidly to increase, even before the October Revolution. When we took power into our own hands in October, the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, who strutted freely around Smolny,[3] warned us threateningly that the front would move up and wipe us off the face of the earth. We laughed in their faces in reply because we knew that the working people would understand our explanations, that they supported the power of the working people and, consequently, the power of the Soviets. And so it was; when numerous delegations came to Petrograd from the front we explained to them the real state of affairs and they all came over to our side. That is an object lesson for you non-party working people. Everyone who works, every factory worker, every man of time Red Army, must learn a lesson from the history of the Kerensky government, who, I repeat, wanted to reconcile time interests of the landowners and peasants, workers and employers, labour and capital.
It seemed that the Kerensky government ought to have been a strong one because the Allied bourgeois governments promised to support it, nevertheless it collapsed. The Kerensky government collapsed because it was founded on deception and had no ground under its feet. The Kerensky government promised the working people universal elections, but only to cast dust in their eyes and distract their attention from the real state of affairs. For this reason, when the proletariat took power into its own hands after the October Revolution, it immediately organised its own government bodies, the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’ Deputies.
The workers’ and peasants’ government straightaway rejected the false policy of Kerensky’s bourgeois government. The first act of the Council of People’s Commissars was the publication of the secret treaties concluded between the government of Nicholas the Bloody and our former Allies. The workers’ and peasants’ government declared forthrightly that they did not want to carry on a war waged in the interests of the bourgeoisie, and notwithstanding all the slander by the Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary hirelings of the bourgeoisie, proposed to all belligerent countries that they commence peace negotiations. The workers of all countries then saw that Soviet power did not wish to continue the war. The rapacious Treaty of Brest was concluded, the treaty that the German predators imposed on unarmed Russia. Sympathy for Soviet power spread and grew strong among the class-conscious working-class masses of all countries. When the bourgeois governments of the countries of the Entente[4] forced the German plunderers to conclude a still more harsh and rapacious treaty,[5] the workers of all countries realised that they had been fooled all the time. Voices were raised and grew in strength and number against those who had all the time been fooling the people. Workers began to demand Soviet power, the power of the working people, the power of the workers and peasants.
That is why the bourgeois governments of Kerensky and Kolehak, that were supported by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, collapsed so rapidly. (You all know that the Menshevik Maisky was a member of the Siberian Government.[6]) And the Mensheviks, and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the Czechoslovaks,[7] supported by the foreign bourgeoisie, all joined forces, at first against the Bolsheviks, and then to organise a ntiona1 democratic government. But what do we see? Kolchak-type officers disbanded the Constituent Assembly in Siberia and established the power of the officers, capitalists and landowners. Thus the working people of Siberia learned from their own experience that they were being deceived, and that is why the Red Army was able to capture the whole of Siberia so easily and in such a short time—the Siberian workers and peasants came to the aid of the Red Army.
Comrades, now we have to give some thought to why it is said that the Bolsheviks use force, that the Bolsheviks are dictators. Why is it that all those who followed the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, Czechoslovaks and Kolchak soon turned their backs on them? Why did the landowners, capitalists and officers from the Siberian Government expel the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries and put Kolchak in their place immediately they got power into their own hands? Why did that government, supported from all sides, collapse so quickly? Because all their words and all their deeds were false and fraudulent. Because they did not keep their word, did not give the people a constituent assembly, or popular government, or any other kind of democratic government; they established a dictatorship of the landowners and officers.
Comrades, the bourgeoisie, by force of its class interests, had to lie to the working people and deceive them. The workers and peasants understand all this. They realise that there will he no lies and no deception only when power is in the hands of time working people; nor will there be any of the horrors the proletariat and poor peasantry had to put up with and still have to put up with after four years of war during which the bourgeoisie were in power. The proletariat has realised that there is only one way out—to overthrow the power of the capitalists; that there can be no reconciliation between labour and capital such as the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries are always talking about. Time Siberian workers and peasants have paid a truly high price—tens of thousands of people shot and flogged to death—for their gullibility. We have had the sad experience of the blood of Siberian workers and peasants being spilled, but we know that it will he a lesson to them. Experience of this kind is the best way of teaching Bolshevism to the workers and peasants. After it the working people realise that there is no middle way, that they must choose—either the power of the workers and peasants, Soviet power, or the power of the landowners and capitalists. The bourgeoisie are trying to stultify the consciousness of the working people by force and by deception, but all their efforts will collapse like a house of cards as the political consciousness of the workers and the poor peasants grows.
The venture of Denikin, who, in the Ukraine is repeating the Kolchak lesson, will compel the Ukrainian workers and peasants to understand the mistake they are making in not fighting vigorously enough against him. We know that after Denikin has ruled for a while in the Ukraine, the Ukrainian workers and peasants will be all the stronger for it and will defend the power of the workers and peasants, not in words but in deeds, as our Siberian brothers are now doing. The workers’ and peasants’ government tells the peasants and all working people, “Come with us, build your own proletarian state. Take a look at the lesson taught by Kolchak and Denikin and you will see the sort of life you get when there is no Soviet power.” That lesson is the best agitation on our behalf.
The powerful workers’ and peasants’ government suppresses ’whiteguard conspiracies conjured up against it. It sweeps the traitors out of its ranks with an iron broom. The workers’ and peasants’ government organised the Red Army, put specialists into it and surrounded them with a number of communist commissars. Dozens of specialists who proved to be traitors have been kicked out of the Red Army, and thousands, tens of thousands of them are honestly carrying out their duties and remain in the ranks of the workers’ and peasants’ Red Army. That is the main, basic lesson to be learned from the political emancipation and liberation of the working people.
Everything that I am telling you today, comrades, is becoming clear to the working people of other countries. Everywhere the movement of the workers who demand the establishment of Soviet power is growing and expanding. You know that Mensheviks now head the government in Germany and that they are maintained in power by the armed force of the Entente; nevertheless, despite this, the German workers are demanding Soviet power. And the German Government was recently forced to add a clause to its constitution introducing Soviets or Councils of workers’ deputies throughout Germany. Those councils, however, do not possess the right to discuss questions of the country’s political life. According to the constitution of the socialist-traitors the German Soviets have the right to discuss only the economic situation in the country. We get very little information on other West-European countries, because we are surrounded by enemies on all sides, but the information that does reach us speaks of the spread and strengthening of the movement in favour of the Bolsheviks. Let me tell you of a little incident that occurred in France and which proves more eloquently than any words the correctness of my arguments; it will tell you a great deal. Two Bolshevik newspapers are published in France. One of them wanted to have the title of >Bolshevik hut the censor (in democratic France there is a censor!) forbade it and the newspaper called itself Le Titre censure.[8]Workers who buy the newspaper and see the title add the word Bolshevik themselves. (Stormy applause.)
In conclusion, comrades, let me tell you of a report I received today from Comrade Zinoviev, Chairman of the Petrograd Soviet of Workers’ and Red Army Deputies. Comrade Zinoviev informs rue t Ii at a hundred Estomia n prisoners have been landed in Petrograd and they told him the following. A non-party conference of trade union workers was held in whiteguard Estonia. It was attended by 417 delegates of whom only 33 were Mensheviks, all the others being Bolsheviks! (Stormy applause.) The conference demanded the conclusion of peace with Russia. When the British learned of this their representative appeared at the conference and proposed the overthrow of the whiteguard Government of Estonia, but the workers answered by chasing him away and demanding the conclusion of peace with Russia and the return to peaceful life. The conference was then dispersed and a hundred people were sent to Russia “to seek Bolshevism”; they have arrested 26 people and intend to shoot them. We responded to this act of whiteguard Estonia by a manifesto to the workers and the population of the country, and we informed their government that we shall shoot all hostages in our hands.[9] (Applause.) And there, too, the government was supported by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries]
Little Estonia, at her non-party trade union conference, gave powerful Britain a proper answer—Britain that had menaced us with an alliance of fourteen powers.[10]
As I come to the end of my speech, allow me to express my confidence that Soviet Russia, for two years victorious inside the country, will soon conquer the power of the bourgeoisie throughout the world. (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1] The non-party conference of the workers and Red Army men of
Basmanny, Lefortovo, Alexeyevskoye and Sokolniki districts of
Moscow was held September 3-4, 1919, about 3,000 people attend-
ing. The resolution adopted on Lenin’s report said that the workers
and peasants were in danger of being hurled hack into most severe
slavery under the yoke of landowners and capitalists and that only
ruthless struggle against the enemies could thwart the danger
(Pravda No. 195, September 4, 1919). The conference resolved to
continue building up the Red Army, to strain every effort in develop-
ing all branches of the national economy, maintain revolutionary
discipline, and carry out all the directives of the Soviet government
faithfully and without fail.
[2]
The Kerensky period-a period from May to October 1917 when the bourgeois Provisional Government headed by Kerensky, a Social-ist-Revolutionary, was in power.
The Kornilov revolt was a counter-revolutionary conspiracy organised by the Russian bourgeoisie in August 1917 and headed by the tsarist general Kornilov. The conspirators, relying on higher army officers, hoped, with the aid of the officer cadets and Cossack units, to seize revolutionary Petrograd, smash the Bolshevik Party, disband the Soviets and establish a military dictatorship in the country. Answering the call of the Bolshevik Central Committee the Petrograd workers and revolutionary soldiers and sailors suppressed the Kornilov revolt. Under pressure from the masses the Provisional Government was forced to order Kornilov’s arrest and to indict him and his accomplices for mutiny. The attempt by the bourgeoisie and the landowners to crush the revolution failed. After the defeat of the Kornilov revolt, the prestige of the Bolshevik Party among the masses grew rapidly; the Boishevisation of the Soviets throughout the country began. The Bolsheviks again issued the slogan “All Power to the Soviets!”
Kaledin—tsarist general and Cossack ataman who organised a counter-revolutionary revolt in the Don area at the end of 1917.
Kolchak—Admiral of the tsarist navy and a hireling of British, American and French imperialism; organised a counter-revolutionary uprising against Soviet power. In November 1918 he proclaimed himself "Supreme Ruler of Russia", seized Siberia, and established a military dictatorship. In 1919 the Kolchak army was routed by the Red Army, and Soviet rule was restored throughout the territory occupied by Koichak.
 Denikin—tsarist general, headed the counter-revolutionary Insurrection in the South of Russia arid in the Ukraine. In the summer and autumn of 1919, aided by Britain, France and the U.S.A., Denikin ventured an offensive against the Soviet Republic from the South, heading for Moscow. By the beginning of 1920 Denikin’s
army had been defeated by the Red Army. 


[3] Smolny—the building of the former Smolny Institute in Petrograd; in October 1917 the Bolshevik Central Committee and the Revolutionary Military Committee of the Petrograd Soviet were housed in it. After the revolution it was the seat of the Soviet Government until it moved to Moscow in March 1918.
[4] Lenin refers to the peace treaty between the Soviet Republic and the powers of the Quadruple Alliance (Germany, Austria-Hungary, Bulgaria and Turkey), concluded on March 3, 1918 in Brest-Litoysk and ratified by the Extraordinary Fourth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on March 15. The peace terms were extremely harsh for Soviet Russia. Under the treaty, Poland, nearly all the Baltic area and part of Byelorussia were annexed to Germany and Austria-Hungary, end the Ukraine became a separate state dependent on Germany. Moreover, Soviet Russia had to pay considerable indemnities under a rapacious supplementary treaty and finance agree-ment imposed on her by Germany in August 1918.
Despite its harsh terms, the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk gave the Soviet state a breathing-space, enabled it to demobilise the old, disintegrating army and create a new, Red Army, start socialist construction and build lip the forces for the coming battles against internal counter-revolution and foreign intervention.
After the November revolution in Germany in 1918 the Brost
Treaty was annulled. 
[5] Entente—the imperialist bloc of Britain, France and tsarist Russia which took final shape in 1907, and was opposed to the Triple Alliance of Germany, Austria-Hungary and Italy. The emergence of the Triple Entente was preceded by the conclusion of the Franco-Russian alliance of 1891-93 and the Anglo-French agree-ment of 1904. The formation of the Entente was concluded by the signing of the Anglo-Russian agreement in 1007. During the First World War the military and political alliance of Britain, France and Russia was joined by the United States, Japan, Italy and other countries. This alliance of imperialist powers, that later took part in the intervention against Soviet Russia, was known at the time as “the Entente”; this is the meaning given to the word by Lenin.
[6] Lenin refers to the Treaty of Versailles which put an end to the First World War of 1914-18. It was signed in June 1919 between Britain, France, Italy, Japan on the one side and the defeated Germany, on the other.
The Versailles Treaty legalised the redivision of the world in favour of the victor countries. Germany had to pay huge reparations and indemnities in the form of a great number of ships, tens of mil-lions of tons of coal, half of the country’s stock of dyes and other chemicals, and so on.
The Versailles Treaty was a heavy burden for the German people. They had to pay high taxes and suffered chronic unemployment. As far as the German imperialists and heavy industry magnates were concerned, they retained their dominant position in the country and continued to extract colossal profits. 


[7] The Siberian Government was formed on June 30, 1918 in Omsk with the aid of the British, French and American interventionists. So-cialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks and Cadets participated in the government. Under the guise of hypocritical phrases about democracy It pursued a counter-revolutionary policy. It returned factories, commercial enterprises and landed estates to their former owners, repealed the eight-hour working day, introduced courts martial, passed a decision on the dissolution and prohibition of the Soviets, repealed the Soviet Government’s decrees and enforced th laws of the tsarist and the bourgeois provisional governments. The rout of the counter-revolutionary and interventionist armies by the Red Army in 1919 put an end to the Siberian Government.
[8] This refers to the counter-revolutionary revolt of the Czechoslovak Army Corps organised by the Entente imperialists with the active participation of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries.
The Czechoslovak Corps was formed in Russia prior to the Great October Socialist Revolution from Czech and Slovak prison-ers of war. After the establishment of Soviet power in Russia the president of the Czechoslovak National Council, TomÂi Masaryk, proclaimed the Corps part of the French army, and representatives of the Entente raised the question of its evacuation to France. The Soviet Government agreed to send it to France through Vladivostok on the condition that it surrendered its arms. But the counter-revolutionary commanders of the Corps violated the agreement with the Soviet Government and at the end of May 1918 began an insur-rection against Soviet power. The governments of the U.S.A., Britain and France supported the insurrection. French officers took part in it openly. Acting in close contact with the whiteguards and kulaks, the Czechoslovak Corps seized a large part of the Urals, the Volga area and Siberia, everywhere restoring bourgeois rule. Whiteguard governments were formed in the occupied dis-tricts, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries participating-the so-called Siberian Government in Omsk, the Committee of Members of the Constituent Assembly in Samara and others.
Soon after the outbreak of the insurrection, on June 11, the Cen-tral Executive Committee of the Czechoslovak Communist groups in Russia issued an appeal to the soldiers of the Corps in which it ex- ed the counter-revolutionary nature of the insurrection and called upon Czech and Slovak workers and peasants to suppress the revolt and to enrol in the Czechoslovak units of the Red Army. About 12,000 Czech and Slovak soldiers fought in the ranks of the Red Army.
In autumn 1918 the Red Army liberated the Volga area. The
Czechoslovak revolt was finally suppressed in 1919 when the Kolchak revolt was crushed. 
[9] Le Titre censuré!!!(Title Forbidden!!!)—a weekly newspaper published in Paris by Georges Anquetil from April 19 to June 21, 1919. Altogether ten issues were published. Beginning with issue No. 8 it co-operated with Le Titre enchainé (Fettered Title) and offered some of its pages to the latter.
Le Titre censuré published mainly Anquetil’s articles or reprints from other newspapers. 
[10] This refers to the appeal “To the Workers of Estonia from the Petrograd Soviet” published in connection with the arrival in Petrograd of the workers banished from Estonia, and to the radio message to the Estonian Government of September 3, 1919.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive 
 
 
 







==========

## How the Bourgeoisie Utilises Renegades











How the Bourgeoisie Utilises Renegades



V. I. Lenin
How the Bourgeoisie Utilises Renegades


Written: 20 September, 1919 
 
First Published: September 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 27-37
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Our wireless stations intercept messages from
    Carnarvon (Britain), Paris and other European centres. Today Paris
    is the centre of the world imperialist alliance and its wireless
    messages are therefore often of particular interest. A few days
    ago, on September 13, the government wireless station in this
    centre of world imperialism reported the publication of a new
    anti-Bolshevik book by Karl Kautsky, the well-known renegade and
    leader of the Second International.
The millionaires and multimillionaires would not use their
    government wireless station for nothing. They considered it
    necessary to publicise Kautsky’s new crusade. In their
    attempt to stem the advancing tide of Bolshevism they have to
    grasp at everything—even at a straw, even at Kautsky’s
    book. Our heartfelt thanks to the French millionaires for helping
    Bolshevik propaganda so splendidly, for helping us by making a
    laughing-stock of Kautsky’s philistine anti-Bolshevism.
Today, September 18, I received the September 7 issue of Vorwärts,
    the newspaper of the German social-chauvinists, the murderers of
    Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg. It has an article by Friedrich
    Stampfer on Kautsky’s new book (Terrorism
    and Communism ) and cites a number of passages from it.[1] When we compare Stampfer’s
    article and the Paris wireless message we see that the latter is
    in all probability based on the former. Kautsky’s book is
    extolled by the Scheidemanns
    and Noskes,
    the bodyguards of the German bourgeoisie and murderers of the
    German Communists, by those who have joined the imperialists of
    the Entente in fighting international communism. A highly edifying
    spectacle! And when I called Kautsky a lackey of the bourgeoisie
    (in my book The
    Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade Kautsky), our
    Mensheviks, those typical representatives of the Berne
    (yellow) International, could not find words strong enough to
    express their indignation.
But it is a fact, gentlemen, despite all your indignation. The
    Scheidemanns of Vorwärts and the Entente
    millionaires are certainly not in collusion with me when they
    praise Kautsky and hold him up as a weapon in the struggle against
    world Bolshevism. In relation to the bourgeoisie
    Kautsky—even if he did not realise and did not wish
    it—has proved to be exactly what I described him to be.
Some of the more “thunderous” of his accusations
    against the Bolsheviks will show how far he has gone in his
    apostasy from socialism and the revolution, apostasy that hides
    behind the name of Marxism.
“Kautsky describes in detail,” Stampfer writes,
    “how the Bolsheviks always, in the end, arrive at the very
    opposite of their avowed aims: they were opposed to the death
    sentence, but are now resorting to mass
    shootings. . . .”
First, it is a downright lie to say that the Bolsheviks were
    opposed to the death sentence in time of revolution. At the
    Party’s Second Congress in 1903, when Bolshevism first
    emerged, it was suggested that abolition of the death sentence be
    made one of the demands in the Party programme then being drawn
    up, but the minutes record that this only gave rise to the
    sarcastic question: “For Nicholas II too?” Even the
    Mensheviks, in 1903, did not venture to call for a vote on the
    proposal to abolish the death sentence for the tsar. And in 1917,
    at the time of the Kerensky government, I wrote in Pravda
    that no revolutionary government could dispense with the death
    sentence; the question was against which class a
    particular government would use it. Kautsky has so far forgotten
    how to think in terms of revolution and is so steeped in
    philistine opportunism that he cannot visualise a proletarian
    revolutionary party openly acknowledging, long before its victory,
    the need for capital punishment in relation to
    counter-revolutionaries. “Honest” Kautsky, being an
    honest man and an honest opportunist, quite unashamedly writes
    untruths about his opponents.
Secondly, anyone with the least understanding of revolution
    will realise that here we are not discussing revolution in
    general, but a revolution that is developing out of the great
    imperialist slaughter of the peoples. Can one conceive of a
    proletarian revolution that develops from such a war being free of
    counter-revolutionary conspiracies and attacks by hundreds of
    thousands of officers belonging to the landowner and capitalist
    classes? Can one conceive of a working-class revolutionary party
    that would not make death the penalty for such attacks in the
    midst of an extremely cruel civil war, with the bourgeoisie
    conspiring to bring in foreign troops in an attempt to overthrow
    workers’ government? Everyone, save hopeless and ludicrous
    pedants, must give a negative answer to these questions. But
    Kautsky is no longer able to see issues in their concrete
    historical setting in the way he formerly did.
Thirdly. If Kautsky is no longer capable of analysis and writes
    lies about the Bolsheviks, if he cannot think, or even present the
    problem of distinctive features of a revolution arising out of
    four years of war—he could at least take a closer look at
    what is going on around him. What is proved by the assassination
    of Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg by army officers in the
    democratic republic of Germany? What is proved by the escape from
    prison of these officers, who were given preposterously lenient
    sentences? Herr Kautsky and his whole “independent”
    party (independent of the proletariat but very much dependent on
    petty-bourgeois prejudices) evade these issues and resort to
    snivelling condemnation and philistine lamentations. That is
    precisely why more and more revolutionary workers the world over
    are turning away from the Kautskys, Longuets, MacDonalds and
    Turatis and joining the Communists, for the revolutionary
    proletariat needs victory over counter-revolution, not
    impotent “condemnation” of it.
Fourthly. The question of “terrorism” is,
    apparently, basic to Kautsky’s book. That is evident from
    the title, also from Stampfer’s remark that “Kautsky
    is doubtlessly right in asserting that the fundamental principle
    of the Commune was not terrorism, but universal
    suffrage”. In my Proletarian Revolution and the Renegade
    Kautsky I cited ample evidence to show that all this talk of
    a “fundamental principle” is a sheer travesty of
    Marxism. My purpose here is a different one. To show what
    Kautsky’s disquisitions on the subject of
    “terrorism” are worth, whom, which class,
    they serve, I shall cite in full a short article by a
    liberal writer. It is a letter to The New
    Republic (June 25, 1919), a liberal American journal which,
    generally speaking, expresses the petty-bourgeois
    viewpoint. However, it is preferable to Kautsky’s in not
    presenting that viewpoint either as revolutionary socialism or
    Marxism.
This is the full text of the letter:
MANNERHEIM AND KOLCHAK
Sir: The Allied governments have refused to
    recognise the Soviet Government of Russia because, as they state:
    

      1.; The Soviet Government is—or was—pro-German. 
 2.; The Soviet Government is based on terrorism. 
3.; The Soviet Government is undemocratic and
    unrepresentative of the Russian people.

      Meanwhile the Allied governments have long since recognised the
      present whiteguard Government of Finland under the dictatorship
      of General Mannerheim, although it appears: 

      1.; That German troops aided the whiteguards in crushing the
          Socialist Republic of Finland, and that General Mannerheim
          sent repeated telegrams of sympathy and esteem to the
          Kaiser. Meanwhile the Soviet Government was busily
          undermining the German Government with propaganda among
          troops on the Russian front. The Finnish Government was
          infinitely more pro-German than the Russian. 

      2.; That the present Government of Finland on coming into power
          executed in cold blood within a few days’ time 16,700
          members of the old Socialist Republic, and imprisoned in
          starvation camps 70,000 more. Meanwhile the total executions
          in Russia for the year ended November 1, 1918, were
          officially stated to have been 3,800, including many corrupt
          Soviet of officials as well as counter-revolutionists. The
          Finnish Government was infinitely more terroristic than the
          Russian. 

      3.; That after killing and imprisoning nearly 90,000 socialists,
          and driving some 50,000 more over the border into
          Russia—and Finland is a small country with an
          electorate of only about 400,000—the white guard
          government deemed it sufficiently safe to hold elections. In
          spite of all precautions, a majority of socialists were
          elected, but General Mannerheim, like the Allies after the
          Vladivostok elections, allowed not one of them to be
          seated. Meanwhile the Soviet Government had disenfranchised
          all those who do no useful work for a living. The Finnish
          Government was considerably less democratic than the
          Russian. 

      And much the same story might be rehearsed in respect to that
      great champion of democracy and the new order, Admiral Kolchak
      of Omsk, whom the Allied governments have supported, supplied
      and equipped, and are now on the point of officially
      recognising. 

      Thus every argument that the Allies have urged against the
      recognition of the Soviets, can be applied with more strength
      and honesty against Mannerheim and Kolchak. Yet the latter are
      recognised, and the blockade draws ever tighter about starving
      Russia. 
Stuart Chase

    

      Washington, D.C.

      This letter written by a bourgeois liberal, effectively exposes
      all the vileness of the Kautskys, Martovs, Chernovs, Brantings
      and other heroes of the Berne yellow International and their
      betrayal of socialism.
For, first, Kautsky and all these heroes lie about Soviet
    Russia on the question of terrorism and democracy. Secondly, they
    do not assess developments from the standpoint of the class
    struggle as it is actually developing on a world scale and in the
    sharpest possible form, but from the standpoint of a
    petty-bourgeois, philistine longing for what might have been if
    there had been no close link between bourgeois democracy and
    capitalism, if there were no whiteguards in the world, if they had
    not been supported by the world bourgeoisie, and so on and so
    forth. Thirdly, a comparison of this American letter with the
    writings of Kautsky and Co. will clearly show that Kautsky’s
    objective role is servility to the bourgeoisie.
The world bourgeoisie supports the Mannerheims and Kolchaks in
    an attempt to stifle Soviet power, alleging that it is terrorist
    and undemocratic. Such are the facts. And Kautsky, Martov, Chernov
    and Co. are only singing songs about terrorism and democracy in
    chorus with the bourgeoisie, for the world bourgeoisie is singing
    this song to deceive the workers and strangle the workers’
    revolution. The personal honesty of “socialists” who
    sing the same song “sincerely”, i.e., because they are
    extremely dull-witted, does not in any way alter the objective
    role played by the song. The “honest opportunists”,
    the Kautskys, Martovs, Longuets and Co., have become
    “honest” (in their unprecedented spinelessness)
    counter-revolutionaries.
Such are the facts.
An American liberal realises—not because he is
    theoretically equipped to do so, but simply because he is an
    attentive observer of developments in a sufficiently broad light,
    on a world scale—that the world bourgeoisie has organised
    and is waging a civil war against the revolutionary proletariat 


      
      and, accordingly, is supporting Kolchak and Denikin in Russia,
      Mannerheim in Finland, the Georgian Mensheviks, those lackeys of
      the bourgeoisie, in the Caucasus, the Polish imperialists and
      Polish Kerenskys in Poland, the Scheidemanns in Germany, the
      counter-revolutionaries (Mensheviks and capitalists) in Hungary,
      etc., etc.
But Kautsky, like the inveterate reactionary philistine he is,
    continues snivelling about the fears and horrors of civil war! All
    semblance of revolutionary understanding, and all semblance of
    historical realism (for it is high time the inevitability of
    imperialist war being turned into civil war were realised) have
    disappeared. This is, furthermore, directly abetting the
    bourgeoisie, it is helping them, and Kautsky is
    actually on the side of the bourgeoisie in the civil war
    that is being waged, or is obviously being prepared, throughout
    the world.
His shouting, groaning, weeping and hysteria about the civil
    war serve to cover up his dismal failure as a theoretician. For
    the Bolsheviks have proved to be right; in the autumn of 1914 they
    declared to the world that the imperialist war would be
    transformed into civil war. Reactionaries of every shade were
    indignant or laughed; but the Bolsheviks were right. To
    conceal their complete failure, their stupidity and
    short-sightedness, the reactionaries must try to scare the petty
    bourgeoisie by showing them the horrors of civil war. That is just
    what Kautsky as a politician is doing.
To what absurd lengths he has gone can be seen from the
    following. There is no hope of a world revolution, Kautsky
    asserts—and what do you think he used as an argument? A
    revolution in Europe an the Russian pattern would mean
    “unleashing (Entfessellung) civil war throughout the
    world for a whole generation ”, and moreover not simply
    unleashing a veritable class war, but a “fratricidal war
    among the proletarians ”. The italicised words belong
    to Kautsky and are—admiringly of course—quoted by
    Stampfer.
Yes, Scheidemann’s scoundrels and hangmen have good
    reason to admire them! Here is a “socialist leader”
    scaring people with the spectre of revolution and scaring them
    away from revolution! But, curiously enough, there is one thing
    Kautsky overlooks; for nearly two years the all powerful Entente
    has been fighting against Russia and thereby stirring up
    revolution in the Entente countries. If the revolution were even
    to begin now, even if only in its compromising stage and in only
    one or two of the Entente Great Powers this would
    immediately put an end to the civil war in Russia, would
    immediately liberate hundreds of millions in the
    colonies, where resentment is at boiling-point and is kept in
    check only by the violence of the European powers.
Kautsky now obviously has another motive for his actions in
    addition to the foulness of his servile soul that he demonstrated
    throughout the imperialist war—he is afraid of
    protracted civil war in Russia. And fear prevents him from seeing
    that the bourgeoisie of the whole world is fighting
    Russia. A revolution in one or two of the European Great Powers
    would completely undermine the rule of the world
    bourgeoisie, destroy the very foundations of its
    domination and leave it no safe haven anywhere.
The two-year war of the world bourgeoisie against
    Russia’s revolutionary proletariat actually
    encourages revolution aries everywhere, for it
    proves that victory on a world scale is very
    near and easy.
As far as civil war “among the proletarians” is
    concerned, we have heard that argument from the Chernovs and
    Martovs. To assess its utter dishonesty, let us take a simple
    example. During the great French Revolution, part of the peasants,
    the Vendée peasants, fought for the King against the
    Republic. In June 1848 and May 1871 part of the workers served in
    the armies of Cavaignac and Galliffet, the armies that stifled the
    revolution. What would you say of a man who took this line of
    argument: I regret the “civil war among the
    peasants in France in 1792 and among the workers in 1848 and
    1871”? You would have to say that he was a hypocrite and
    defender of reaction, the monarchy and the Cavaignacs.
And you would be right.
Today only a hopeless idiot could fail to understand that what
    has taken place in Russia (and is beginning or maturing in the
    rest of the world) is a civil war of the proletariat against
    the bourgeoisie. There never has been, and never can be, a
    class struggle in which part of the advanced class does
    not remain on the side of the reactionary forces. That applies to
    civil war too. Part of the backward workers are bound to help the
    bourgeoisie—for a longer or shorter period. But only
    scoundrels can use that to justify their
    desertion to the bourgeoisie.
Theoretically, this is a refusal to understand what the facts
    of the development of the world labour movement have been
    screaming and shouting about since 1914. The break away of the
    top strata of the working class, corrupted by a
    middle-class way of life and opportunism and bribed by
    “soft jobs” and other bourgeois sops, began to take
    shape on a world scale in the autumn of 1914 and reached its full
    development between 1915 and 1918. By disregarding this historical
    fact and blaming the Communists for the split in the movement,
    Kautsky is only demonstrating, for the thousandth time, his role
    of lackey of the bourgeoisie.
For forty years, from 1852 to 1892, Marx and Engels spoke of
    part (i.e., the top strata, the leaders, the “aristocracy")
    of the workers in Britain becoming increasingly
    bourgeois, owing to that country’s colonial
    advantages and her monopolies.[2] It is clear as
    daylight that the twentieth-century imperialist monopolies in a
    number of other countries were bound to create the same phenomenon
    as in Britain. In all the advanced countries we see corruption,
    bribery, desertion to the bourgeoisie by the leaders of the
    working class and its top strata in consequence of
    the doles handed out by the bourgeoisie, who provide these leaders
    with “soft jobs”, give crumbs from their profits to
    these upper strata, shift the burden of the worst paid and hardest
    work to backward workers brought into the country, and enhance the
    privileges of the “labour aristocracy” as compared
    with the majority of the working class.
The war of 1914-18 has given conclusive proof of treachery to
    socialism and desertion to the bourgeoisie by the leaders and
    top strata of the proletariat, by all the social-chauvinists,
    Gomperses, Brantings, Renaudels, MacDonalds, Scheidemanns,
    etc. And it goes without saying that for a time part of the
    workers by sheer inertia follow these bourgeois scoundrels.
The Berne International of the Huysmanses, Vanderveldes and
    Scheidemanns has now taken full shape as the yellow International
    of these traitors to socialism. If they are not fought, if a split
    with them is not effected, there can be no question of any
    real socialism, of any sincere work for the
    benefit of the social revolution.
Let the German Independents try to sit between two
    stools—such is their fate. The Scheidemanns embrace Kautsky
    as their “own man”. Stampfer advertises this. Indeed,
    Kautsky is a worthy comrade of the Scheidemanns. When Hilferding,
    another Independent and friend of Kautsky’s, proposed at
    Lucerne that the Scheidemanns be expelled from the International,
    the real leaders of the yellow International only laughed at
    him. His proposal was either a piece of extreme foolishness or a
    piece of extreme hypocrisy; he wanted to parade as a Left among
    the worker masses and, at the same time, retain his place in the
    International of bourgeois servitors! Regardless of what motivated
    this leader (Hilferding), the following is beyond doubt—the
    spinelessness of the Independents and the perfidy of the
    Scheidemanns, Brantings and Vanderveldes are bound to result in a
    stronger movement of the proletarian masses away from these
    traitorous leaders. In some countries imperialism can
    continue to divide the workers for a fairly long time to come. The
    example of Britain is proof of that, but the unification
    of the revolutionaries, and the uniting of the masses with the
    revolutionaries and the expulsion of the yellow elements are, on a
    world scale, proceeding steadily and surely. The tremendous
    success of the Communist International is proof of it: in America,
    a Communist Party has already been formed,[3] in
    Paris, the Committee for the Re-establishment of International
    Contacts and the Syndicalist Defence Committee[4] have
    come out for the Third International, and two Paris papers have
    sided with the Third International: Raymond Péricat’s
    L’Internationale[5] and Georges
    Anquetil’s Le Titre censuré (Bolshevik?). In
    Britain, we are on the eve of the organisation of a Communist
    Party with which the best elements in the British
    Socialist Party, the Shop
    Stewards Committees, the revolutionary trade-unionists, etc.,
    are in solidarity. The Swedish Lefts, the Norwegian
    Social-Democrats, the Dutch Communists, the Swiss[6] and
    Italian[7] Socialist parties stand solid with the
    German
    Spartacists and the Russian Bolsheviks.
In the few months since its organisation early this year, the
    Communist International has become a world organisation leading
    the masses and unconditionally hostile to the betrayers of
    socialism in the yellow International of the Berne and Lucerne
    fraternity. 

In conclusion, here is a highly instructive communication that
    casts light on the part played by the opportunist leaders. The
    conference of yellow socialists in Lucerne this August was
    reported by the Geneva paper La Feuille [8] in a
    special supplement appearing in several languages. The English
    edition (No. 4, Wednesday, August 6) carried an interview with
    Troelstra, the well-known leader of the opportunist party in
    Holland.
Troelstra said that the German revolution of November 9 had
    caused a good deal of agitation among Dutch political and trade
    union leaders. For a few days the ruling groups in Holland were in
    a state of panic especially as there was practically universal
    unrest in the army. 

    

      The Mayors of Rotterdam and The Hague, he continues, sought to
      build up their own organisations as an auxiliary force of the
      counter-revolution. A committee composed of former
      generals—among them an old officer who prided himself on
      having shared in the suppression of the Boxer rebellion in
      China—tried to mislead several of our comrades into taking
      up arms against the revolution. Naturally, their efforts had the
      very opposite result and in Rotterdam, at one time, it seemed
      that a workers’ council would be set up. But the political
      and trade union leaders believed such methods premature and
      confined themselves to formulating a workers’ minimum
      programme and publishing a strongly worded appeal to the
      masses.
That is what Troelstra said. He also bragged a good deal,
    describing how he had delivered revolutionary speeches calling
    even for the seizure of power, how he realised the inadequacy of
    parliament and political democracy as such, how he recognised
    “illegal methods” of struggle and “dictatorship
    of the proletariat” in the transition period, and so on and
    so forth.
Troelstra is a typical specimen of the venal, opportunist
    leader who serves the bourgeoisie and deceives the workers. In
    words he will accept everything — workers’
    councils, proletarian dictatorship and whatever else you wish. But
    actually he is a vile betrayer of the workers, an agent of the
    bourgeoisie. He is the leader of those “political
    and trade union leaders” that saved the Dutch
    bourgeoisie by joining forces with them at the decisive
    moment.
For the facts revealed by Troelstra are perfectly clear and
    point in a very definite direction. The Dutch army had been
    mobilised, the proletariat was armed and united, in the army, with
    the poor sections of the people. The German revolution inspired
    the workers to rise, and there was “practically universal
    unrest in the army”. Obviously, the duty of revolutionary
    leaders was to lead the masses towards revolution, not to
    miss the opportune moment, when the arming of the workers
    and the influence of the German revolution could have decided the
    issue at one stroke.
But the treasonable leaders, with Troelstra at their head,
    joined forces with the bourgeoisie. The workers were stalled off
    with reforms and still more with promises of
    reforms. “Strongly worded appeals” and revolutionary
    phrases were used to placate—and deceive—the
    workers. It was the Troelstras and similar “leaders”,
    who make up the Second International of Berne and Lucerne, that
    saved the capitalists by helping the bourgeoisie demobilise the
    army.
The labour movement will march forward, ousting these traitors
    and betrayers, the Troelstras and the Kautskys, ridding itself of
    the upper stratum that has turned bourgeois, is misleading the
    masses and pursuing capitalist policies. 

    
N. Lenin

    

      September 20, 1919
P.S. Judging by Stampfer’s article, Kautsky is now silent
    on the Soviet political system. Has he surrendered on this
    cardinal issue? Is he no longer prepared to defend the banalities
    set forth in his pamphlet against The Dictatorship of the
    Proletariat ? Does he prefer to pass from this chief
    issue to secondary ones? The answer to all these questions must
    await examination of Kautsky’s pamphlet.

Endnotes
[1]
Vorwärts (Forward )Âa daily newspaper,
    Central Organ of the German Social-Democratic Party. In accordance
    with a decision of the Halle Congress of the party, it was
    published in Berlin from 1891 under the name of Vorwärts
    Berliner Volksblatt as a continuation of the newspaper
    Berliner Volksblatt issued since 1884. Engels used the
    columns of this paper to combat all manifestations of
    opportunism. In the late nineties, after the death of Engels,
    Vorwärts was controlled by the Right wing of the
    party and regularly published articles by opportunists. During the
    First World War Vorwärts took a social-chauvinist
    stand; after the Great October Socialist Revolution the paper
    carried on anti-Soviet propaganda. It was published in Berlin till
    1933. 

    
Lenin refers to Friedrich Stampfer’s
    article “Kautsky gegen Spartakus” published in
    Vorwärts No. 457 of September 7, 1919.
    
[2]
    See record of Karl Marx’s speech on the Barry Mandate
    (Minutes of the Hague Congress of 1872 , Madison, 1958);
    Engels’s Preface to the English edition of The
    Condition of the Working Class in England, Preface to the
    second German edition of The Condition of the Working Class in
    England ; Engels’s letters to Marx of September 24,
    1852 and of October 7, 1858; letters by Engels to Sorge of
    September 21, 1872 and of October 5, 1872; Marx’s letter to
    Sorge of August 4, 1874; Engels’s letter to Marx of August
    11, 1881; Engels’s letters to Kautsky of September 12, 1882
    and to Sorge of December 7, 1889.
[3]
    In 1919 two Communist Parties were founded in the U.S.A. Their
    core was the Left wing of the Socialist Party. The Communist
    Labour Party headed by John Reed, James P. Cannon. It was based
    on, and oriented to, native born American workers, the majority of
    the US Working class. Support to the the CLP came also from the
    Jewish Federation of the Socialist Party which joined the CLP. The
    Communist Party of the United States was headed by Charles
    Ruthenberg and Louis Friana, with the support of the majority of
    the foreign born workers federations of the Socialist Party such
    as the Italians, Finns and Russians. The two parties had no
    serious programatic disagreements. Both parties passed decisions
    at their inaugural congresses on affiliation to the Third
    International. In May 1921 they united to form one Communist
    Party.  
[4]
    The Committee for the Re-establishment of International Contacts
    was formed in January 1916 by French internationalists. This was
    the first attempt to set up in France an internationalist
    revolutionary organisation of socialists to counterbalance the
    social-chauvinist organisations. Lenin regarded the Committee as a
    factor in rallying the internationalist forces; he proposed that
    Inessa Armand participate in the Committee. 

    
 Under the influence of the October Revolution
    in Russia and the growth of the French labour movement, the
    Committee became the centre of the revolutionary internationalist
    forces in France, and in 1920 merged with the Communist Party of
    France. 

    
 The Syndicalist Defence Committee was
    formed in autumn of 1916 by a group of syndicalists who broke away
    from the Committee for the Re-establishment of International
    Contacts because they rejected parliamentary activity. In May 1919
    it resolved to join the Communist International.
[5]
L’Internationale— a weekly newspaper of the
    French syndicalists, organ of the Syndicalist Defence Committee,
    appeared in Paris from February to July 1919; edited by Raymond
    Péricat.
[6]
      The Social-Democratic Party of Switzerland (known as
      the Socialist Party) was founded in the 1870s and affiliated to
      the First International; a new party was founded in 1888. The
      party was strongly influenced by opportunists, who took a
      social-chauvinist position during the First World War. In the
      autumn of 1916 the Right wing broke away from the Party and
      founded its own organisation. The party majority, led by Robert
      Grimm, followed a Centrist social-pacifist policy. The Left wing
      adhered to the internationalist stand. After the October
      Revolution in Russia the Left wing became much more
      influential. In December 1920 the Left withdrew from the party
      and in 1921 merged with the Communist Party of Switzerland.
[7]
    The Socialist Party of Italy was founded in 1892 and from
    the very start was the scene of a sharp struggle on all basic
    political and tactical issues between the opportunist and
    revolutionary trends. At its Congress in Reggio-Emilia (1912), the
    more outspoken reformists, who supported the war and co-operation
    with the government and the bourgeoisie (Ivanoe Bonomi, Leonida
    Bissolati and others), were expelled from the party under pressure
    from the Left. Prior to Italy’s entry into the First World
    War, the party opposed war and advocated neutrality. In December
    1914 it expelled a group of renegades (among them Mussolini) for
    supporting the imperialist policy of the bourgeoisie and urging
    Italy’s entry into the war. In May 1915, when Italy did
    enter the war on the side of the Entente, the party split into
    three distinct factions: (1) the Right wing, which helped the
    bourgeoisie prosecute the war, (2) the Centrists who made up the
    majority of the party and pursued the policy of
    “non-participation in the war and no sabotage of the
    war”, and (3) the Left wing, which took a more resolute
    stand against the war but failed to organise a consistent struggle
    against it. The Lefts did not realise the necessity to convert the
    imperialist war into a civil war, or to break resolutely with the
    reformists. The Italian socialists held a joint conference with
    the Swiss socialists in Lugano (1914), took part in the
    international socialist conferences at Zimmerwald (1915) and
    Kienthal (1916), where they sided with the Centrist majority.
After the October Soclalist Revolution in
    Russia the Left wing of the Italian Socialist Party became more
    influential. The 16th party congress, held October 5-8, 1919 in
    Bologna, passed a decision to join the Third International. The
    I.S.P. delegates took part in the Second Congress of the Communist
    International. After the Congress, Serrati, head of the delegation
    and a Centrist, declared against the break with the reformists. In
    January 1921, at the 17th party congress in Livorno the Centrists
    who were in the majority refused to break with the reformists and
    to recognise all the terms of admittance to the Communist
    International. On January 21 the Left-wing delegates left the
    congress and founded the Communist Party of Italy.
[8]
La Feuille— a daily newspaper published in Geneva
    from August 1917 to 1920. Its editor was Jean Debrit. The
    newspaper did not formally belong to any party, but in fact it
    adhered to the positions of the Second International.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the American Workers











To the American Workers



V. I. Lenin
To the American Workers


Written: 23 September, 1919 
First Published: In English on December 27, 1919 in the magazine Soviet Russia No. 30; First published in Russian in Pravda No. 308,November 7, 1930; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 38-39
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, 
 About a year ago, in my letter
    to the American workers (dated August 20th, 1918) I exposed to
    you the situation in Soviet Russia and the problems facing the
    latter. That was before the German revolution. The events which
    since took place in the world’s history proved how right the
    Bolsheviks were in their estimation of the imperialist war of
    1914-18 in general and of the Entente imperialism in
    particular. As for the Soviet power it has become familiar and
    dear to the minds and hearts of the working masses of the whole
    world. Everywhere the working people, in spite of the influence of
    the old leaders with their chauvinism and opportunism penetrating
    them through and through, become aware of the rottenness of the
    bourgeois parliaments and of the necessity of the Soviet power,
    the power of the working people, the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, for the sake of the emancipation of humanity from the
    yoke of capital. And Soviet power will win in the whole world,
    however furiously, however frantically the bourgeoisie of all
    countries rages and storms. The bourgeoisie inundates Russia with
    blood, waging war upon us and inciting against us the
    counter-revolutionaries, those who wish the yoke of capital to be
    restored. The bourgeoisie inflicts upon the working masses of
    Russia unprecedented sufferings through the blockade and through
    the help it gives to counter-revolution, but we have already
    defeated Kolchak and we are carrying on the war against Denikin
    with the firm assurance of our coming victory. 
N. Lenin

    

      September 23, 1919 

z    *  *  *
 
      I am often asked whether those American opponents of the war
      against Russia—not only workers, but mainly
      bourgeois—are right, who expect from us, after peace is
      concluded, not only resumption of trade relations, but also the
      possibility of receiving concessions in Russia. I repeat once
      more that they are right. A durable peace would be such a relief
      to the working people of Russia that they would undoubtedly
      agree to certain concessions being granted. The granting of
      concessions under reasonable terms is desirable also for us, as
      one of the means of attracting into Russia, during the period of
      the coexistence side by side of socialist and capitalist states,
      the technical help of the countries which are more advanced in
      this respect. 

    
N. Lenin
    

      September 23, 1919


Collected Works Volume 30
 Collected Works Table of
Contents
 Lenin Works Archive 
 







==========

## The Tasks of the Working Women’s
      Movement In the Soviet Republic











The Tasks Of The Working Women’s Movement In The Soviet Republic Speech Delivered At The Fourth Moscow City Conference Of Non-Party Working Women September 23, 1919



V. I. Lenin
The Tasks Of The Working Women’s Movement In The Soviet Republic
Speech Delivered At The Fourth Moscow City Conference Of Non-Party Working Women
September 23, 1919


Delivered: 23 September, 1919 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 213, September 25, 1919; Published according to the text of the pamphlet, V. I. Lenin, Speech at the Working Women’s Congress, Moscow, 1919, verified with the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 40-46
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, it gives me pleasure to greet a
    conference of working women. I will allow myself to pass over
    those subjects and questions that, of course, at the moment are
    the cause of the greatest concern to every working woman and to
    every politically-conscious individual from among the working
    people; these are the most urgent questions—that of bread
    and that of the war situation. I know from the newspaper reports
    of your meetings that these questions have been dealt with
    exhaustively by Comrade Trotsky as far as war questions are
    concerned and by Comrades Yakovleva and Svidersky as far as the
    bread question is concerned; please, therefore, allow me to pass
    over those questions.
I should like to say a few words about the general tasks facing
    the working women’s movement in the Soviet Republic, those
    that are, in general, connected with the transition to socialism,
    and those that are of particular urgency at the present
    time. Comrades, the question of the position of women was raised
    by Soviet power from the very beginning. It seems to me that any
    workers’ state in the course of transition to socialism is
    laced with a double task. The first part of that task is
    relatively simple and easy. It concerns those old laws that kept
    women in a position of inequality as compared to men.
Participants in all emancipation movements in Western Europe
    have long since, not for decades but for centuries, put forward
    the demand that obsolete laws be annulled and women and men be
    made equal by law, but none of the democratic European states,
    none of the most advanced republics have succeeded in putting it
    into effect, because wherever there is capitalism, wherever there
    is private property in land and factories, wherever the power of
    capital is preserved, the men retain their privileges. It was
    possible to put it into effect in Russia only because the power of
    the workers has been established here since October 25, 1917. From
    its very inception Soviet power set out to be the power of the
    working people, hostile to all forms of exploitation. It set
    itself the task of doing away with the possibility of the
    exploitation of the working people by the landowners and
    capitalists, of doing away with the rule of capital. Soviet power
    has been trying to make it possible for the working people to
    organise their lives without private property in land, without
    privately-owned factories, without that private property that
    everywhere, throughout the world, even where there is complete
    political liberty, even in the most democratic republics, keeps
    the working people in a state of what is actually poverty and
    wage-slavery, and women in a state of double slavery.
Soviet power, the power of the working people, in the first
    months of its existence effected a very definite revolution in
    legislation that concerns women. Nothing whatever is left in the
    Soviet Republic of those laws that put women in a subordinate
    position. I am speaking specifically of those laws that took
    advantage of the weaker position of women and put them in a
    position of inequality and often, even, in a humiliating position,
    i.e., the laws on divorce and on children born out of wedlock and
    on the right of a woman to summon the father of a child for
    maintenance.
It is particularly in this sphere that bourgeois legislation,
    even, it must be said, in the most advanced countries, takes
    advantage of the weaker position of women to humiliate them and
    give them a status of inequality. It is particularly in this
    sphere that Soviet power has left nothing whatever of the old,
    unjust laws that were intolerable for working people. We may now
    say proudly and without any exaggeration that apart from Soviet
    Russia there is not a country in the world where women enjoy full
    equality and where women are not placed in the humiliating
    position felt particularly in day-to-day family life. This was one
    of our first and most important tasks.
If you have occasion to come into contact with parties that are
    hostile to the Bolsheviks, if there should come into your hands
    newspapers published in Russian in the regions occupied by Koichak
    or Denikin, or if you happen to talk to people who share the views
    of those newspapers, you may often hear from them the accusation
    that Soviet power has violated democracy.
We, the representatives of Soviet power, Bolshevik Communists
    and supporters of Soviet power are often accused of violating
    democracy and proof of this is given by citing the fact that
    Soviet power dispersed the Constituent Assembly. We usually answer
    this accusation as follows; that democracy and that Constituent
    Assembly which came into being when private property still existed
    on earth, when there was no equality between people, when the one
    who possessed his own capital was the boss and the others worked
    for him and were his wage-slaves-that was a democracy on which we
    place no value. Such democracy concealed slavery even in the most
    advanced countries. We socialists are supporters of democracy only
    insofar as it eases the position of the working and oppressed
    people. Throughout the world socialism has set itself the task of
    combating every kind of exploitation of man by man. That democracy
    has real value for us winch serves the exploited, the
    underprivileged. If those who do not work are disfranchised that
    would be real equality between people. Those who do not work
    should not eat.
In reply to these accusations we say that the question must be
    presented in this way—how is democracy implemented in
    various countries? We see that equality is proclaimed in all
    democratic republics but in the civil laws and in laws on the
    rights of women—those that concern their position in the
    family and divorce—we see inequality and the humiliation of
    women at every step, and we say that this is a violation of
    democracy specifically in respect of the oppressed. Soviet power
    has implemented democracy to a greater degree than any of the
    other, most advanced countries because it has not left in its laws
    any trace of the inequality of women.

    Again I say that no other state and no other legislation has
    ever done for women a half of what Soviet power did in the first
    months of its existence.
Laws alone, of course, are not enough, and we are by no means
    content with mere decrees. In the sphere of legislation, however,
    we have done everything required of us to put women in a position
    of equality and we have every right to be proud of it. The
    position of women in Soviet Russia is now ideal as compared with
    their position in the most advanced states. We tell ourselves,
    however, that this is, of course, only the beginning.
Owing to her work in the house, the woman is still in a
    difficult position. To effect her complete emancipation and make
    her the equal of the man it is necessary for the national economy
    to be socialised and for women to participate in common productive
    labour. Then women will occupy the same position as men.
Here we are not, of course, speaking of making women the equal
    of men as far as productivity of labour, the quantity of labour,
    the length of the working day, labour conditions, etc., are
    concerned; we mean that the woman should not, unlike the man, be
    oppressed because of her position in the family. You all know that
    even when women have full rights, they still remain factually
    downtrodden because all housework is left to them. In most cases
    housework is the most unproductive, the most barbarous and the
    most arduous work a woman can do. It is exceptionally petty and
    does not include anything that would in any way promote the
    development of the woman.
In pursuance of the socialist ideal we want to struggle for the
    full implementation of socialism, and here an extensive field of
    labour opens up before women. We are now making serious
    preparations to clear the ground for the building of socialism,
    but the building of socialism will begin only when we have
    achieved the complete equality of women and when we undertake the
    new work together with women who have been ’emancipated from
    that petty, stultifying, unproductive work. This is a job that
    will take us many, many years.
This work cannot show any rapid results and will not produce a
    scintillating effect.
We are setting up model institutions, dining-rooms and
    nurseries, that will emancipate women from housework. And the work
    of organising all these institutions will fall mainly to women. It
    has to be admitted that in Russia today there are very few
    institutions that would help woman out of her state of household
    slavery. There is an insignificant number of them, and the
    conditions now obtaining in the Soviet Republic—the war and
    food situation about which comrades have already given you the
    details—hinder us in this work. Still, it must be said that
    these institutions that liberate women from their position as
    household slaves are springing up wherever it is in any way
    possible.
We say that the emancipation of the workers must be effected by
    the workers themselves, and in exactly the same way the
    emancipation of working women is a matter for the working women
    themselves. The working women must themselves see to it that such
    institutions are developed, and this activity will bring about a
    complete change in their position as compared with what it was
    under the old, capitalist society.
In order to be active in politics under the old, capitalist
    regime special training was required, so that women played an
    insignificant part in politics, even in the most advanced and free
    capitalist countries. Our task is to make politics available to
    every working woman. Ever since private property in laud and
    factories has been abolished and the power of the landowners and
    capitalists overthrown, the tasks of politics have become simple,
    clear and comprehensible to the working people as a whole,
    including working women. In capitalist society the woman’s
    position is marked by such inequality that the extent of her
    participation in politics is only an insignificant fraction of
    that of the man. The power of the working people is necessary for
    a change to be wrought in this situation, for then the main tasks
    of politics will consist of matters directly affecting the fate of
    the working people themselves.
Here, too, the participation of working women is essential
    —not only of party members and politically-conscious women,
    but also of the non-party women and those who are least
    politically conscious. Here Soviet power opens up a wide field of
    activity to working women.
We have had a difficult time in the struggle against the forces
    hostile to Soviet Russia that have attacked her. It was difficult
    for us to fight on the battlefield against the forces who went to
    war against the power of the working people and in the field of
    food supplies against the profiteers, because of the too small
    number of people, working people, who came whole-heartedly to our
    aid with their own labour. Here, too, there is nothing Soviet
    power can appreciate as much as the help given by masses of
    non-party working women. They may know that in the old, bourgeois
    society, perhaps, a comprehensive training was necessary for
    participation in politics and that this was not available to
    women. The political activity of the Soviet Republic is mainly the
    struggle against the landowners and capitalists, the struggle for
    the elimination of exploitation; political activity, therefore, is
    made available to the working woman in the Soviet Republic and it
    will consist in the working woman using her organisational ability
    to help the working man.
What we need is not only organisational work on a scale
    involving millions; we need organisational work on the smallest
    scale and this makes it possible for women to work as well. Women
    can work under war conditions when it is a question of helping the
    army or carrying on agitation in the army. Women should take an
    active part in all this so that the Red Army sees that it is being
    looked after, that solicitude is being displayed. Women can also
    work in the sphere of food distribution, on the improvement of
    public catering and everywhere opening dining-rooms like those
    that are so numerous in Petrograd.
It is in these fields that the activities of working women
    acquire the greatest organisational significance. The
    participation of working women is also essential in the
    organisation and running of big experimental farms and should not
    take place only in isolated cases. This i5 something that cannot
    be carried out without the participation of a large number of
    working women. Working women will be very useful in this field in
    supervising the distribution of food and in making food products
    more easily obtainable. This work can well be done by non-party
    working women and its accomplishment will do more than anything
    else to strengthen socialist society.
We have abolished private property in land and almost
    completely abolished the private ownership of factories; Soviet
    power is now trying to ensure that all working people, non-party
    as well as Party members, women as well as men, should take part
    in this economic development. The work that Soviet power has begun
    can only make progress when, instead of a few hundreds, millions
    and millions of women throughout Russia take part in it. We are
    sure that the cause of socialist development will then become
    sound. Then the working people will show that they can live and
    run their country without the aid of the landowners and
    capitalists. Then socialist construction will be so soundly based
    in Russia that no external enemies in other countries and none
    inside Russia will be any danger to the Soviet Republic.

 Collected Works Volume 30  Collected Works Table of Contents  Lenin Works Archive 







==========

## The Example of the Petrograd Workers











The Example of the Petrograd Workers



V. I. Lenin
The Example of the Petrograd Workers[1]


Written: 3 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 221, October 4, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 47-49
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The newspapers have already reported that the
    Petrograd workers have begun the intensive mobilisation and
    dispatch of the best workers to the Southern Front.
Denikin’s capture of Kursk and advance on Orel fully
    explain this energetic action of the Petrograd proletariat, whose
    example must be followed by the workers of other industrial
    centres.
The Denikin gang count on sowing panic in our ranks and making
    us think only of defence, only of the matter in hand. The foreign
    radio shows how zealously the French and British imperialists are
    helping Denikin, how they are helping him with armaments and
    hundreds of millions of rubles. The foreign radio proclaims to the
    whole world that the road to Moscow lies open. That is how the
    capitalists would like to frighten us.
But they will not succeed in frightening us. The deployment of
    our troops has been carefully planned and strictly carried
    out. Our offensive against the chief source of the enemy’s
    strength steadily continues. The victories recently won—the
    capture of 20 guns in the Boguchar area, the capture of the
    village of Veshenskaya—indicate the successful advance of
    our troops to the centre of the Cossack area, which alone enabled
    arid still enables Denikin to organise a serious force. Denikin
    will be smashed as Kolchak has been smashed. They cannot frighten
    us and we shall bring our cause to a victorious conclusion.
The capture of Kursk and the enemy’s advance on Orel
    required the provision of additional forces in order to repel him
    there. By their example the Petrograd workers have shown that they
    have correctly understood this task. Without hiding the dangers
    from ourselves, and without in any way minimising them, we say:
    Petrograd has shown that we do have additional forces. In order to
    repel the attack on Orel and to launch an offensive against Kursk
    and Kharkov, the best proletarians must be mobilised, over and
    above the forces we already have at our disposal. The fall of
    Kursk constitutes a serious danger; never has the enemy been so
    near to Moscow. In addition to the previous army forces, we are
    dispatching new contingents of advanced workers capable of
    changing the mood of the retreating units to ward off this
    danger.
Among our troops in the South, deserters who have returned to
    the ranks occupy a prominent place. Most of them have returned
    voluntarily, under the influence of the propaganda which has
    explained where their duty lies and shown them how serious is the
    threat that the power of the landowners and capitalists will be
    restored. But the deserters do not hold out, they lack staunchness
    and quite often they begin to retreat without fighting.
That is why it is of prime importance to strengthen the army by
    a new influx of proletarian forces. The unstable elements will be
    given strength, morale will be raised, a turning-point will be
    reached. As has continually happened in our revolution, the
    proletariat will support and guide the wavering sections of the
    working population.
For a long time now the Petrograd workers have had to bear much
    greater burdens than the workers of other industrial centres. The
    Petrograd proletariat has suffered more than the proletariat in
    other localities from famine, the perils of war and the withdrawal
    of the best workers for Soviet duties throughout Russia.
Yet we see that there has not been the slightest dejection, not
    the slightest diminution of energy among the Petrograd workers. On
    the contrary, they have become steeled, they have found new
    strength and have brought new fighters to the fore. They are
    excellently fulfilling the duty of a leading contingent, sending
    aid and support where it is most needed.
When such fresh forces go to reinforce units of our army that
    have wavered, the mass of the working people, the soldiers of
    peasant origin obtain new leaders from among their own kind, from
    the more developed, more politically-conscious, and more
    staunch-minded working people. That is why such help to our
    peasant army gives its a decisive superiority over the enemy, for
    in his case it is only landowners’ sons who are sent out to
    strengthen his peasant army, and we know that this
    “strengthening” has ruined Kolchak and will ruin
    Denikin.
Comrade workers! Let all of you set about the new work after
    the example of the Petrograd comrades! More energy for activities
    in the army, more initiative and boldness, more emulation so as to
    equal the Petrograders, and victory will be won by the working
    people, the landowner and capitalist counter-revolution will be
    beaten.
N. Lenin 
P.S. I have just learned that from Moscow also some dozens of
    the most devoted comrades have left for the front. Following
    Petrograd, Moscow has taken action. Following Moscow, all the rest
    should take action.
N. L.
      
    

      October 3, 1919

Endnotes
[1]
    This article was written in connection with the beginning of the
    mobilisation of the Petrograd Communists for the front. During the
    foreign military intervention and the Civil War there were a
    number of such mobilisations. Lenin wrote, “We concentrated
    our best Party forces in the Red Army; we mobilised the best of
    our workers; we looked for new forces at the deepest roots of our
    dictatorship” (see present edition, Vol. 33, “How We
    Should Reorganise the Workers’ and Peasants’
    Inspection”).
In view of the difficult situation on the
    Southern Front the plenary meeting of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.), held
    September 21 and 26, 1919, resolved to mobilise Communists and
    send the best Party and working-class people to the front. The
    Party Central Committee in its letter published in Bulletin of the
    C.C., R.C.P.(B.) No. 0, September 30, 1919 pointed out that
    Communists should be sent to the front from those institutions
    where they might be replaced by non-party workers, women and
    ex-servicemen disabled in the Civil War. The Communist Party
    appeal met with a warm response among the working people. The
    Petrograd Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) decided to mobilise 1,200
    Communists for the Southern Front. That same day the first group
    of mobilised Petrograd Communists left for the front, the second
    group on the following day and the third on October
    2. Mobilisation continued during the following days. On October 2,
    Lenin sent a telegram of greetings to the Petrograd work- ers in
    which he praised them for energetic measures in rendering
    assistance to the Southern Front. Between September and November
    the Petrograd Party organisation dispatched for the front over
    4,000 Communists, of whom 1,800 were assigned to leading posts in
    the army. 

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## Answers to Questions Put By a Chicago Daily News Correspondent











Answers To Questions Put By A Chicago Daily News Correspondent



V. I. Lenin
Answers To Questions Put By A Chicago Daily News Correspondent[1]


Interviewed: 5 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Chicago Daily News No. 257, October 27, 1919; First published in Russian in 1942; Published according to the newspaper text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 50-51
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 October 5, 1919 
I beg to apologise for my bad English. I am glad to answer your
    few questions.
1. What is the present policy of the Soviet Government on
    the question of peace?
2. What, in general outline, are the peace terms put forward by
    Soviet Russia?
Our peace policy is the former, that is, we have accepted the
    peace proposition of Mr. Bullitt.[2] We have never changed
    our peace conditions (question 2), which are formulated with
    Mr. Bullitt.
We have many times officially proposed peace to the Entente
    before coming of Mr. Builitt.
3. Is the Soviet Government prepared to guarantee absolute
    nonintervention in the internal affairs of foreign
    states?
We are willing to guarantee it.
4. Is the Soviet Government prepared to prove that it
    represents the majority of the Russian people?
Yes, the Soviet Government is the most democratic goverrunent
    of all governments in the world. We are willing to prove it.
5. What is the position of the Soviet Government in respect
    of an economic understanding with America?
We are decidedly for an economic understanding with
    America—With all con utries but especially with
    America.
If necessary we can give you the full text of our peace
    conditions as formulated by our government with Mr. Bnllitt.
Wl. Oulianoff (N. Lenin) 

Endnotes
[1]
    The Chicago Daily News corrrespondent I. Levin, who was
    in Soviet Russia, asked Lenin to answer five questions. The
    questions and Lenin’s answers were published in the
    Chicago Daily News No. 257, October 27, 1919.
[2]
    Lenin refers to peace talks with William Bullitt who came to
    Soviet Russia in March 1919 to discuss the possible terms of peace
    treaties between Soviet Russia and the Allies, and the whiteguard
    govern-ments then existing on the territory of Russia. Bullitt
    submitted the proposals put forward by President Woodrow Wilson
    and Prime Minister Lloyd George.
Guided by the desire to conclude peace as soon
    as possible, the Soviet Government agreed to negotiate, and
    introduced a number of amendments and addenda to the proposals put
    forward by the U.S.A. and Britain, after which a final joint draft
    was prepared.
Soon after Bullitt’s departure from
      Soviet Russia Koichak’s
      army launched an offensive, and the imperialist governments
      refused to accept the Soviet proposals in the hope that Soviet
      Russia would be defeated. Wilson prohibited the publication of
      the draft agreement brought by Bullitt, and Lloyd George
      announced in Parliament that he had not authorised anyone to
      negotiate with the
      Soviet Government. 
    

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Greetings to Italian, French and German Communists











Greetings To  Italian, French and German Communists



V. I. Lenin
Greetings To
Italian, French and German Communists


Written: 10 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Published in October 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 52-62
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Scant indeed is the news we get from abroad. The
    blockade by the imperialist beasts is in full swing; the violence
    of the biggest world powers is turned against us in the hope of
    restoring the rule of the exploiters. And all this bestial fury of
    the Russian and world capitalists is cloaked, needless to say, in
    phrases about the lofty significance of “democracy”!
    The exploiter camp is true to itself; it depicts bourgeois
    democracy as “democracy” in general. And all the
    philistines and petty bourgeois, down to Friodrich Adler, Karl
    Kautsky and the majority of the leaders of the Independent (that
    is, independent of the revolutionary proletariat but dependent on
    petty-bourgeois prejudices) Social-Democratic Party of Germany,
    join in the chorus.
But the more infrequently we in Russia receive news from
    abroad, the greater the joy with which we follow the gigantic,
    universal advance of communism among the workers in all the
    countries of the world, the successful severance of the masses
    from the corrupt and treacherous leaders who, from Scheidernanu to
    Kautsky, have gone over to the bourgeoisie.
All that we know of the Italian Party is that its Congress has
    resolved by a huge majority to affiliate to the Third
    International and to adopt the programme, of the dictatorship of
    the proletariat. Thus, the Italian Socialist Party has, in
    practice, aligned itself with communism, though to our regret it
    still retains its old name. Warm greetings to the Italian workers
    and their party!
All that we know of France is that in Paris alone there are
    already two communist newspapers: L’Internattonale
    edited by Raymond PÃ©ricat, arid Le Titre censure edited
    by Georges Anquetil. A number of proletarian organisations have
    already affiliated to the Third International. The sympathies of
    the workers are undoubtedly on the side of communism and Soviet
    power.
Of the German Communists we know only that communist newspapers
    are published in a number of towns. Many bear the name Die
    Rote Fahne. The Berlin Rote Fahne, an illegal
    publication, is battling heroically against the Scheidemanmis and
    Noskes, the butchers who play flunkey to the bourgeoisie in deeds,
    just as the Independents do in words and in their
    “ideological” (petty-bourgeois ideological)
    propaganda.
The heroic struggle of Die Rote Fahne, the Berlin
    communist paper, evokes whole-hearted admiration. At last we see
    in Germany honest and sincere socialists, who, despite all
    persecution, despite the foul murder of their best leaders, have
    remained firm and unbending! At last we see in Germany communist
    workers who are waging a heroic struggle that really deserves to
    be called “revolutionary”! At last there has emerged
    from the very midst of the proletarian masses in Germany a force
    for which the words “proletarian revolution” have
    become a truth!



      Greetings to the German Communists!
The Scheidemanns and Kautskys, the Henners and Friedrich
    Adlers, great as the difference between these gentlemen in the
    sense of personal integrity may probably be, have in equal measure
    proved to be petty bourgeois, most shameful traitors to and
    betrayers of socialism, supporters of the bourgeoisie. For in 1912
    all of them took part in drafting and signing the Basle
    Manifesto “on the approaching imperialist war, all of
    them spoke then about ”proletarian
    revolution”, and all of them proved in practice to be
    petty-bourgeois democrats, knights of philistine-republican,
    bourgeois-democratic illusions, accomplices of the
    counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie.
The savage persecution to which the German Communists have been
    subjected has strengthened them. If at the moment they are
    somewhat disunited, this testifies to the breadth and mass
    character of their movement, to time vigour with which communism
    is growing out of the very midst of the masses of workers. It is
    inevitable that a movement so ruthlessly persecuted by the
    counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie and their Scheideniann-Noske
    henchmen and forced to organise illegally should be disunited.
And it is natural, too, that a movement which is growing so
    rapidly and experiencing such desperate persecution should give
    rise to rather sharp differences. There is nothing terrible in
    that; it is a matter of growing pains.
Let the Scheidemanns and Kautskys gloat in their Vorwarts
    and Freiheit
    about the differences among the Communists. There is nothing left
    for these heroes of rotten philistinism but to cover up their
    rottenness by pointing to the Communists. But if we take the real
    state of affairs we realise that only the blind can now fail to
    see the truth. And the truth is that the followers of Scheidemann
    and Kautsky have shamelessly betrayed the proletarian
    revolution in Germany, broken faith with it and have, in
    fact, sided with the counterrevolutionary
    bourgeoisie. Heinrich Laufenberg in his excellent pamphlet,
    From the First Revolution to the Second, demonstrated
    this and proved it with remarkable force, vividness, clarity and
    conviction. The differences among the followers of Scheidemann and
    Kautsky are differences within disintegrating, dying parties of
    which there remain only leaders without masses, generals without
    armies. The masses are abandoning the Scheidemanns and going over
    to the Kautskys, being attracted by their Left wing (this is borne
    out by any report of a mass meeting), and this Left wing
    combines—in unprincipled and cowardly fashion-the old
    prejudices of the petty bourgeoisie about parliamentary democracy
    with communist recognition of the proletarian revolution, the
    dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power. 
Under mass pressure, the rotten leaders of the Independents
    acknowledge all this in words, but in deeds they remain
    petty-bourgeois democrats, “socialists” of the type of
    Louis Blanc and the other dolts of 1848 who were so mercilessly
    ridiculed and branded by Marx.
Here we have differences that are really irreconcilable. There
    can be no peace, no joint work, between the proletarian
    revolutionaries and the philistines, who, like those of 1848,
    worship at the shrine of bourgeois “democracy” without
    understanding its bourgeois nature. Haase and Kautsky, Friedrich
    Adler and Otto
    Bauer can twist and squirm as much s they like, use up reams
    of paper and make endless speeches, but they cannot get away from
    the fact that in practice they absolutely fail to
    understand the dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power,
    that in practice they are petty-bourgeois democrats,
    “socialists” of the Louis Blanc and Ledru-Rollill
    type, that in practice they are, at best, puppets in the
    hands of the bourgeoisie, and, at worst, direct hirelings of the
    bourgeoisie.
The Independents, the Kautskyites and the Austrian
    Social-Democrats seem to be united parties; actually, on
    the basic, chief and most essential issue, most of their party
    members do not agree with the leaders. The party
    membership will wage a proletarian revolutionary struggle
    for Soviet power the very moment a new crisis sets in, and the
    “leaders” will act as counter-revolutionaries as they
    do now. To sit between two stools is not a difficult matter in
    words; Hilferding in Germany and Friedrich Adler in Austria are
    giving a model display of this noble art.
But people who try to reconcile the irreconcilable will prove
    to be mere soap-bubbles in the heat of the revolutionary
    struggle. This was demonstrated by all the “socialist”
    heroes of 1848, by their Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary
    kindred in Russia in 1917-19, and is being demonstrated by all the
    knights of the Borne, or yellow, Second International.
The differences among the Communists are of another kind. Only
    those who do not want to cannot see the fundamental
    distinction. The differences among the Communists are differences
    between representatives of a mass movement that has grown with
    incredible rapidity; and time Communists have a single, common,
    granite-like foundation-recognition of the proletarian revolution
    and of the struggle against bourgeois-democratic illusions and
    bourgeois-democratic parliatnentarism, and recognition of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power.
On such a basis differences are nothing to worry about
    they represent growing pains, not senile decay. Bolshevism, too,
    has experienced differences of this kind more than once, as well
    as minor breakaways caused by such differences, but at the
    decisive moment, at the moment of taking power and establishing
    time Soviet Republic, Bolshevism was united; it drew to itself all
    that was best in the trends of socialist thought akin to it and
    rallied round itself the entire vanguard of the proletariat
    and the overwhelming majority of the working people.


      And so
      it will be with the German Communists, too.
The followers of Sclieidemann and Kautsky still talk about
    “democracy” in general, they still live in the ideas
    of 1848, they are Marxists in words, Louis Blancs in deeds. They
    prattle about the “majority” and believe that equality
    of ballot-papers signifies equality of exploited and exploiter, of
    worker and capitalist, of poor and rich, of the hungry and the
    satiated.
The Scheidernanns and the Kautskys would have us believe that
    the kind-hearted, honest, noble, peace-loving capitalists have
    never used the force of wealth, the force of money, the power of
    capita], the oppression of bureaucracy and military dictatorship,
    but have decided matters truly “by majority”!
The Scheidemanns and the Kautskys (partly from hypocrisy,
    partly from extreme stupidity, instilled by decades of reformist
    activity) prettily bourgeois democracy, bourgeois
    parliamentarism and the bourgeois republic, so as to make it
    appear that the capitalists decide affairs of state by the will of
    the majority, and not by the will of capital, not by means of
    deception and oppression and the violence of the rich against the
    poor.
The Scheidemanns and Kautskys are ready to
    “recognise” the proletarian revolution, but only with
    the proviso that first, while the force, power, oppression and
    privileges of capital and wealth are retained, the
    majority of the people shall vote (with the voting supervised by
    the bourgeois apparatus of state power) ”for
    revolution”! It is difficult to imagine the extent of
    the philistine stupidity displayed in these views, or the extent
    of the philistine gullibility (Vertrauensduslei) in the
    capitalists, in the bourgeoisie, in the generals, and in the
    bourgeois apparatus of state power.
Actually, it is precisely the bourgeoisie that has always
    played the hypocrite by characterising formal equality as
    “democracy”, and in practice using force against the
    poor, the working people, the small peasants and the workers, by
    employing countless means of deception, oppression, etc. The
    imperialist war (that the Scbeidemanns and the Kautskys painted in
    shamelessly bright colours) has made this plain to millions of
    people. Proletarian dictatorship is the sole means of
    defending the working people against the oppression of capital,
    the violence of bourgeois military dictatorship, and imperialist
    war. Proletarian dictatorship is the sole step to equality
    and democracy in practice, not on paper, but in life, not
    in political phrase-mongering, but in economic reality.
Having failed to understand this, the Scheidemanus and the
    Kaniskys proved to he contemptible traitors to socialism and
    defenders of the ideas of the bourgeoisie.

*     *      *
The Kautskyite (or Independent) party is dying. It is bound to
    die and disintegrate soon as a result of the differences between
    its predominantly revolutionary membership and its
    counter-revolutionary “leaders”.
The Communist Party, experiencing exactly the same (essentially
    the same) differences as were experienced by Bolshevism, will grow
    stronger and become as hard as steel.
The differences among the German Communists boil down, so far
    as I can judge, to the question of “utilising the legal
    possibilities” (as the Bolsheviks used to say in the 1910-13
    period), of utilising the bourgeois parliament, the reactionary
    trade unions, the law on works’ councils (Bet riebsratge
    setz), bodies that have been hamstrung by the Scheidemanns
    and Kautskys; it is a question of whether to participate in such
    bodies or boycott them.
We Russian Bolsheviks experienced quite similar differences in
    1906 and in the 1910-12 period. And for us it is clear that with
    many of the young German Communists it is simply a case of a lack
    of revolutionary experience. Had they experienced a couple of
    bourgeois revolutions (1905 and 1917), they would not he
    advocating the boycott so unconditionalnor fall from time to time
    into the mistakes of syndicalism.
This is a matter of growing pains; the movement is developing
    in fine style and as it grows they will pass. And these obvious
    mistakes must be combated openly; the differences Must not be
    exaggerated since it must be clear to everyone that in the near
    future the struggle for the dictatorship of the proletariat, for
    Soviet power, will wipe out the greater part of them.
Both from the standpoint of Marxist theory and the experience
    of three revolutions (1905, February 1917 and October 1917) I
    regard refusal to participate in a bourgeois parliament, in a
    reactionary (Legien, Gompers, etc..) trade union, in an
    ultra-reactionary workers’ council hamstrung by the
    Scheidemanns, etc., as an undoubted mistake.
At times, in individual eases, in individual countries, the
    boycott is correct, as, for example, was the Bolshevik boycott of
    the tsarist Duma in 1905. But the selfsame Bolsheviks took part in
    the much more reactionary and downright counter-revolutionary Duma
    of 1907. The Bolsheviks contested the elections to the bourgeois
    Constituent Assembly in 1917, and in 1918 we dispersed it, to the
    horror of the philistine democrats, the Kautskys and other such
    renegades from socialism. We worked in the ultra-reactionary,
    purely Menshevik, trade unions which (in their
    counter-revolutionary nature) yielded nothing to the Legien
    unions—the foulest and most reactionary trade unions in
    Germany. Even now, two years after the conquest of state power, we
    have not yet finished fighting the remnants of the Menslievik
    (i.e., the Scheidemann, Kautsky, G ompers, etc.) trade
    unions—so long is the process! So strong in some places and
    in some trades is the influence of petty-bourgeois ideas!
At one time we were in a minority in the Soviets, the trade
    unions and the co-operatives. By persistent effort and long
    struggle—both before and after the conquest of
    political power—we won a majority, first in all
    workers’ organisations, then in non-worker and, finally,
    even in small-peasant organisations.
Only scoundrels or simpletons can think that the proletariat
    must first win a majority in elections carried out under the
    yoke of the bourgeoisie, under the yoke of wage-slavery,
    and must then win power. This is the height of stupidity or
    hypocrisy; it is substituting elections, under the old system and
    with the old power, for class struggle and revolution.


      The proletariat wages its class struggle and does not wait for
    elections to begin a strike, although for the complete success of
    a strike it is necessary to have the sympathy of the majority of
    the working people (and, it follows, of the majority of the
    population); the proletariat wages its class struggle and
    overthrows the bourgeoisie without waiting for any preliminary
    elections (supervised by the bourgeoisie and carried out under its
    yoke); and the proletariat is perfectly well aware that for the
    success of its revolution, for the successful overthrow of the
    bourgeoisie, it is absolutely necessary to have the
    sympathy of the majority of the working people (and, it follows,
    of the majority of the population).
The parliamentary cretins and latter-day Louis Blancs
    “insist” absolutely on elections, on elections that
    are most certainly supervised by the bourgeoisie, to ascertain
    whether they have the sympathy of the majority of the working
    people. But this is the attitude of pedants, of living corpses, or
    of cunning tricksters.
Real life and the history of actual revolutions show that quite
    often the “sympathy of the majority of the working
    people” cannot be demonstrated by any elections (to say
    nothing of elections supervised by the exploiters, with
    ’equality” of exploiters and exploited!). Quite often
    the “sympathy of the majority of the working people”
    is demonstrated not by elections at all, but by the
    growth of one of the parties, or by its increased representation
    in the Soviets, or by the success of a strike which for some
    reason has acquired enormous significance, or by successes won in
    civil war, etc., etc.
The history of our revolution has shown, for example, that
    sympathy for the dictatorship of the proletariat on the part of
    the majority of the working people in the boundless expanses of
    the Urals and Siberia was ascertained not by means of elections,
    but by the experience of a year of the tsarist general
    Kolchak’s rule in that area. Incidentally, Kolchak’s
    rule also began with a “coalition” of the Scheidemann
    and Kautsky crowd (in Russian they are called Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, supporters of the Constituent
    Assembly), just as in Germany at the moment the Haases and
    Scheidemanns, through their “coalition”, are paving
    the way to power for von Goltz or Ludendorif and covering up this
    power and making it look decent. In parenthesis it should be said
    that the Haase-Scheidemanmi coalition in the government has ended,
    but the political coalition of these betrayers of socialism
    remains. Proof: Kautsky’s books, Stampfer’s articles
    in VorwÃ¤rts, the articles by the Kautskys and the
    Scheidemanns about their “unification”, and so on.
The proletarian revolution is impossible without the sympathy
    and support of the overwhelming majority of the working people for
    their vanguard—the proletariat. But this sympathy and this
    support are not forthcoming immediately and are not decided by
    elections. They are won in the course of long, arduous
    and stern class struggle. The class struggle waged by the
    proletariat for the sympathy and support of the majority
    of the working people does not end with the conquest of political
    power by the proletariat. After the conquest of power
    this struggle continues, but in other forms. In
    the Russian revolution the circumstances were exceptionally
    favourable for the proletariat (in its struggle for its
    dictatorship), since the proletarian revolution took place at a
    time when all the people were under arms and when the peasantry as
    a whole, disgusted by the “Kautskyite” policy of the
    social-traitors, the Mensheviks and the SocialistRevolutionaries,
    wanted the overthrow of the rule of the landowners.
But even in Russia, where things were exceptionally favourable
    at the moment of the proletarian revolution, where a most
    remarkable unity of the entire proletariat, the entire army and
    the entire peasantry was achieved at once—even in Russia,
    the proletariat, exercising its dictatorship, had to struggle for
    months and years to win the sympathy and support of the majority
    of the working people. After two years this struggle has
    practically, but still not completely, ended in favour of the
    proletariat. In two years we have won the full sympathy and
    support of the overwhelming majority of the workers and labouring
    peasants of Great Russia, including the Urals and Siberia, but as
    yet we have not won the full support and sympathy of the majority
    of the working peasants (as distinct from the peasant exploiters)
    of the Ukraine. We could he (but shall not be) crushed by
    the military might of the Entente, but inside Russia we
    now have such sound sympathy, and from such an enormous
    majority of the working people, that our state is the most
    democratic state the world has ever seen.
One has only to give some thought to this complex, difficult
    and long history of proletarian struggle for powera struggle rich
    in the extraordinary variety of forms and in the unusual abundance
    of sharp changes, turns and switches from one form to
    another—to see clearly the error of those who would
    “forbid” participation in bonrgeois parliaments,
    reactionary trade unions, tsarist or Scheidemann Shop Stewards
    Committees or works’ councils, and so on and so forth. This
    error is due to the lack of revolutionary experience among quite
    sincere, convinced and valiant workingclass
    revolutionaries. Consequently, Karl Liebknecht and Rosa Luxemburg
    wore a thousand times right in January 1919 when they realised
    this mistake, pointed it out, but nevertheless chose to remain
    with the proletarian revolutionaries, mistaken though they were on
    a minor question, rather than side with the traitors to socialism,
    the Scheidemanns and the Kautskys, who made no mistake on the
    question of participating in bourgeois parliaments, but had ceased
    to be socialists and had become philistine democrats and
    accomplices of the bourgeoisie.
A mistake, however, remains a mistake and it is necessary to
    criticise it and fight for its rectification.
The fight against the traitors to socialism, the Scheidemanns
    and the Kautskys, must be waged mercilessly, but not on the issue
    of for or against participation in bourgeois parliaments,
    reactionary trade unions, etc. This would be an obvious mistake,
    and a bigger mistake still would be to retreat from the ideas of
    Marxism and its practical line (a strong, centralised political
    party) to the ideas and practice of syndicalism. It is necessary
    to work for the Party’s participation in bourgeois
    parliaments, in reactionary trade unions and in
    “works’ councils” that have been mutilated and
    castrated in Scheidemann fashion, for the Party to be wherever
    workers are to be found, wherever it is possible to talk to
    workers, to influence the working masses. Legal and illegal work
    must at all costs be combined, the illegal Party, through its
    workers’ organisations, must exercise systematic,
    constant and strict control over legal activity. This is no easy
    matter, but the proletarian revolution, generally speaking, knows
    nothing and can know nothing of “easy” tasks or
    aeasy” means of struggle.

    

      This difficult task must be carried
    out at all costs. The Scheideinann and Kautsky gang differ from us
    not only (and not chiefly) because they do not recognise the armed
    uprising and we do. The chief and radical difference is that in
    all spheres of work (in bourgeois parliaments, trade unions,
    cooperatives, journalistic work, etc.) they pursue an
    inconsistent, opportunist policy, even a policy of downright
    treachery and betrayal.
Fight against the social-traitors, against reformism and
    opportunism—this political line can and must be followed
    without exception in all spheres of our struggle. And then we
    shall win the working masses. And the vanguard of
    the. proletariat, the Marxist centralised political party together
    with the working masses will take the people along the true road
    to the triumph of proletarian dictatorship, to proletarian instead
    of bourgeois democracy, to the Soviet Republic, to the socialist
    system.
In the space of a few months the Third International has won a
    number of glorious, unprecedented victories. The speed of its
    growth is astonishing. Particular mistakes and growing pains give
    no grounds for alarm. By criticising them directly and openly, we
    shall ensure that the working masses of all cultured countries,
    educated in the spirit of Marxism, quickly rid themselves of the
    betrayers of socialism, the Scheidemanns and Kautskys of all
    nations (for these traitors are to be found in all nations).
The victory of communism is inevitable. Communism will
    triumph.
N. Lenin

    

      October 10, 1919

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 







==========

## The Workers’ State and Party Week











The Workers’ State and Party Week



V. I. Lenin
The Workers’ State and Party Week


Written: 11 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 228, October 12, 1919 Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 63-65
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

Moscow Party Week[1] comes at a time of difficulty for the Soviet government. Denikin’s successes have given rise to a frenzied increase in plots by the landowners, capitalists and their friends, and increased efforts on the part of the bourgeoisie to sow panic and undermine the strength of the Soviet rule by every means in their power. The vacillating, wavering, politically backward petty bourgeois, and with them the intelligentsia, the socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, have, as usual, become more shaky than ever and were the first to allow themselves to be intimidated by the capitalists.
Moscow Party Week at such a difficult time is, I think, something of an advantage to us, for it is much better for the cause. We do not need a Party Week for show purposes. We do not need fictitious Party members even as a gift. Our Party, the party of the revolutionary working class, is the only government party in the world which is concerned not with increasing its membership but with improving its quality, and purging itself of “self-seekers”. We have more than once carried out the re-registration of Party members in order to get rid of these “self-seekers” and to leave in the Party only politically-conscious elements who are sincerely devoted to communism.[2] We have further taken advantage of the mobilisations for the front and of the subbotniks to purge the Party of those who are only “out for” the benefits accruing to membership of a government party and do not want to bear the burden of devoted work on behalf of communism.
And at this juncture, when intensified mobilisation for the front is in progress, Party Week is a good thing because it offers no temptation to the self-seekers. We extend a broad invitation into the Party only to rank-arid-file workers and poor peasants, to labouring peasants, but not to the peasant profiteers. We do not promise and do not give these rank-and-file members any advantages from joining the Party. On the contrary, just now harder and more dangerous work than usual falls to the lot of Party members.
So much the better. Only sincere supporters of communism, only persons who are conscientiously devoted to the workers’ state, only honest working people, only genuine representatives of the masses that were oppressed under capitalism will join the Party.
And it is only such members that we need in the Party.
We need new Party members not for advertising purposes but for serious work. These are the people we invite into the Party. To the working people we throw the doors of the Party wide open.
Soviet power is the power of the working people that is fighting for the complete overthrow of the yoke of capital. The first to engage in this fight were the working class of the towns and the factory centres. They won the first victory and conquered state power.
The working class is winning to their side the majority of the peasants. For it is only the peasant huckster, the peasant profiteer, and not the labouring peasant who is drawn to the side of capital, to the side of the bourgeoisie.
The workers of Petrograd, the most advanced, the most politically-conscious workers, have been contributing most of all to the administration of Russia. But we know that among the rank-and-file workers and peasants there are very many people devoted to the interests of the working masses and capable of undertaking the work of leadership. Among them there are many with a talent for organisation and administration to whom capitalism gave no opportunity and whom we are helping and must help in every way to come to the fore and take up the work of building socialism. To discover these new, modest and unperceived talents is no easy matter. It is no easy matter to enlist for state administrative work rank-and-file workers and peasants who for centuries had been downtrodden and intimidated by the landowners and capitalists.
But this difficult work has to be done, it must be done, so as to draw more deeply on the working class and the labouring peasantry for new forces.
Comrades, non-party workers and labouring peasants, join the Party! We promise you no advantages from joining; it is hard work we are calling you to, the work of organising the state. If you are sincere supporters of communism, set about this work boldly, do not fear its novelty and the difficulty it entails, do not be put off by the old prejudice that only those who have received formal training are capable of this work. That is not true. The work of building socialism can and must be directed by rank-and-file workers and labouring peasants in ever-growing numbers.
The mass of the working people are with us. That is where our strength lies. That is the source of the invincibility of world communism. More new workers from among the masses for the ranks of the Party to take an independent part in building the new life-that is our method of combating all difficulties, that is our path to victory.
N. Lenin
October 11, 1919

Endnotes
[1] Party Week was conducted in accordance with the decision of the Eighth Party Congress to enlarge the Party membership. It was carried out in a period of the intense struggle of the Soviet state against foreign military intervention and internal counter-revolution. “To get our Party card in such conditions signified, to a certain extent, becoming a candidate to the Denikin gallows," wrote Bulletin of the CC., R.C.P.(B.) No. 5, December 2, 1919. The first Party Week was held by the Petrograd Party organisation from August 10 to 17 (the second Party Week took place in October-November 1919); the Party Week in the Moscow Gubernia Party organisation was conducted from September 20 to 28. At the end of September the Central Committee sent a circular letter to all Party organisations, in which it stated that as the re-registration and purge was over In almost all Party organisations the C.C. considered it opportune to start admitting new members to the Party. The C.C. stressed that only men and women workers, Red Army men, sailors and peasant men and women should be admitted to the Party during Party Week. In 38 gubernias of the European part of the R.S.F.S.R. alone Party Weeks brought over 200,000 new members, of whom more than half were workers. At the fronts up to 25 per cent of the army and navy personnel joined the Party. Lenin wrote that workers and peasants who entered the Party at such a difficult period made up "a fine and reliable body of leaders of the revolutionary proletariat and of the non-exploiting section of the peasantry”.
[2] The re-registration of Party members was held in May-September 1919 by decision of the Eighth Party Congress which pointed to its necessity and to the need for special measures of control in respect to those members who joined the Party after the October Socialist Revolution. For this purpose a special instruction was worked out by the Central Committee. It said, “The aim of the re-registration is to purge the Party of non-Communist elements, chiefly of persons who wormed their way into the Party because it is the ruling party and who use their position of Party members in their own interests” (Pravda No. 86, April 24, 1919). During re-registration Party members were to return their Party, cards, fill in the questionnaires, and submit the recommendations of two Party members who had been in the Party for not less than six months and whom the Party Committee knew to be reliable Communists. The admittance of new members to the Party was discontinued during re-registration. Party members who wore convicted of behaviour unworthy of Communists, or who violated Party decisions, or did not pay Party dues, or who proved to be deserters were liable to expulsion. This re-registration was the first purge of the Party. As a result Party discipline was strengthened, the Party links with the masses grew stronger and the membership and the fighting capacity of the Party improved.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech to Mobilised Worker
  Communists Delivered From the Balcony of Moscow Soviet of
  Workers’ and Red army Deputies











Speech To Mobilised Worker Communists Delivered From The Balcony Of Moscow Soviet Of Workers’ And Red Army Deputies October 16, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech to
Mobilised Worker Communists
Delivered From the Balcony of Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red Army Deputies
October 16, 1919
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 16 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 232, October 17, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 66-67
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Lenin is greeted with stormy applause.)
    Comrades, permit me to greet the workers of Yaroslavi and Vladimir
    gubernias who have once again answered our call and given their
    best forces for the defence of the workers’ and
    peasants’ republic. You know from the newspapers in which we
    print the whole truth, concealing nothing, what new and ominous
    danger is embodied in the capture of Ore! by the tsarist general
    Denikin and the threat to Red Petrograd by Yudenich. But we regard
    this danger, and we struggle against it, in the way we always
    have-we appeal to the politically-conscious proletariat and
    working peasantry to stand firm in defence of their gains.
The situation is extremely grave. But we do not despair, for we
      know that every time a difficult situation for the Soviet
      Republic arises, the workers display miracles of valour and by
      their example encourage and inspire the troops and lead them on
      to fresh victories. 

    

      We know that throughout the world, in all countries, the
      revolutionary movement is growing, slower than we would like,
      but definitely growing. We also know that the victory of the
      working class throughout the world is certain.
Great as the sacrifices made by Russia are, greatly as she has
    been tormented and mutilated, she is nevertheless fighting
    persistently for the cause of all workers. The imperialists may
    crush another republic or two, but they cannot save world
    imperialism, for it is doomed and will be swept away by the coming
    socialism.
That is why I greet you, workers of Vladimir and Yaroslavi
    gubernias, in the firm conviction that you will, by your personal
    example, strengthen the spirit of the Red Army and lead it to
    victory.
Long live the workers and peasants!
Long live the world workers’ republic!

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the Workers and Red army Men of Petrograd











To the Workers and Red Army Men
of Petrograd



V. I. Lenin
To the Workers and Red Army Men
of Petrograd


Written: 17 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Petrogradskaua Pravda No. 237, October 19, 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 68-69
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, the decisive moment has arrived. The tsarist generals have again been provided with munitions and other supplies by the capitalists of Britain, France and America, and with gangs of landowners’ sons are again trying to capture Red Petrograd. The enemy launched his attack at the time of the peace negotiations with Estonia, attacked our Red Army troops who believed in these negotiations. The treacherous nature of the attack partly explains the rapid successes of the enemy. Krasnoye Selo, Gatchina and Vyritsa have been captured. Two railway lines to Petrograd have been cut. The enemy is trying to cut the third, Nikolayevskaya, line, and the fourth, Vologda, line so as to starve Petrograd into surrender.
Comrades, you all know and can see for yourselves the tremendous threat hanging over Petrograd. A few days will decide the fate of the city, and that means half the fate of Soviet power in Russia.
There is no need for me to remind Petrograd workers and Red Army soldiers of their duty. The entire history of the two years’ struggle of the Soviet Republic against the bourgeoisie of the whole world, a struggle of unprecedented difficulty that has brought unprecedented victories, has demonstrated that the Petrograd workers are not only a model in the fulfilment of their duty but have also shown examples of the greatest heroism and of revolutionary enthusiasm and devotion such as the world has never before seen.
Comrades, the fate of Petrograd is being decided! The enemy is trying to catch us unawares. His forces are weak, insignificant even, but he is strong because he is swift, because his officers are insolent and because he is well supplied and well armed. Help for Petrograd is near at hand, we have sent reinforcements. We are much stronger than the enemy. Fight to the last drop of blood, comrades, hold fast to every inch of land, he firm to the end, victory is hear! Victory will be ours!
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

    

 October 17

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the Red army Men











To the Red Army Men



V. I. Lenin
To the Red Army Men


Written: 19 October, 1919 

      
First Published: 1919


Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
1965, Volume 30, page 70


Translated: George Hanna


Transcription/HTML Markup: David
Walters & Robert Cymbala


Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



      Comrades, Red Army men! The tsarist generals--Yudenich in the
      North and Denikin in the South--are once again bending every
      effort in an attempt to vanquish Soviet power and restore the
      power of the tsar, the landowners and the capitalists.
    

      We know how a similar attempt by Kolchak ended. He did not
      succeed in deceiving the workers of the Urals and the peasants
      of Siberia for long. Having seen through the deception and
      having suffered endless violence, floggings and robbery at the
      hands of the officers, the sons of landowners and capitalists,
      the Ural workers and Siberian peasants helped our Red Army
      defeat Kolchak. The Orenburg Cossacks came straight over to the
      side of Soviet Power.
    

      That is why we are fully confident in victory over Yudenich and
      Denikin. They will not succeed in restoring the power of the
      tsar and the landowners. that will never be! The peasants are
      already rising in Denikin's rear. The flames of revolt against
      Denikin are burning brightly in the Caucasus. The Kuban Cossacks
      are grumbling and stirring to action, resentful of Denikin's
      violence and robbery on behalf of the landowners and the British.
    

      Let us then be firm, comrades, Red Army men! The workers and
      peasants are rallying ever more solidly, consciously and
      resolutely to the side of the Soviet government.
    

      Forward, comrades, Red Army men, to the fight for the workers'
      and peasants' rule, against the landowners and the tsarist
      generals! Victory will be ours!
    
N. Lenin
October 19, 1919

 Collected Works
Volume 30

Collected Works Table of
      Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Results of Party Week In Moscow and Our tasks











Results of Party Week in Moscow and Our Tasks



V. I. Lenin
Results of Party Week in Moscow and Our Tasks


Written: 21 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Bulletin of the CC., R.C.P,(B.) No. 7, October 22, 1919 Signed: N. Lenin; Published according to the text in Bulletin of lbs CC., R.C.P.(B.)
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 71-75
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

During Party Week in Moscow, 13,600 people
    were enrolled in the Party.
This is a huge, quite unexpected success. The entire
    bourgeoisie, and especially the urban petty bourgeoisie, including
    the specialists, officials and office workers who lament the loss
    of their privileged ‘ruling’ position—all these
    gentlemen have recently, particularly during Party Week in Moscow,
    been doing their best to sow panic and to prophesy the imminent
    collapse of Soviet power and the imminent victory of Denikin.
And with what consummate artistry this
    “intellectualist” public wields the weapon of sowing
    panic! And it has indeed become a real weapon in the class
    struggle of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat. In periods
    such as the one we are passing through, the petty bourgeoisie
    merges in “one reactionary mass” with the bourgeoisie
    and “passionately” seizes on this weapon.
It is Moscow, where the trading element was especially strong,
    where there was a greater concentration of exploiters, landowners,
    capitalists and rentiers than anywhere else, where capitalist
    development brought together a mass of bourgeois intellectuals,
    where the central state administration produced an especially
    large body of officials-it is Moscow that has furnished an
    exceptionally convenient field for bourgeois tittle-tattle,
    bourgeois malicious talk and bourgeois panic-sowing. The
    successful offensive of Denikin and Yudenich was a
    “factor” that favoured to an extraordinary extent the
    “successes” of this bourgeois weapon.
And yet, when the mass of the proletarians saw Denikin’s
    “successes” and realised all the difficulties, burdens
    and dangers attaching to the title and duties of a Communist at
    the present time, thousands and thousands of them rose up to
    reinforce the Party of Communists, to undertake the incredibly
    heavy burden of state administration.
The success of Soviet power, the success of our Party, is truly
    remarkable!
This success has proved and vividly demonstrated to the people
    of the capital, and then to the whole Republic and the whole
    world, that it is in the proletarian milieu, among the genuine
    representatives of the working people, that the most reliable
    source of the strength and durability of Soviet power is to be
    found. This successful voluntary enrolment in the Party at a time
    of maximum difficulty and danger is a real demonstration of
    that aspect of the dictatorship of the proletariat which its
    enemies, in their malice, refuse to see but which is valued above
    all by the real friends of the emancipation of labour from the
    capitalist yoke, namely, the special strength of the
    moral (in the best sense of the word) influence of the
    proletariat (which wields state power) on the masses, the
    ways this influence is exerted.
With state power in their hands, the foremost sections of the
    proletariat have by their example shown the mass of the working
    people, shown them throughout two whole years (an immense period
    for our exceptionally rapid tempo of political development), a
    model of such devotion to the interests of the working
    people, such vigour in the struggle against the enemies of the
    working people (against the exploiters in general and against
    “property-owners” and profiteers in particular), such
    firmness in difficult moments, such self-sacrificing resistance to
    the bandits of world imperialism, that the strength of the
    workers’ and peasants’ sympathy for their
    vanguard has proved by itself capable of performing
    miracles.
 It is indeed a miracle. Workers, who have suffered
    unprecedented torments of hunger, cold, economic ruin and
    devastation, are not only maintaining their cheerful spirit, their
    entire devotion to Soviet power, all the energy of self-sacrifice
    and heroism, but also, despite their lack of training and
    experience, are undertaking the burden of steering the ship of
    state! And this at a moment when the storm has reached the peak of
    its fury ....
The history of our proletarian revolution is full of such
    miracles. They will lead, surely and inevitably, no matter what
    severe trials may be in store, to the full victory of the world
    Soviet republic.
We must take care now that proper use is made of the
    new Party members, Particularly great attention must be devoted to
    this task, for it is not an easy one; it is a new task and cannot
    be accomplished by old routines.
Capitalism stifled, suppressed and killed a wealth of talent
    among the workers and working peasants. These talents perished
    under the oppression of want, poverty and the outrage of human
    dignity. It is our duty now to bring out these talents and put
    them to work. The new members who have joined the Party during
    Party Week are undoubtedly for the most part inexperienced arid
    ignorant in matters of state administration. Equally undoubtedly
    these are most devoted, most sincere and capable people from the
    sections of society that capitalism artificially held
    down, reduced to the lowest level and did not allow to
    rise. Among them, however, there is more strength,
    vigour, staunchness, directness and sincerity than among other
    sections.
It follows that all Party organisations must give especial
    thought to the employment of these new Party members. They must be
    more boldly given the most varied kinds of state work,
    they must be tested in practice as rapidly as possible.
Boldness, of course, must not be taken to mean that the new
    members are to be entrusted at once with responsible
    posts requiring knowledge they do not possess. We must be bold in
    combating red tape: not for nothing has our Party Programme very
    definitely raised the question of the causes of a certain revival
    of bureaucratic methods and indicated methods of combating it. We
    must be bold in establishing, first of all, supervision
    over office workers, officials and specialists by new Party
    members who are well acquainted with the condition of the people,
    their needs and requirements. We must be bold in
    immediately affording these new members opportunities for
    developing and displaying their abilities in work on a broad
    scale. We must be bold in breaking with customary routine
    (among us too-quite often, alasi-there is an excessive fear of
    encroaching on established Soviet routine, although sometimes the
    “establishing” has been done not by class-conscious
    Communists, but by old officials and office workers); we must be
    bold in the sense that we must be prepared with revolutionary
    speed to alter the form of work for new Party members so as to
    test them more quickly and to find the appropriate place for
    them.
In many cases new Party members can be given posts where, in
    the course of checking up the conscientiousness with which old
    officials perform their tasks, these Party members will quickly
    learn the job themselves and he able to take it over
    independently. In other cases they can be placed so as to renovate
    and refresh the intermediary links between the mass of workers and
    peasants on the one hand, and the state apparatus on the other. In
    our industrial “chief administrations and central
    boards”, in our agricultural “state farms” there
    are still many, far too many, saboteurs, landowners and
    capitalists in hiding, who harm Soviet power in every
    way. Experienced Party workers in the centre and the localities
    should show their efficiency through their ability to make
    intensive use of the new Party forces for a determined fight
    against this evil.
The Soviet Republic must become a single armed camp where,
    there is a maximum of effort, a maximum economy of forces, a
    maximum reduction of all red tape and unnecessary formalism and a
    maximum simplification of the apparatus which must be not only as
    close as possible to the needs of the masses, but also something
    they can readily understand and participate in independently.
Increased mobilisation of old Party members for army work is
    taking place. This activity must not be weakened in any way, but
    more and more intensified. At the same time, however and with the
    aim of achieving success in the war, we must improve, simplify and
    revitalise our civil administration.
Victory in war goes to the side whose people has greater
    reserves, greater sources of strength and greater endurance.
We have more of all these qualities than the Whites, more than
    the “all-powerful” Anglo-French imperialism, this
    colossus with feet of clay. We have more of them because we can
    draw, and for a long time will continue to draw, more and more
    deeply upon the workers and working peasants, upon those classes
    which were oppressed by capitalism and which everywhere form the
    overwhelming majority of the population. We can draw from this
    most capacious reservoir, for it gives us leaders of the workers
    and peasants in the building of socialism who are the most
    sincere, the most steeled by the burdens of life, the closest to
    the workers and peasants.
Our enemies, whether the Russian or the world bourgeoisie, have
    nothing remotely resembling this reservoir; the ground is more and
    more giving way under their feet; they are being deserted by ever
    greater number of their former supporters among the workers and
    peasants.
That is why, in the last analysis, the victory of Soviet power
    throughout the world is certain and inevitable.


      October 21, 1919

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech to Students of the Sverdlov
  University Leaving for the Front









Speech to Students of the Sverdlov University Leaving for the Front



V. I. Lenin
Speech to Students of the Sverdlov University Leaving for the Front


Delivered: October 24, 1919
Source: Collected Works, Volume 30, p. 76-84 Progress Publishers, 1965
First Published: Pravda Nos. 240 and 241, October 26 and 28, 1919
Translated: George Hanna
Online Version: marx.org 1997; marxists.org 1999 Transcribed/HTML Markup: Robert Cymbala & Brian Baggins and David Walters
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

Comrades, you know it is
    not only the desire to celebrate the completion of the course of
    instruction at the Soviet school by the majority of you that has
    brought us here together, but also the decision taken by about a
    half the graduates to leave for the front to render fresh,
    extraordinary and substantial aid to the troops in action
    there.
Comrades, we are well aware of the great difficulties being
    experienced by our entire administration in the towns and,
    especially, in the rural areas because of the shortage of
    experienced, knowledgeable comrades. We are also well aware that
    the advanced workers of Petrograd, Moscow, Ivanovo-Voznesensk and
    other towns, those advanced comrades who until now have been
    bearing what one might call the main burden of administering the
    country under unprecedentedly difficult conditions, who have been
    bearing the main burden of uniting the workers and peasants and
    giving them guidance—we are well aware that these comrades
    are extremely exhausted by the superhuman efforts at times
    required of them for the defence of the Soviet
    Republic. Therefore, the opportunity to gather together here
    several hundred workers and peasants and give them the possibility
    of studying regularly for a few months, to complete a course of
    Soviet studies and then leave here in a body, organised, mustered,
    politically conscious to do the work of government and to make
    good the tremendous defects that still remain—such an
    opportunity is of great value to us and it was with great
    difficulty and reluctance, and after considerable wavering that we
    took a decision to permit half the present graduation class to go
    to work at the front. The conditions obtaining at the front,
    however, are such that we were left with no other choice. And we
    were of the opinion that the decision, adopted voluntarily and for
    the purpose of dispatching to the front a number of the best
    people who would have been valuable in all administrative and
    organising work—this decision was called for by
    circumstances of undoubted necessity.
Comrades, permit me to give you a short review of the situation
    now obtaining on the various fronts so that you may judge how
    urgent this necessity has become.
On a number of fronts that were formerly extremely important
    and on which the enemy had placed great hopes, victory for our
    side has recently drawn nearer and it will, by all the signs, be
    complete and irrevocable. On the Northern Front, where the
    offensive against Murmansk promised the enemy particularly great
    advantages and where the British had long ago mustered huge,
    excellently equipped forces and where we had unbelievable
    difficulty in fighting because of the lack of food and
    equipment—there, it seemed, the prospects for the British
    and French imperialists were of the brightest. It was there,
    however, that the enemy offensive collapsed completely. The
    British had to withdraw their troops, and we now have full
    confirmation that the British workers do not want war against
    Russia and even now, when Britain is far from the revolutionary
    struggle, they are able to bring such pressure to bear on their
    government of predators and plunderers that they can force them to
    withdraw their troops from Russia. They have been forced to
    abandon this front which was particularly dangerous because the
    enemy there was in possession of a sea route and was in a most
    favourable position. There are Russian whiteguard forces of
    practically no significance left there.
Take another front—the Kolchak front. You know that when
    Kolchak's army advanced towards the Volga the capitalist press of
    Europe hurried to inform the whole world of the collapse of Soviet
    power and to recognise Kolchak as the Supreme Ruler of
    Russia. Before the document announcing this recognition reached
    Kolchak, however, our troops had pushed him back into Siberia and,
    as you know, we approached Petropavlovsk and the River Irtysh and
    Kolchak was compelled to deploy his forces differently from the
    way he had intended. Time was when we had to withdraw because the
    local workers and peasants were late in mustering their
    forces. Information received from behind Kolchak's lines tells of
    his undoubted debacle, and the population, even the affluent
    peasants, are rising against him to a man. We are approaching the
    time when the last stronghold of Kolchak's forces will be smashed
    and that will bring us to the end of a year of revolution in the
    course of which all Siberia was under Kolchak's rule and when he
    was helped by the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks who
    again went through the business of coining to an agreement with a
    bourgeois government. You know that all the European bourgeoisie
    helped Kolchak. You know that the Siberian line was held by the
    Poles and Czechs, that there were also Italians there and American
    officer volunteers. Everything that might paralyse the revolution
    came to the aid of Kolchak. And it all collapsed because the
    peasants, the Siberian peasants, who least of all submit to the
    influence of communism because they see least of it, were given
    such a lesson by Kolchak, such a practical comparison
    (and peasants like practical comparisons) that we may say that
    Kolchak has given us a million supporters in districts the
    farthest removed from industrial centres where we should have had
    difficulty in winning them over. That is how Kolchak's power came
    to an end and that is why we feel our position to be most stable
    on that front.
We can see that the Polish offensive on the Western Front is
    coming to an end. The Poles got help from Britain, France and
    America who all tried to arouse Poland's ancient hatred towards
    her Great-Russian oppressors, tried to transfer the Polish
    workers' hatred of the landowners and tsars, a hundred times
    deserved, to the Russian workers and peasants, and tried to make
    the Polish workers think that the Bolsheviks, like the Russian
    chauvinists, dream of conquering Poland. For the time being they
    were successful in this. But there are definite signs that the
    time when this fraud was effective is now over and that
    disintegration has set in in the Polish army. American reports
    that cannot be suspected of sympathy for communism affirm that
    there is a growing demand among the Polish peasants to finish the
    war by October 1 at all costs, and that this demand is supported
    by even the most patriotic of the Polish social-chauvinists (P.S.P.) who
    occupy the same position as our Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and are offering greater and greater
    opposition to their government. In recent times the mood of the
    Poles has changed considerably.
That leaves two other fronts, the Petrograd and Southern
    fronts, where the most important events are taking place. Here,
    too, all the signs indicate that the enemy is mustering his last
    forces. We have precise information to the effect that Secretary
    for War Churchill and the capitalist party in Britain undertook
    this military venture against Petrograd to demonstrate the
    possibility of making a speedy end of Soviet Russia, and that the
    British press regards this venture as the last stake made by
    Mr. Churchill and the chauvinists against the undoubted will of
    the majority of the people.
We may regard the Petrograd attack as a measure of help to
    Denikin; this conclusion may be drawn from the situation on the
    Petrograd Front.
You know that the Latvian, Lithuanian and Estonian governments
    have agreed to our proposal to start peace negotiations. Naturally
    this last piece of news has caused some wavering among our troops,
    giving them hopes that the war is drawing to an end. The
    negotiations have begun. In the meantime Britain collected her
    remaining vessels and landed several thousand whiteguards equipped
    with magnificent war materiel. They cannot transport them to us,
    however, unless they lull the people by deception, because in both
    Britain and France there have been cases of attempts to load war
    materiel on to ships having failed because the dockers struck work
    and said that they would not allow steamers carrying weapons of
    destruction to Soviet Russia to be loaded. The British
    imperialists had to get armaments from other countries,
    hoodwinking their own people. No wonder, then, that they
    dispatched against Soviet Russia a few hundred or a few thousand
    Russian whiteguard officers. There are camps in Britain where
    these whiteguard officers are housed, fed and trained for the
    invasion of Russia; and then they say that this is an internal war
    brought about by the terrorism of the Bolsheviks. Camps that were
    once full of Russian prisoners of war are now full of Russian
    whiteguard officers. This accounts for the tremendous successes
    achieved by the enemy when he brought these forces up to the
    Petrograd Front at a time when we were expecting Latvia and
    Lithuania to conclude an armistice. You now know that the
    turning-point has been reached on the Petrograd Front. You know
    from the reports of Zinoviev and Trotsky that losses have been
    made up, that the former wavering has come to an end and that our
    forces are attacking, and attacking successfully, overcoming the
    most desperate resistance. These battles are outstanding in their
    extraordinary ferocity. Comrade Trotsky informed me by telephone
    from Petrograd that in Detskoye Selo, which we recently captured,
    whiteguards, and bourgeois who had remained behind, fired from
    individual houses, offering stubborn resistance, greater
    resistance than in any previous battles. The enemy feels that a
    turning-point has been reached in the entire war and that Denikin
    is in a position in which he must be helped and our forces
    attacking him diverted. It can be said definitely that they did
    not succeed in doing this. Everything we sent to help Petrograd
    was obtained without the slightest weakening of the Southern
    Front. Not a single unit for Petrograd was withdrawn from the
    Southern Front and that victory which we have begun to achieve and
    which we shall pursue to the end will be achieved without any
    weakening of the Southern Front where the outcome of the war
    against the landowners and the imperialists is being decided. That
    outcome will be there on the Southern Front, and in the near
    future.
Comrades, you know that on the Southern Front on the one hand,
    the enemy relied mainly on the Cossacks who were fighting for
    their privileges, and on the other hand, more regiments of the
    volunteer army had been formed there than elsewhere; these were
    troops full of savage resentment who fought for the interests of
    their class, for the restoration of the power of the landowners
    and capitalists. It is here, therefore, that we have to engage
    them in the decisive battle, and here we see the same as we saw in
    the case of Kolchak; at first he achieved tremendous success, but
    the longer the fighting went on, the thinner became the ranks of
    the officers and politically-conscious kulaks who formed the
    backbone of Kolchak's army, and the more workers and peasants he
    had to enlist. They like other people to do their fighting for
    them, they do not like making sacrifices themselves and prefer
    that the workers risk their necks in their interests. And when
    Kolchak had to expand his army, the expansion led to hundreds of
    thousands coming over to our side. Dozens of whiteguard officers
    and Cossacks who deserted to our side said that they had become
    convinced that Kolchak was selling Russia right and left, and
    although they did not share the views of the Bolsheviks they came
    over to the side of the Red Army. That is how Kolchak finished up
    and that is how Denikin will end up, too. Today you were able to
    read in the evening newspapers that there had been risings behind
    Denikin's lines—the Ukraine is aflame. We have reports of
    the events in the Caucasus where the mountain people, driven to
    despair, attacked Shkuro's regiments and took their rifles and
    ammunition away from them. Yesterday we received a foreign
    wireless message that admitted that Denikin's situation was a
    difficult one—he had been compelled to send his best forces
    into battle because the Ukraine was aflame and there was an
    uprising in the Caucasus. The time is coming when Denikin will
    have to stake everything. Never before have there been such
    ferocious, bloody battles as that at Orel, where the enemy sent
    his best regiments, the so-called "Kornilov" regiments, into
    battle; one-third of them were the most counter-revolutionary
    officers, the best trained and fiercest in their hatred of the
    workers and peasants, officers who were defending the restoration
    of their own landowners' rule. That is why we have every reason to
    believe that the decisive moment is approaching on the Southern
    Front. The victories at Orel and Voronezh where the pursuit of the
    enemy continues, show that here, as on the Petrograd Front, the
    turning-point has been reached. We must ensure that our offensive
    will develop from a petty, partial attack into a gigantic mass
    offensive that will bring us the final victory.
That is why, no matter how great this sacrifice may be for
    us—the dispatch to the front of the hundreds of students
    gathered here and very obviously needed for work in
    Russia—we have nevertheless granted you your wish. There, on
    the Petrograd and Southern fronts, the fate of the war will be
    decided, if not in weeks, then at most in months. At such a moment
    every politically-conscious Communist should say to himself, "My
    place is there, ahead of the others at the front, where every
    politically-conscious Communist who has graduated from this school
    is of value."
If there has been some wavering among the troops it is only
    because the people have become tired of war. You are well aware of
    the hunger, ruination and torment that the workers and peasants
    have endured during these two years of struggle against the
    imperialists of the whole world. You know that those suffering
    mostly from fatigue will not stand up to the tension for long, and
    this is taken advantage of by the enemy who has better
    communications, a better staff and no traitors, and he attacks in
    full force. This is the reason for our failures on the Southern
    Front. That is why the most politically-conscious of the workers
    and peasants, those who have had courses of military training or
    courses similar to yours, must go to the front organised and
    solid, dividing up into large or small groups as agreed upon by
    the military authorities, and distributing duties among themselves
    so as to help the troops among whom a certain instability is
    manifest and where the enemy is pressing most strongly. Throughout
    the two years' existence of Soviet power, whenever a certain
    instability has made its appearance among the peasant masses who
    have never seen and do not know Soviet work, we have always
    appealed to the more organised section of the urban proletariat
    for help and have received the most heroic support from them.
Today I saw comrades from among the Ivanovo-Voznesensk workers
    who have allotted half the Party officials in responsible posts
    for dispatch to the front. One of them told me today of the
    enthusiasm with which tens of thousands of non-party workers saw
    them off; one old man, a non-party worker, came up to them and
    said, "Don't worry, you may go, your place is there, we'll work
    for you here." When this mood makes itself apparent among
    non-party workers, when the non-party masses who are not yet quite
    clear on political questions see that we are sending the best of
    the workers and peasants to the front where they undertake the
    most difficult and most burdensome duties, duties of the greatest
    responsibility, where they will fight in the front ranks and make
    the greatest number of sacrifices, will die in desperate battles,
    then the number of our supporters among the less-developed
    non-party workers and peasants will increase tenfold and miracles
    will occur among troops that are wavering, weak and tired.
That, comrades, is the magnificent, onerous and difficult task
    with which you are faced. There is no choice for those who are
    leaving for the front as representatives of the workers and
    peasants. Their slogan must be victory or death. Each of you must
    be able to approach the most backward, the least developed Red
    Army men in order to explain the situation to them in the most
    comprehensible language, from the standpoint of a man of labour,
    help them in a moment of difficulty, eliminate all wavering, teach
    them to fight against numerous manifestations of inertia,
    sabotage, deception or treachery. You know that there are still
    many such manifestations in the ranks and among the
    commanders. Here people are needed who have been through a certain
    course of study, who understand the political situation and are
    able to help the masses of workers and peasants in their struggle
    against treachery and sabotage. Soviet power expects that you, in
    addition to displaying personal courage, will afford all-round
    help to those masses and so put an end to all wavering among them
    and show them that Soviet power possesses forces to resort to in a
    moment of difficulty. Those forces we possess in sufficient
    numbers.
I repeat that we must now make this great sacrifice only
    because this is the main and the last front where, by all the
    signs, the fate of the whole Civil War will be decided within the
    next few weeks or months. Here we can once and for all deliver the
    enemy a blow that he will never recover from. After this bloody
    struggle against the whiteguards, a struggle that they imposed on
    us, we shall at last be able to get on with our own affairs, with
    real development, more freely and with redoubled energy. That is
    why I greet those of you, comrades, who have taken upon yourselves
    the difficult and magnificent task of fighting to the end in the
    ranks at the front, and I bid you farewell in the full confidence
    that you will bring us complete and final victory.



Collected Works Volume 30
 Collected Works Table of
Contents
 Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

## To Comrade Loriot and all the French Friends Who adhered to the 3rd International











To Comrade Loriot and all the French Friends Who Adhered to the Third International



V. I. Lenin
To Comrade Loriot and all the French Friends Who Adhered to the Third International


Written: 28 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Published in English in The Workers’ Dreadnought No. 41, January 3, 1920; First published in Russian in 1932; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 85-86
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


October 28, 1919
Dear Friend,
I thank you with all my heart for your letter, which is the
    more precious because we very rarely receive any from you.
In France, as in England, victorious imperialism has not only
    enriched a certain number of small capitalists, but it has also
    been able to give alms to the upper grade of workers, the
    aristocracy of the working class, by throwing it a few crumbs from
    the imperialist exploit, won by the pillage of the colonies, and
    so on.
But the crisis caused by the war is so serious that even in the
    conquering countries the working masses are inevitably condemned
    to appalling misery. From this springs the rapid growth of
    communism and the increasing movement of sympathy towards the
    Soviet power and towards the Third International.
It follows that you must maintain a long struggle still,
    especially with the very refined opportunists of the Longuet type;
    in the same way the experimenters and politicians will continue
    making effort after effort to make words suffice where it is a
    question of revolutionary tactics and of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. In fact, they will continue to deceive the
    proletariat by means of new subterfuges, as Longuet, Merrheim and
    company did regarding the 21st of July. They will adhere to their
    old opportunist policy which consists in hindering the revolution
    and in prejudicing it in all ways. In France and in England the
    old rotten (pourris) leaders of the workers will make thousands of
    such attempts.
But we are sure that the Communists who are working in close
    contact with the proletarian masses will succeed in paralysing and
    in breaking these attempts. The more the Communists are firm and
    energetic in their attitude, the sooner they will gain a complete
    victory.
With communist greetings,

    

      N. Lenin


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Letter to the Central Committee of
  the Communist Party of Germany Regarding the Split








Letter To The Central Committee Of The Communist Party Of Germany Regarding The Split



V. I. Lenin
 Letter To The Central Committee
Of The Communist Party Of Germany
 Regarding The Split[1]
To Comrades Paul Levi, Clara Zetkin, Eberlein And
The Other Members Of The Cc. Of The Communist Party
Of Germany


Written: October 28, 1919
Source: Collected Works, Volume 30,p. 87-88 Progress Publishers, 1965
First Published: First published in 1932; Published according to the manuscript
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


October 28, 1919
Dear Friends,
I have forwarded to you for publication a letter dated October
    10, 1919, “Greetings to French, Italian and German
    Communists”, in which I have referred, among other things,
    to your disagreements with the supporters of the boycott, the
    semi-syndicalists, etc. Today I have learned from the German
    government wireless message (from Nauen) about a split in your
    party: although the source is a filthy one, it is probably telling
    the truth in this case, because letters from our friends in
    Germany speak of the possibility of a split.
The only thing that seems incredible is this radio report that
    with 25 votes against 18, you expelled the minority,
    which, they tell us, then set up a party of its own. I know very
    little about this breakaway opposition, for I have seen only a few
    issues of the Berlin Rote Fahne. My impression is that
    they are very gifted propagandists, inexperienced and young, like
    our own Left Communists ("Left” due to lack of experience
    and youth) of 1918. Given agreement on the basic issue
    (for Soviet rule, against bourgeois parliamentarism), unity, in my
    opinion, is possible and necessary, just as a split is necessary
    with the Kautskyites. If the split was inevitable, efforts should
    be made not to deepen it, but to approach the Executive Committee
    of the Third International for mediation and to make the
    “Lefts” formulate their differences in theses and in a
    pamphlet. Restoration of unity in the Communist Party of Germany
    is both possible and necessary from the international
    standpoint. I would be extremely glad to get a letter from you on
    this subject. I am enclosing a letter to the breakaway group, and
    hope that you will forward it at the time of publishing my
    article, which, written before the news of the split was
    received, fully recognises the correctness of your standpoint.
A hearty handshake and warm wishes for success.to you in your
    difficult work. The communist movement is growing splendidly
    throughout the world. It is slower than we would like, but broad,
    powerful, deep and invincible. As was the case in Russia, the
    stage of the dominance of the “Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries” (of the Second International) is
    discernible everywhere. This dominance will be succeeded by that
    of the Communists and the victory of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat and of Soviet government.
With communist greetings,

    

      N. Lenin

Endnotes
[1]
    The Communist Party of Germany split at Its Second Congress, held
    in October 1919 in Heidelberg. It was attended by 46 delegates
    representing 16,000 party members. The Congress recognised the
    error of the boycott tactics of the elections to the Constituent
    Assembly and passed a decision to take part in parliamentary
    elections. A group of the “Lefts” came out at the
    Congress against its decisions and in defence of
    anarcho-syndicalist views-the boycott of parliament, repudiation
    of the political struggle, refusal to work in reactionary trade
    unions and so on. The “Lefts” were in the minority and
    were expelled from the party, after which they founded the
    so-called Communist Workers’ Party of Germany. Subsequently
    the C.W.P.G. became an insignificant sectarian group without any
    influence in the working class. Simultaneously with this letter
    addressed to the Central Committee of the Communist Party of
    Germany Lenin sent a letter to the breakaway group too (see
    pp. 89-90 of this volume). 
    

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the Communist Comrades Who Belonged to the United Communist Party of Germany and Have Now formed a New Party








To the Communist Comrades Who Belonged to the United “Communist Party of Germany” and Have Now Formed a New Party



V. I. Lenin
To the Communist Comrades Who Belonged to the United “Communist Party of Germany” and Have Now Formed a New Party


Written: October 28, 1919
First Published: First published in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Collected Works, Volume 30,p. 89-90 Progress Publishers, 1965
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



October 28, 1919
Dear Comrades,
Only today have I learned of the split from the brief wireless
  message of the German Government (from Nauen). My article,
  “Greetings to French, Italian and German Communists”,
  was written before the news of the split arrived.
In that article I tried, from the standpoint of interna tional
  communism, to appraise your position, insofar as I could acquaint
  myself with it in some issues of the Berlin Rote Fahne. I
  am convinced that the Communists who are agreed on the basic issue
  (the fight for the dictatorship of the proletariat and for Soviet
  government) and are implacably hostile to the Scheidemann and the
  Kautsky groups in all nations, could and should have acted in
  unison. In my opinion, differences on less important issues can, and
  unfailingly will, vanish; this will result from the logic of the
  joint struggle against the really formidable enemy, the bourgeoisie,
  and its overt (Scheidemann) and covert (Kautsky) servitors.
I am not a member of the Executive Committee of the Third
  International, but I believe it will offer the German Communists its
  good services in restoring German communist unity. It is not
  surprising that the furious persecutions, which have made the Party
  illegal, impeded its work and hindered a proper exchange of ideas
  and the elaboration of common tactics. A careful discussion of
  differences and an exchange of views on an international scale could
  assist in advancing the cause of German communism. and in mustering
  its forces.
I shall be very glad if we manage to exchange opinions on these
  questions.

    With communist greetings,

  

    N. Lenin

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To Comrade Serrati and to all
  Italian Communists











To Comrade Serrati and to All Italian Communists



V. I. Lenin
 To Comrade Serrati and to All Italian Communists


Written: 17 October, 1919 
Publishing history: Published In Italian in Avanti! (Rome) No. 332,  December, 1919; First published in Russian in 1932; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 91-92
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



October 28, 1919
Dear Friend,
The news we get from Italy is extremely scanty. It is only from the foreign (non-communist) press that we have learned of your Party Congress at Bologna and of the splendid victory of communism. I send my heartfelt greetings to you and all the Italian Communists, arid wish you every success. The example of the Italian Party will be of enormous significance to the whole world. In particular, the resolution of your Congress on participating in elections to the bourgeois parliament is in my opinion perfectly correct, and I hope that it will help to achieve unity in the Communist Party of Germany, which has just split on this issue.
There is no doubt that the overt and the covert opportunists, who are so numerous among the parliamentarians in the Italian Party, will try to circumvent and nullify the Bologna resolutions. The struggle against these trends is by no means over, but the victory at Bologna will facilitate further victories.
Difficult tasks lie ahead for the Italian proletariat owing to Italy’s position in the international field. Britain and France, with the co-operation of the Italian bourgeoisie, may possibly try to provoke the Italian proletariat to a premature uprising in order the easier to crush it. But their provocation will fail. The brilliant work of the Italian Communists guarantees that they will he just as successful in winning the entire industrial and the entire rural proletariat plus the small peasants, and then, if the proper moment is chosen internationally, victory for the dictatorship of the proletariat in Italy will be enduring. That is also guaranteed by the successes of the Communists in France, Britain and throughout the world.

      With communist greetings,

    

N. Lenin

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Interview with
    the Manchester Guardian








Interview with the Manchester Guardian



An Interveiw with Lenin

      Three Questions and the Answers
      The Bullitt Peace Terms still hold good
      Bolsheviks and Propaganda among Western peoples
    


Written: October 21, 1919
Source: The Manchester Guardian
Online Version: marx.org 1997; marxists.org
1999
Transcribed: J.J. Plant
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins and David Walters


By Our Special Correspondent
      W. T. Goode
    
 The interview with Lenin had been a matter of some
difficulty to arrange; not because he is unapproachable -- he goes about
with as little external trappings or precautions as myself -- but because
his time is so precious. He, even more than the other Commissaries, is
continuously at work. But at last I had secured a free moment and drove
from my room, across the city, to one of the gates of the Kremlin. I had
taken the precaution at the beginning of my stay to secure a pass that
set me free from any possible molestation from officials or police, and
this gave me admission to the Kremlin enclosure. Entrance to the Kremlin
is naturally guarded; it is the seat of the Executive Government; but the
formalities are no more than have to be observed at Buckingham Palace or
the House of Commons. A small wooden office beyond the bridge, where a
civilian grants passes, and a few soldiers, ordinary Russian soldiers,
one of whom receives and verifies the pass, were all there was to be seen
at this entrance. It is always said that Lenin is guarded by Chinese. There
were no Chinese here.
I entered, mounted the hill, and drove across to the building
where Lenin lives, in the direction of the large platform where formerly
stood the Alexander statue, now removed. At the foot of the staircase were
two more soldiers, Russian youths, but still no Chinese. I went up by a
lift to the top floor, where I found two other young Russian soldiers,
but no Chinese, nor in any of the three visits which I paid to the Kremlin
did I see any.
I hung up my hat and coat in the ante-chamber, passed through
a room in which clerks were at work, and entered the room in which the
Executive Committee of the Council of People's Commissaries holds its meetings
-- in other words, the Council Chamber of the Cabinet of the Soviet Republic.
I had kept my appointment strictly to time, and my companion passed on
(rooms in Russia are always en suite) to let Lenin know that I had arrived.
I then followed into the room in which Lenin works and waited a minute
for his coming. Here let me say that there is no magnificence about this
suite of rooms. They are well and solidly furnished; the Council Chamber
is admirably arranged for its purpose, but everything is simple, and there
is an atmosphere of hard work about everything. Of the meretricious splendour
I had heard so much there is not a trace.

Lenin

I had but the time to make these observations, mentally, when Lenin entered
the room. He is a man of middle height, about fifty years old, active,
and well proportioned. His features, at first sight, seem to have a slight
Chinese cast, and his hair and pointed beard have a ruddy brown tinge.
The head is well domed, and his brow broad and well raised. He has a pleasant
expression in talking, and indeed his manner can be described as distinctly
prepossessing. He speaks clearly in a well modulated voice, and throughout
the interview he never hesitated or betrayed the slightest confusion. Indeed,
the one clearly cut impression he left on one was that here was a clear,
cold brain, a man absolutely master of himself and of his subject, expressing
himself with a lucidity that was as startling as it was refreshing.
My companion had seated himself on the other side of the table
to act as interpreter in case of need; he was not wanted. After a word
of introduction I asked what I should speak, French or German. He replied
that if I did not object he would prefer to speak in English, and that
if I would only speak clearly and slowly he would be able to follow everything.
I agreed, and he was as good as his word, for only once during the three-
quarters of an hour that the meeting lasted did he stumble at a word, and
then only for an instant; he had seized me meaning almost immediately.
The Questions

I ought to state here that the thought of the interview had engaged me
from the moment I had entered Russia. There were so many things I wanted
to know, scores of questions occurred to me, and to secure the answers
I longed to have would have required a discursive talk of hours had I begun
my task with this interview. But by leaving it to the last my month's work
had brought the answer to many of the questions, and others had been settled
by the radiographic interview submitted from Lyons by a combination of
American journalists. It behoved me therefore to utilise to the best advantage
the time rigidly apportioned to me, wedged in between two important meetings.
I had therefore reduced all my curiosity to three questions, to which the
authoritative answers could be given only by Lenin himself, the head of
the Government of the Soviet Republic. He knew quite well who I was; he
did not know what I wanted. There could therefore be no question of preparation
as far as he was concerned.
I had spoken of my questions to only one man, the commissary who
accompanied me, and he became very depressed and gave it as his opinion
that Lenin would not answer them. To his unfeigned astonishment, the questions
were answered promptly, simply and decisively, and when the interview was
ended my companion naively expressed his wonderment.
The guidance of the interview was left to me. I began at once.
I wanted to know how far the proposals which Mr Bullitt took to the Conference
at Paris still held good. Lenin replied that they still held good, with
such modifications as the changing military situation might indicate. Later
he added that in the agreement with Bullitt it had been stated that the
changing military situation might bring in alterations. Continuing, he
said that Bullitt was unable to understand the strength of British and
American capitalism, but that if Bullitt were President of the United States
peace would soon be made.
Then I took up again the thread by asking what was the attitude
of the Soviet Republic to the small nations who had split off the Russian
Empire and had proclaimed their independence.
He replied that Finland's independence had been recognised in
November, 1917; that he (Lenin) had personally handed to Swinhufrod, then
head of the Finnish Republic, the paper on which this recognition was officially
stated; that the Soviet Republic had announced some time previously that
no soldiers of the Soviet Republic would cross the frontier with arms in
their hands; that the Soviet Republic had decided to create a neutral strip
or zone between their territory and Esthonia, and would declare this publicly;
that it was their principle to recognise the independence of all small
nations, and that finally they had just recognised the independence of
the Bashkir Republic -- and, he added, the Bashkir are a weak and backward
people.

Propaganda

For the third time I took up the questioning, asking what guarantees could
be offered against official propaganda among the Western peoples, if by
any chance relations with the Soviet Republic were opened. His reply was
that they had declared to Bullitt that they were ready to sign an agreement
not to make official propaganda. As a Government they were ready to undertake
that no official propaganda should take place. If private persons undertook
propaganda they would do it at their own risk and be amenable to the laws
of the country in which they acted. Russia has no laws, he said, against
propaganda by British people. England has such laws; therefore Russia is
the more liberal-minded. They would permit, he said, The British, or French,
or American Government to carry out propaganda of their own. He cried out
against the Defence of the Realm Act, and, as for freedom of the press
in France, he declared that he had just been reading Henri Barbusse's novel
"Clarte" in which there were two censored patches. "They censor novels
in free, democratic France?"
I asked if he had any general statement to make, upon which he
replied that the most important thing for him to say was that the Soviet
system is the best, and that English workers and agricultural labourers
would accept it if they knew it. He hoped that after peace the British
Government would not prohibit the publication of the Soviet Constitution.
That, morally, the Soviet system is even now victorious, and that the [proof
of this statement is seen in the persecution of Soviet literature in free,
democratic countries.
My allotted time had expired, and, knowing that he was needed
elsewhere, I rose and thanked him, and making my way back though Council
Chamber and clerks' room to the stair and courtyard, where were the young
Russian guards, I picked up my droshky and drove back to my room to think
over my meeting with Vladimir Ulianoff.
[A new photograph of Lenin, taken in the courtyard of the Kremlin,
was brought back by Mr. Goode, and appears in the Image archive.]
The Bullitt Peace Terms
In the account of his mission in Soviet Russia which
Mr Bullitt gave to the Senate Committee on Foreign Relations, he says that
he received a note from Mr. Kerr, Mr. Lloyd George's confidential secretary,
giving the conditions upon which, in Mr. Kerr's opinion, peace could be
concluded with the Bolsheviks. He took these with him to Moscow and received
from the Bolshevik Government a "projected peace proposal" which the Bolsheviks
were prepared on their part to accept if it should be put forward formally
by the Allies. This "peace proposal" may be summarised as follows:

All the Governments formed within the territory of the old Russian Empire
to keep full power over the territories occupied by them until the inhabitants
should declare the form of Government preferred by them.

None of such Governments to overthrow another by force.

The blockade of Russia to be raised.

Re-establishment of commercial relations.

All produce existing or received in Russia to be accessible to all classes
of the population, without any distinction.

All the above Russian Governments to grant full and complete amnesty to
political opponents, soldiers included.

The Allied troops to evacuate Russia.

Simultaneous reduction of the Soviet and anti-Soviet armies to peace footing.

All the above Russian Governments to recognise, jointly, the financial
obligations of the former Russian Empire.

Freedom of residence and movement of all Russian subjects over all parts
of Russia.

Repatriation of all prisoners of war.

Mr Bullitt said that the Soviet Government wished to add a further clause
to these terms, viz.:


The Soviet Government is most anxious to have a semi-official guaranty
from the American and British Governments that they will do their utmost
to see to it that France lives up to the conditions of the Armistice.


Mr Bullitt, however, says that he refused to embody this clause in his
final document.



Lenin Works Archive








==========

## The Dictatorship of the
  Proletariat











The  Dictatorship Of The Proletariat



V. I. Lenin
The  Dictatorship Of The 
      Proletariat[1]

Written: September-October 1919

      
First Published: 1925

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
      Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
      1965, Volume 30, pages 93-104

      
Translated: George Hanna

      
Transcription/HTML Markup:

Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
      License


For treatment in the pamphlet the question falls into 4 main sections:
(A) The dictatorship of the proletariat as new forms of the class struggle of the proletariat (in other words: its new stage and new tasks).
(B)The dictatorship of the proletariat as the destruction of bourgeois democracy and the creation of proletarian democracy.
(C)The dictatorship of the proletariat and the distinguishing features of imperialism (or the imperialist stage of capitalism).
(D) The dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power.

      Plan for the elaboration of these 4 sections:
    
I (A) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat
      as New Forms of the Class Struggle
      of the Proletariat


1. The chief reason why the
“socialists” do not understand the dictatorship of
the proletariat is that they do not carry the idea of the
class struggle to its logical conclusion (C f. Marx, 1852) .[2]


  The dictatorship of the proletariat is the
  continuation of the class struggle of the
  proletariat in new forms. That is the crux of the matter,
  and that is what they do not understand.

  

  The proletariat, as a special class, alone continues to wage
  its class struggle.

  


  2. The state is only a weapon of the proletariat in its
             class struggle. A special kind of cudgel, rien de
             plus!  Nothing
             more.—Editor.]


  Old prejudices regarding the state (cf. The State and
  Revolution). New forms of the state the subject of
  section B; here only the approach to it.

  

  3. The forms of the class struggle of the
  proletariat, under its dictatorship, cannot be what they
  were before. Five new (principal) tasks and
  correspondingly five new forms:
4. (1) Suppression of the resistance of
      the exploiters.k This, as the task (and content) of the
      epoch, is entirely forgotten by the opportunists and
      the “socialists”.

  

  Hence:

  


  (αα) the special (higher) severity of the class
  struggle (ββ) new forms of resistance
  corresponding to capitalism and its highest stage (plots +
  sabotage + influence  
  on the petty bourgeoisie, etc., etc.) and, in
  particular.
The resistance of the exploiters begins
before their overthrow and afterwards becomes
intensified from two sides. A fight to a
finish, or  “talk one's way out” (Karl Kautsky,
the petty bourgeoisie, the “socialists").
5. (2) (ΥΥ) Civil war. 
  Revolution in general and civil war (1649, 1793) (cf. Karl
  Kautsky, 1902, in The Social Revolution). Civil war
  in the epoch of the international ties of capitalism.
Civil war and the “destruction”
of the party (Karl Kautsky). Terror and civil war.

Transformation of imperialist war into
      civil war. (Ignorance and despicable cowardice of the
      “socialists”.)
  Cf. Marx, 1870[3]: give the proletariat practice in
      arms. The epoch 1871-1914 and the epoch of civil
      wars. 
(α Russia, Hungary, 
Finland,  Germany. 
  {
  (βSwitzerland and America.

  

  +Inevitability of a combination of civil war with
  revolutionary wars (cf. Programme of the R.C.P.). 

6. (3) “Neutralisation” of
    the petty bourgeoisie, especially the peasantry.
    Communist Manifesto (reactionary and revolutionary
  “only in view of").

  
  Karl Kautsky in the Agrarfrage. The same idea of
  neutralisation, only verballhornt.[Bowdlerised.—Editor.]


  "Neutralisation" in practice means
  | (suppression by force 
  | (Engels, 1895)
  | example
  | persuasion, etc., etc enlisting + suppression, “on-ly in view of”.
The “ruling class”. Rule precludes “liberty and equality”.
  
  "To head”, “to lead”, “to take with”, the class meaning of these concepts.
     
   | Peasant and worker.
   | The peasant as a
   | toiler and the peas-
   | ant as an exploiter
   | (profiteer, property-
   | owner). “Only in view
   | of.” Vacillations in
   | the course of the
   | struggle. Experience
   |  of the struggle.
"One reactionary mass":
  Engels, 1875, in respect
  of the Commune.[4]
7. (4) “Ulilisation” of the bourgeoisie. 
  “Specialists.” Not only suppression of resistance, not only “neutralisation”, but setting them to work, compelling them to serve the proletariat. 
  Cf. Programme of the FLC.P. “Military
  Specialists."

8. (5) Inculcation of a new discipline. 
  
  (α) The dictatorship of the proletariat and the trade unions.

  (β) Bonuses and piece rates.
  
  (γ) Party purge and its role.
  
  (δ) “Communist subbotniks." 

II(B) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat as the Destruction of Bourgeois Democracy and the Creation of Proletarian Democracy


9. Dictatorship and democracy as “general” (“pure”, according to Karl Kautsky) concepts.

Dictatorship as the denial of democracy. For whom?

Abstract (petty-bourgeois) democratic view and Marxism (class struggle).

Definition. Force (Engels).
State and “liberty” (cf Engels, 1875)[5]
10.“Liberty.” = Liberty
for the commodity owner.

Real liberty for the wage-workers, for the peasants.

Liberty for the exploiters.

Liberty for whom?

from whom? from  what?

Liberty in what?




  11. “Equality.” Engels in
  Anti-Dühring (prejudice, if it goes beyond the
  abolition of 

  classes).[6]

  Equality between the exploited and the exploiter.

  
  Equality between hungry and satiated.

  
  Equality between worker and peasant.

  
  Equality between whom? In what?

  

Equality of the commodity owners.
 
  
12. Decision by majority..

Its conditions; real equality (culture).
  real freedom.

Cf. press, assembly, etc..

All are equal, leaving out 
of account, money, capital, land ....

13. Decision by majority. Another condition for it= “conscientious” subordination.
Utopia of reformism.
Gilding of capitalism.

First throw off the yoke of money, the power of capital, abolish private property, then the slow growth of “conscientiousness” on this new basis. 
14. Reality of the bourgeois-democratic republic.

Engels on the connection of the government with the stock exchange and capital [7]

Corruption
  deceit

  presst
  assemblyt
  parliamentt
  customt
  pressure of capitalt
  (public opinion, etc.).
Formal equality while bourgeois oppression, the yoke of capital, and wage-slavery are preserved.
15. The imperialist war of 1914-18 as the “last word” in bourgeois democracy.
The “peace” of 1918-19. Foreign policy.
Army and Navy.



16. The bureaucracy. The courts. Militarism.
Dictatorship of the bourgeoisie masked by parliamentary forms.

17. Decision by majority and strength of majority. 51 per cent of the “proletariat”..
Decision of “all”? despite 
waverersand excluding exploiters.



 | Imperialist 
 | influence,
 | status of 
 | petty 
 | bourgeoisie,
 | etc., “semi-
 | proletariat”.

 |  versus 20
 |  per cent+401/2
 |  percent?
Motives of referendums (bourgeois surroundings).



18. Peaceful voting and sharpened class struggle.
 |  First“decide”, then
 |  quietly vote?
 |  First the 
 |  development of 
 |  the class struggle.

Economic and political conditions for sharpening of class struggle.
Destruction of the bourgeois surroundings, their real conditions of motivation of will.
19. Reality of democracy under proletarian democracy.
Achievements of democracy: congresses, meetings, press, religion, women, oppressed nations.
20. The historical change from bourgeois democracy to proletarian democracy.
“Growing over”, “creeping into”, or the break-up of the former and birth of the latter? = Revolution, or without revolution? Conquest of political power by the new class, overthrow of the bourgeoisie, or a deal, a compromise between classes?

III (C) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat
and the Distinguishing Features of Imperialism

21. Imperialism as the highest stage of capitalism.
Résumé of my book.
Definition.
22. The colonies and dependent countries.

Revolt of the proletariat 
against the bourgeoisie of its own country+revolt of the nations in the colonies and dependent countries.
Revolutionary proletarian wars and national wars (cf. Programme of the R.C.P.).
23. Seizure of territory by the League of Nations.
A “single” oppressor. Concentration of the struggle.
Variety of stages.
24. The bourgeois upper layer of the proletariat.
8852-92,Engels and Marx [8]
1872, Marx on the leaders of the British trade unions.[9]
Labour lieutenants of the capitalist class. [This expression written by Lenin in English Social-chauvinism.]
Two chief “streams”: the corrupt and the
philistines.

   
 

Split of 1915-17, “Centre”.
”      ” 1917-19 (cf. Programme of the R.C.P.).

   
 
 
Vorwärts (“Radikalisierung der englischen Arbeiter")... “eine gewisse Grösse” [Radicalisation of  the British workers ... a certain numher.-Ed.] of Bolsheviks.
Wiener Arbeiter Zeitung 
No. 180 (July 2, 1919)

Friedrich Adler in his speech. ΣΣΣ [in its totality]—the sophistry of a turncoat.
25. Two Internationals. Dictatorship of the revolutionary elements of the class.

One country and the whole world.


IV (D) The Dictatorship of the Proletariat and Soviet Power

26. Origin of the Soviets.
1905 and 1917.

27. Peculiarities of Russia.
Kautsky: “Slavs and Revolution.”

28. Soviets and “compromise”
March-October 1917.
Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries.  

 | (1894 (Struve) and 1899
 | (Bernstein)
 | Mensheviks and Socialist
 | Revolutionaries
 | (1917)-1918-19-20
 | …(in Europe).
29. Ignorance and stupidity of leaders of the Second International. Nothing about Soviets.
Kautsky in his pamphlet, August 1918. 
Soviets for the struggle, but not for state power!
30. But the proletarian masses see it differently: class instinct!
31. Triumphal march of the Soviet idea through the world.
The form of the dictatorship of the proletariat discovered (by the mass movement of the proletariat)!
The Third International.
Direct and indirect (inclusion in the German Constitution) victory of the Soviet idea.
The idea has won over the masses.
32. Soviet Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R.
N.B. its § 23[10]
1793-94 versus 1917-19.
 

Endnotes

[1] This article is apparently a draft of a pamphlet planned but not written by Lenin.
[2] Lenin refers to Karl Marx’s letter to Joseph Weydemeyer of March 5, 1852 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, p. 85).
[3] Lenin refers to Karl Marx’s letter to Ludwig Kugelmann of December 13, 1870 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, p. 307).
[4] Lenin refers to Engels’s letter to August Bebel of March 18-28 1875 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, p. 353).
[5]  Lenin refers to Engels’s letter to August Bebel of March 18-28 1875 (see Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955, pp. 356-57).
[6] See Frederick Engels, Anti-Dühring, Moscow, 1954, Part I, Philosophy. Chapter X, pp. 134-49.
[7] See Frederick Engels, The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State, Moscow, Chapter IX, Barbarism and Civilisation, pp. 307-27.
[8] Lenin refers to statements by Marx and Engels in the period between 1852 and 1892 concerning the development of the upper stratum of the working class into bourgeois (references are given in Note 15).
[9] Lenin refers to Marx’s address to the Hague Congress of the First International in September 1872. Engels wrote about it in letters to Sorge of September 21 and October 5, 1872. 
[10] The Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R. was adopted on July 10, 1918 by the Fifth All-Russia Congress of Soviets. Its Clause 23 reads as follows, "Prompted by the interests of the working class as a whole, the R.S.F.S.R. deprives of rights certain individuals and certain groups who use such rights to the detriment of the socialist revolution." This clause remained in force till the Eighth Extraordinary) Congress of Soviets of the U.S.S.R. which in 1036 adopted a new Constitution according to which all citizens were granted equal rights to elect and be elected to the Soviets.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 







==========

## Economics and Politics In the Era of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat











Economics And Politics in the Era of the Dictatorship of the Proletariat



V. I. Lenin
 
 Economics And Politics In The Era
 Of The Dictatorship Of The Proletariat


Written: 30 October, 1919 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 250, November 7, 1919. Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 107-117
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


I had intended to write a short pamphlet on the subject
    indicated in the title on the occasion of the second anniversary
    of Soviet power. But owing to the rush of everyday work I have so
    far been unable to get beyond preliminary preparations for some of
    the sections. I have therefore decided to essay a brief,
    summarised exposition of what, in my opinion, are the most
    essential ideas on the subject. A summarised exposition, of
    course, possesses many disadvantages and
    shortcomings. Nevertheless, a short magazine article may perhaps
    achieve the modest aim in view, which is to present the problem
    and the groundwork for its discussion by the Communists of various
    countries.
1
Theoretically, there can be no doubt that between capitalism
    and communism there lies a definite tranition period which must
    combine the features and properties of both these forms of social
    economy. This transition period has to be a period of struggle
    between dying capitalism and nascent communism—or, in other
    words, between capitalism which has been defeated but not
    destroyed and communism which has been born but is still very
    feeble. 
 The necessity for a whole historical era distinguished by
    these transitional features should be obvious not only to
    Marxists, but to any educated person who is in any degree
    acquainted with the theory of development. Yet all the talk on the
    subject of the transition to socialism which 


      we hear from present-day petty-bourgeois democrats (and such, in
      spite of their spurious socialist label, are all the leaders of
      the Second International, including such individuals as
      MacDonald, Jean Longuet, Kautsky and Friedrich Adler) is marked
      by complete disregard of this obvious truth. Petty-bourgeois
      democrats are distinguished by an aversion to class struggle, by
      their dreams of avoiding it, by their efforts to smooth over, to
      reconcile, to remove sharp corners. Such democrats, therefore,
      either avoid recognising any necessity for a whole historical
      period of transition from capitalism to communism or regard it
      as their duty to concoct schemes for reconciling the two
      contending forces instead of leading the struggle of one of
      these forces. 
2
In Russia, the dictatorship of the proletariat must inevitably
    differ in certain particulars from what it would be in the
    advanced countries, owing to the very great backwardness and
    petty-bourgeois character of our country. But the basic
    forces—and the basic forms of social economy— are the
    same in Russia as in any capitalist country, so that the
    peculiarities can apply only to what is of lesser importance. 
 The basic forms of social economy are capitalism, petty
    commodity production, and communism. The basic forces are the
    bourgeoisie, the petty bourgeoisie (the peasantry in particular)
    and the proletariat. 
 The economic system of Russia in the era of the dictatorship
    of the proletariat represents the struggle of labour, united on
    communist principles on the scale of a vast state and making its
    first steps—the struggle against petty commodity production
    and against the capitalism which still persists and against that
    which is newly arising on the basis of petty commodity
    production. 
 In Russia, labour is united communistically insofar as, first,
    private ownership of the means of production has been abolished,
    and, secondly, the proletarian state power is organising
    large-scale production on state-owned land and in state-owned
    enterprises on a national scale, is distributing labour-power
    among the various branches of production and the various
    enterprises, and is distributing among the working people large
    quantities of articles of consumption belonging to the state. 
 We speak of “the first steps” of communism in
    Russia (it is also put that way in our Party Programme adopted in
    March 1919), because all these things have been only partially
    effected in our country, or, to put it differently, their
    achievement is only in its early stages. We accomplished
    instantly, at one revolutionary blow, all that can, in general, be
    accomplished instantly; on the first day of the dictatorship of
    the proletariat, for instance, on October 26 (November 8),1917,
    the private ownership of land was abolished without compensation
    for the big landowners— the big landowners were
    expropriated. Within the space of a few months practically all the
    big capitalists, owners of factories, joint-stock companies,
    banks, railways, and so forth, were also expropriated without
    compensation. The state organisation of large-scale production in
    industry and the transition from “workers’
    control” to “workers’ management” of
    factories and railways— this has, by and large, already been
    accomplished; but in relation to agriculture it has only just
    begun ("state farms”, i.e., large farms organised by the
    workers’ state on state owned land). Similarly, we have only
    just begun the organisation of various forms of co-operative
    societies of small farmers as a transition from petty commodity
    agriculture to communist agriculture.[1] The same must be said
    of the state-organised distribution of products in place-of
    private trade, i.e., the state procurement and delivery of grain
    to the cities and of industrial products to the
    countryside. Available statistical data on this subject will be
    given below. 
 Peasant farming continues to be petty commodity
    production. Here we have an extremely broad and very sound,
    deep-rooted basis for capitalism, a basis on which capitalism
    persists or arises anew in a bitter struggle against
    communism. The forms of this struggle are private speculation and
    profiteering versus state procurement of grain (and other
    products) and state distribution of products in general. 
3
To illustrate these abstract theoretical propositions, let us
    quote actual figures. 
 According to the figures of the People’ s Commissariat
    of Food, state procurements of grain in Russia between August 1,
    1917, and August 1, 1918, amounted to about 30,000,000 poods, and
    in the following year to about 110,000,000 poods. During the first
    three months of the next campaign (1919-20) procurements will
    presumably total about 45,000,000 poods, as against 37,000,000
    poods for the same period (August-October) in 1918. 
 These flgures speak clearly of a slow but steady improvement
    in the state of affairs from the point of view of the victory of
    communism over capitalism. This improvement is being achieved in
    spite of difficulties without world parallel, difficulties due to
    the Civil War organised by Russian and foreign capitalists who are
    harnessing all the forces of the world’s strongest
    powers. 
 Therefore, in spite of the lies and slanders of the
    bourgeoisie of all countries and of their open or masked henchmen
    (the “socialists” of the Second International), one
    thing remains beyond dispute—as far as the basic economic
    problem of the dictatorship of the proletariat is concerned, the
    victory of communism over capitalism in our country is
    assured. Throughout the world the bourgeoisie is raging and fuming
    against Bolshevism and is organising military expeditions, plots,
    etc., against the Bolsheviks, because it realises full well that
    our success in reconstructing the social economy is inevitable,
    provided we are not crushed by military force. And its attempts to
    crush us in this way are not succeeding. 
 The extent to which we have already vanquished capitalism in
    the short time we have had at our disposal, and despite the
    incredible difficulties under which we have had to work, will be
    seen from the following summarised figures.

    The Central Statistical Board has just prepared for the press
    data on the production and consumption of grain—not for the
    whole of Soviet Russia, but only for twenty-six gubernias. 
 The results are as follows:



26 gubernias of Soviet Russia

Population in millions

Production of grain (excluding seed and fodder) millions poods
 Grain delivered, millions poods

Total amount of grain at disposal of population millions poods

Grain consumption, poods per capita

Commisariat of food
Profiteers

Producing gubernias Consuming gubernias
 Urban  4.4 Rural 28.6 Urban5.9 Rural 13.8
—625.4—114.0
20.9—20.012.1
20.6—20.027.8
41.5481.840.0151.4

9.5
16.9
6.8
11.0


Total (26 gubernias)

52.7

739.4

53.0

68.4

714.7

13.6


 
      Thus, approximately half the amount of grain supplied to the
      cities is provided by the Commissariat of Food and the other
      half by profiteers. This same proportion is revealed by a
      careful survey, made in 1918, of the food consumed by city
      workers. It should be borne in mind that for bread supplied by
      the state the worker pays one-ninth of what he pays the
      profiteer. The profiteering price for bread is ten
      times greater than the state price; this is revealed by a
      detailed study of workers’ budgets.
4
A careful study of the figures quoted shows that they present
    an exact picture of the fundamental features of Russia’s
    present-day economy. 
 The working people have been emancipated from their age-old
    oppressors and exploiters, the landowners and capitalists. This
    step in the direction of real freedom and real equality, a step
    which for its extent, dimensions and  rapidity is without parallel
    in the world, is ignored by the supporters of the bourgeoisie
    (including the petty-bourgeois democrats), who, when they talk of
    freedom and equality, mean parliamentary bourgeois democracy,
    which they falsely declare to be “democracy” in
    general, or “pure democracy” (Kautsky). 
 But the working people are concerned only with real equality
    and real freedom (freedom from the landowners and capitalists),
    and that is why they give the Soviet government such solid
    support. 
 In this peasant country it was the peasantry as a whole who
    were the first to gain, who gained most, and gained immediately
    from the dictatorship of the proletariat. The peasant in Russia
    starved under the landowners and capitalists. Throughout the long
    centuries of our history, the peasant never had an opportunity to
    work for himself: he starved while handing over hundreds of
    millions of poods of grain to the capitalists, for the cities and
    for export. Under the dictatorship of the proletariat the peasant
    for the first time has been working for himself and
    feeding better than the city dweller. For the first time
    the peasant has seen real freedom—freedom to eat his bread,
    freedom from starvation. In the distribution of the land, as we
    know, the maximum equality has been established; in the vast
    majority of cases the peasants are dividing the land according to
    the number of “mouths to feed”. 
 Socialism means the abolition of classes. 
 In order to abolish classes it is necessary, first, to
    overthrow the landowners and capitalists. This part of our task
    has been accomplished, but it is only a part, and moreover,
    not the most difficult part. In order to abolish classes
    it is necessary, secondly, to abolish the difference between
    factory worker and peasant, to make workers of all of
    them. This cannot be done all at once. This task is
    incomparably more difficult and will of necessity take a long
    time. It is not a problem that can be solved by overthrowing a
    class. It can be solved only by the organisational reconstruction
    of the whole social economy, by a transition from individual,
    disunited, petty commodity production to large-scale social
    production. This transition must of necessity be extremely
    protracted. It may only be delayed and complicated by hasty and
    incautious administrative and legislative measures. It can be
    accelerated only by affording such assistance to the peasant as
    will enable him to effect an immense improvement in his whole
    farming technique to reform it radically. 
 In order to solve the second and most difficult part of the
    problem, the proletariat, after having defeated the bourgeoisie,
    must unswervingly conduct its policy towards the peasantry along
    the following fundamental lines. The proletariat must separate,
    demarcate the working peasant from the peasant owner, the peasant
    worker from the peasant huckster, the peasant who labours from the
    peasant who profiteers. 
 In this demarcation lies the whole essence of
    socialism. 
 And it is not surprising that the socialists who are
    socialists in word but petty-bourgeois democrats in deed (the
    Martovs, the Chernovs, the Kautskys and others) do not understand
    this essence of socialism. 
 The demarcation we here refer to is an extremely difficult
    one, because in real life all the features of the
    “peasant”, however diverse they may be, however
    contradictory they may be, are fused into one whole. Nevertheless,
    demarcation is possible; and not only is it possible, it
    inevitably follows from the conditions of peasant farming and
    peasant life. The working peasant has for ages been oppressed by
    the landowners, the capitalists, the hucksters and profiteers and
    by their state, including even the most democratic
    bourgeois republics. Throughout the ages the working peasant has
    trained himself to hate and loathe these oppressors and
    exploiters, and this “training”, engendered by the
    conditions of life, compels the peasant to seek an
    alliance with the worker against the capitalist and against the
    profiteer and huckster. Yet at the same time, economic conditions,
    the conditions of commodity production, inevitably turn the
    peasant (not always, but in the vast majority of cases) into a
    huckster and profiteer. 
 The statistics quoted above reveal a striking difference
    between the working peasant and the peasant profiteer. That
    peasant who during 1918-19 delivered to the hungry workers of the
    cities 40,000,000 poods of grain at fixed state prices, who
    delivered this grain to the state agencies despite all the
    shortcomings of the latter, shortcomings fully realised by the
    workers’ government, but which were unavoidable in the first
    period of the transition to socialism—that peasant is a
    working peasant, the comrade and equal of the socialist worker,
    his most faithful ally, his blood brother in the fight against the
    yoke of capital. Whereas that peasant who clandestinely sold
    40,000,000 poods of grain at ten times the state price, taking
    advantage of the need and hunger of the city worker, deceiving the
    state, and everywhere increasing and creating deceit, robbery and
    fraud—that peasant is a profiteer, an ally of the
    capitalist, a class enemy of the worker, an exploiter. For whoever
    possesses surplus grain gathered from land belonging to the whole
    state with the help of implements in which in one way or another
    is embodied the labour not only of the peasant but also of the
    worker and so on— whoever possesses a surplus of grain and
    profiteers in that grain is an exploiter of the hungry
    worker. 
 You are violators of freedom, equality, and
    democracy—they shout at us on all sides, pointing to the
    inequality of the worker and the peasant under our Constitution,
    to the dissolution of the Constituent Assembly, to the forcible
    confiscation of surplus grain, and so forth. We reply—never
    in the world has there been a state which has done so much to
    remove the actual inequality, the actual lack of freedom from
    which the working peasant has been suffering for centuries. But we
    shall never recognise equality with the peasant profiteer, just as
    we do not recognise “equality” between the exploiter
    and the exploited, between the sated and the hungry, nor the
    “freedom” for the former to rob the latter. And those
    educated people who refuse to recognise this difference we shall
    treat as whiteguards, even though they may call themselves
    democrats, socialists, internationalists, Kautskys, Chernovs, or
    Martovs. 
5
Socialism means the abolition of classes. The dictatorship of
    the proletariat has done all it could to abolish classes. But
    classes cannot be abolished at one stroke.
 And classes still remain and will remain in
    the era of the dictatorship of the proletariat. The dictatorship
    will become unnecessary when classes disappear. Without the
    dictatorship of the proletariat they will not disappear. 
 Classes have remained, but in the era of the dictatorship of
    the proletariat every class has undergone a change, and
    the relations between the classes have also changed. The class
    struggle does not disappear under the dictatorship of the
    proletariat; it merely assumes different forms. 
 Under capitalism the proletariat was an oppressed class, a
    class which had been deprived of the means of production, the only
    class which stood directly and completely opposed to the
    bourgeoisie, and therefore the only one capable of being
    revolutionary to the very end. Having overthrown the bourgeoisie
    and conquered political power, the proletariat has become the
    ruling class; it wields state power, it exercises control
    over means of production already socialised; it guides the
    wavering and intermediary elements and classes; it crushes the
    increasingly stubborn resistance of the exploiters. All these are
    specific tasks of the class struggle, tasks which the
    proletariat formerly did not and could not have set itself. 
 The class of exploiters, the landowners and capitalists, has
    not disappeared and cannot disappear all at once under the
    dictatorship of the proletariat. The exploiters have been smashed,
    but not destroyed. They still have an inter national base in the
    form of international capital, of which they are a branch. They
    still retain certain means of production in part, they still have
    money, they still have vast social connections. Because they have
    been defeated, the energy of their resistance has increased a
    hundred and a thousandfold. The “art” of state,
    military and economic administration gives them a superiority, and
    a very great superiority, so that their importance is incomparably
    greater than their numerical proportion of the population. The
    class struggle waged by the overthrown exploiters against the
    victorious vanguard of the exploited, i.e., the proletariat, has
    become incomparably more bitter. And it cannot be otherwise in the
    case of a revolution, unless this concept is replaced (as it is by
    all the heroes of the Second International) by reformist
    illusions. 
 Lastly, the peasants, like the petty bourgeoisie in general,
    occupy a half-way, intermediate position even under the
    dictatorship of the proletariat: on the one hand, they are a
    fairly large (and in backward Russia, a vast) mass of working
    people, united by the common interest of all working people to
    emancipate themselves from the landowner and the capitalist; on
    the other hand, they are disunited small proprietors,
    property-owners and traders. Such an economic position inevitably
    causes them to vacillate between the proletariat and the
    bourgeoisie. In view of the acute form which the struggle between
    these two classes has assumed, in view of the incredibly severe
    break up of all social relations, and in view of the great
    attachment of the peasants and the petty bourgeoisie generally to
    the old, the routine, and the unchanging, it is only natural that
    we should inevitably find them swinging from one side to the
    other, that we should find them wavering, changeable, uncertain,
    and so on. 
 In relation to this class—or to these social
    elements—the proletariat must strive to establish its
    influence over it, to guide it. To give leadership to the
    vacillating and unstable—such is the task of the
    proletariat. 
 If we compare all the basic forces or classes and their
    interrelations, as modified by the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, we shall realise how unutterably nonsensical and
    theoretically stupid is the common petty-bourgeois idea shared by
    all representatives of the Second International, that the
    transition to socialism is possible “by means of
    democracy” in general. The fundamental source of this error
    lies in the prejudice inherited from the bourgeoisie that
    “democracy” is something absolute and above
    classes. As a matter of fact, democracy itself passes into an
    entirely new phase under the dictatorship of the proletariat, and
    the class struggle rises to a higher level, dominating over each
    and every form. 
 General talk about freedom, equality and democracy is in fact
    but a blind repetition of concepts shaped by the relations of
    commodity production. To attempt to solve the concrete problems of
    the dictatorship of the proletariat by such generalities is
    tantamount to accepting the theories and principles of the
    bourgeoisie in their entirety.

    From the point of view of the proletariat, the question can be
    put only in the following way: freedom from oppression by which
    class? equality of which class with which? democracy based on
    private property, or on a struggle for the abolition of private
    property?—and so forth. 
Long ago Engels in his Anti-Dühring explained
    that the concept “equality” is moulded from the
    relations of commodity production; equality becomes a prejudice if
    it is not understood to mean the abolition of
    classes. This elementary truth regarding the distinction
    between the bourgeois-democratic and the socialist conception of
    equality is constantly being forgotten. But if it is not forgotten
    it becomes obvious that by overthrowing the bourgeoisie the
    proletariat takes the most decisive step towards the abolition of
    classes, and that in order to complete the process the proletariat
    must continue its class struggle, making use of the apparatus of
    state power and employing various methods of combating,
    influencing and bringing pressure to bear on the overthrown
    bourgeoisie and the vacillating petty bourgeoisie. 
(To be continued)

[This article remained
unfinished—editor]


      October 30, 1919
    

Endnotes
[1] The number of “state farms” and “agricultural communes” in Soviet Russia is, as far as is known, 3,536 and 1,96l respectively, and the number of agricultural artels is 3,696. Our Central Statistical Board is at present taking an exact census of all state farms and communes. The results will begin coming in in November 1919. 


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Greetings to the Workers of Petrograd











Greetings to the Workers of Petrograd



V. I. Lenin
Greetings to the Workers of Petrograd


Written: 5 November, 1919 
 
First Published: Petrogradshaya Pravda No. 255, November 7, 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 108-119
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The workers of Petrograd deserve the first message
    of greeting on the occasion of the second anniversary of the
    Soviet Republic. The Petrograd workers, as the vanguard of the
    revolutionary workers and soldiers, as the vanguard of the working
    people of Russia and the whole world, were the first to overthrow
    the rule of the bourgeoisie and raise the banner of the
    proletarian revolution against capitalism and imperialism.
For two years the workers and labouring peasants of the Soviet
    Republic have triumphantly held high that banner despite all
    difficulties and all the torments of hunger, cold, chaos and
    economic ruin. Two years of socialist development have given us
    extensive experience, have enabled us to consolidate Soviet power
    despite the malicious fury and resistance of the bourgeoisie and
    the military attack by world imperialism.
On our side we have the sympathy of the world’s
    workers. The proletarian revolution is maturing slowly and with
    difficulty, but persistently in all countries, and the brutal
    violence of the bourgeoisie only exacerbates the struggle, only
    hastens the victory of the proletariat.
Very recently the British reactionaries, the imperialists, made
    their last stake on the capture of Petrograd. The bourgeoisie of
    the entire world, especially the Russian bourgeoisie, already had
    a foretaste of victory. But instead of victory they met with
    defeat at Petrograd.
Yudenich’s forces have been beaten and are
    retreating.
Comrades, workers and Red Army soldiers! Bend all your efforts!
    Keep on the heels of the retreating troops at all costs, crush
    them, do not allow them to rest for an hour, or a single
    minute. At this moment we can and must strike harder than ever in
    order to finish off the enemy.
Long live the Red Army that is defeating the tsarist generals,
      whiteguards and capitalists! Long live the international Soviet
      Republic!
    
N. Lenin

    

      November 5, 1919


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Soviet Power and the Status of Women













Soviet Power and the Status of Women


VI Lenin
Soviet Power and the Status of Women


Written: 6 November, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 249, November 6, 1919; Published according to the manuscript; also, Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 120-123
Source: Women and Communism, Lawrence & Wishart, London, 1950
Transcribed and HTML Markup: Sally Ryan

      
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The second anniversary of the Soviet power is a
    fitting occasion for us to review what  has, in general, been
    accomplished during this period, and to probe into the
    significance and  aims of the revolution which we
    accomplished.
The bourgeoisie and its supporters accuse us of violating
    democracy. We maintain that the  Soviet revolution has given an
    unprecedented stimulus to the development of democracy both in
    depth and breadth, of democracy, moreover, distinctly for the
    toiling masses, who had been  oppressed under capitalism;
    consequently, of democracy for the vast majority of the people,
    of socialist democracy (for the toilers) as distinguished from
    bourgeois democracy (for the  exploiters, the capitalists, the
    rich). 

    

      Who is right? 

    

      To probe deeply into this question and  to
    understand it well will mean studying the experience of these two
    years and being better  prepared to further follow up this
    experience.
The position of women furnishes a particularly graphic
    elucidation of the difference  between bourgeois and socialist
    democracy, it furnishes a particularly graphic answer to the
    question posed.
In no bourgeois republic (i.e., where there is private
    ownership of the land, factories,  works, shares, etc.), be it
    even the most democratic republic, nowhere in the world, not even
    in the most advanced country, have women gained a position of
    complete equality. And this,  notwithstanding the fact that more
    than one and a quarter centuries have elapsed since the  Great
    French (bourgeois-democratic) Revolution.
In words, bourgeois democracy promises equality and liberty. In
    fact, not a single  bourgeois republic, not even the most advanced
    one, has given the feminine half of the human  race either full
    legal equality with men or freedom from the guardianship and
    oppression of  men.
Bourgeois democracy is democracy of pompous phrases, solemn
    words, exuberant promises and  the high-sounding slogans of
    freedom and equality. But, in fact, it screens the non-freedom
    and inferiority of women, the non-freedom and inferiority of the
    toilers and exploited.
Soviet, or socialist, democracy sweeps aside the pompous,
    bullying, words, declares  ruthless war on the hypocrisy of the
    "democrats", the landlords, capitalists or well-fed  peasants who
    are making money by selling their surplus bread to hungry workers
    at  profiteering prices.
Down with this contemptible fraud! There cannot be, nor is
    there nor will there ever be  "equality" between the oppressed and
    the oppressors, between the exploited and the  exploiters. There
    cannot be, nor is there nor will there ever be real "freedom" as
    long as  there is no freedom for women from the privileges which
    the law grants to men, as long as  there is no freedom for the
    workers from the yoke of capital, and no freedom for the toiling
    peasants from the yoke of the capitalists, landlords and
    merchants.
Let the liars and hypocrites, the dull-witted and blind, the
    bourgeois and their  supporters hoodwink the people with talk
    about freedom in general, about equality in general,  about
    democracy in general.
We say to the workers and peasants: Tear the masks from the
    faces of these liars, open the  eyes of these blind ones. Ask
    them:
“Equality between what sex and what other sex?
“Between what nation and what other nation?
“Between what class and what other class?
“Freedom from what yoke, or from the yoke of what class?
    Freedom for what class?”
Whoever speaks of politics, of democracy, of liberty, of
    equality, of socialism, and does  not at the same time
    ask these questions, does not put them in the foreground,
    does  not fight against concealing, hushing up and glossing over
    these questions, is one of the  worst enemies of the toilers, is a
    wolf in sheep's clothing, is a bitter opponent of the  workers and
    peasants, is a servant of the landlords, tsars, capitalists.
In the course of two years Soviet power in one of the most
    backward countries of Europe  did more to emancipate women and to
    make their status equal to that of the "strong" sex than  all the
    advanced, enlightened, "democratic" republics of the world did in
    the course of 130  years.
Enlightenment, culture, civilisation, liberty--in all
    capitalist, bourgeois republics of  the world all these fine words
    are combined with extremely infamous, disgustingly filthy and
    brutally coarse laws in which woman is treated as an inferior
    being, laws dealing with  marriage rights and divorce, with the
    inferior status of a child born out of wedlock as  compared with
    that of a "legitimate" child, laws granting privileges to men,
    laws that are  humiliating and insulting to women.
The yoke of capital, the tyranny of "sacred private property",
    the despotism of philistine  stupidity, the greed of petty
    proprietors --these are the things that prevented the most
    democratic bourgeois republics from infringing upon those filthy
    and infamous laws.
The Soviet Republic, the republic of workers and peasants,
    promptly wiped out these laws  and left not a stone in the
    structure of bourgeois fraud and bourgeois hypocrisy.
Down with this fraud! Down with the liars who are talking of
    freedom and equality for  all, while there is an
    oppressed sex, while there are oppressor classes, while there is
    private ownership of capital, of shares, while there are the
    well-fed with their surplus of  bread who keep the hungry in
    bondage. Not freedom for all, not equality for all, but a
    fight against the oppressors and exploiters, the
    abolition of every  possibility of oppression and
    exploitation-that is our slogan!
Freedom and equality for the oppressed sex!
Freedom and equality for the workers, for the toiling
    peasants!
A fight against the oppressors, a fight against the
    capitalists, a fight against the  profiteering kulaks!
That is our fighting slogan, that is our proletarian truth, the
    truth of the struggle  against capital, the truth which we flung
    in the face of the world of capital with its  honeyed,
    hypocritical, pompous phrases about freedom and equality in
    general, about  freedom and equality for all.
And for the very reason that we have torn down the mask of this
    hypocrisy, that we are  introducing with revolutionary energy
    freedom and equality for the oppressed and for the  toilers,
    against the oppressors, against the capitalists, against the
    kulaks--for this very  reason the Soviet government has become so
    dear to the hearts of workers of the whole  world.
It is for this very reason that, on the second anniversary of
    the Soviet power, the:  sympathies of the masses of the workers,
    the sympathies of the oppressed and exploited in  every country of
    the world, are with us.
It is for this very reason that, on this second anniversary of
    the Soviet power, despite  hunger and cold, despite all our
    tribulations, which have been caused by the imperialists'
    invasion of the Russian Soviet Republic, we are full of firm faith
    in the justice of our  cause, of firm Faith in the inevitable
    victory of Soviet power all over the world.
 

Women and
Marxism - Lenin Index 
Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Two Years of Soviet Power











Two Years Of Soviet Power



V. I. Lenin
Two Years of Soviet Power


Written: 5 November, 1919
First Published: Bednota No 478, November 7, 1919; Published according to the Bednota text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 124-126
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



      The newspaper Bednota45 is read mostly by peasants.

      On this, the second, anniversary of the establishment of Soviet
      power, I wish to extend greetings to the many millions of
      working peasants who have been liberated from landowner and
      capitalist oppression and say a few words about that
      liberation.
Soviet power, which overthrew the rule of capital and placed
    power in the hands of the working people, has to contend in Russia
    with unparalleled and incredible difficulties.
The landowners and capitalists of Russia, now joined by the
    landowners and capitalists of the whole world, are still making
    frenzied attempts to destroy Soviet power. They fear the example
    it has set; they fear that it will win the sympathy and support of
    workers the world over.
Conspiracies within the country, the bribing of the
    Czechoslovak forces, the landing of foreign troops in Siberia,
    Archangel, the Caucasus, South Russia and near Petrograd, the
    hundreds of millions of rubles being spent to help Kolchak,
    Denikin, Yudenich and other tsarist generals—every
    conceivable method is being employed by the capitalists of all
    countries, who have accumulated millions and thousands of millions
    from war contracts, in an attempt to overthrow the Soviet
    government.
But all in vain. The Soviet government stands firm, overcoming
    all these unparalleled and incredible difficulties, despite the
    measureless suffering caused by war, blockade, famine, shortages,
    breakdown of the transport system and general economic
    dislocation.
Soviet power in Russia has already won the support of the
    ‘Workers of the whole world. There is not a single
    country where the people do not talk of Bolshevism and Soviet
    power.
The capitalists talk of it with hatred and rabid malice,
    slandering and vilifying it without end. But this malice gives
    them away, and the mass of workers are turning their backs on the
    old leaders and coming out in support of Soviet power.
Despite the crushing, painful burden imposed by the enemy
    assault on Russia, Soviet power has triumphed throughout the
    world—triumphed in the sense that everywhere the sympathy of
    the working people is already on our side.
The victory of Soviet power throughout the world is
    assured. It is only a question of time.

      Why is Soviet power so firm and stable, despite the incredible
      ordeals, the terrible famine and the difficulties created by war
      and economic dislocation?
Because it is the power of the working people themselves, of
    the millions of workers and peasants.
The workers hold state power. The workers help the millions of
    labouring peasants.
The Soviet government has overthrown the landowners and
    capitalists and is steadfastly defending the people against
    attempts to restore their rule.
The Soviet government gives all the aid it is capable of to
    the labouring peasants, the poor and Middle peasants, who make up
    the vast majority.

      The Soviet government holds a tight rein on the kulak, the
      village money-bag, the proprietor, the profiteer, on everyone
      who wants to get rich without having to work, everyone who
      battens on the misery and hunger of the people.
The Soviet government is for the labouring people,
    against the profiteers, proprietors, capitalists and
    landowners.
That is the source of the strength, stability and invincibility
      of Soviet power throughout the world.
Tens and hundreds of millions of workers and peasants all over
      the world are suffering oppression, humiliation and plunder at the
      hands of landowners and capitalists. The old state apparatus,
      whether of a monarchy or a "democratic" 
      (pseudo-democratic) republic, helps the exploiters and oppresses the
      workers.

    

      Tens and hundreds of millions of workers and peasants in all lands know
      this; they see it and experience it in their everyday life.

    

      The imperialist war lasted over four years; tens of millions were killed and
      crippled. What for? For the division of the capitalists' spoils, for
      markets, profits, colonies and the power of the banks.

    

      The Anglo-French imperialist predators defeated the German imperialist
      predators. With every passing day they are exposing themselves for what they
      are-robbers and plunderers, oppressors of the working folk who batten on the
      misery of the people and tyrannise weak nations.

    

      That is why support for Soviet power is growing among the workers and
      peasants of the world.

    

      The severe and arduous struggle against capital was victoriously begun in
      Russia. It is now spreading in all countries.

    

It will end in the victory of the World Soviet Republic.
    


Collected Works Volume 30

Collected Works Table of Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Two Years of Soviet Power Two Years
  of Soviet Rule











Two Years Of Soviet Rule



V. I. Lenin
Two Years of Soviet Rule

      Speech at a Joint Session of the All-Russia
      Central Executive Committee, the Moscow
      Soviet of Workers’ and Red army
      Deputies, the All-Russia Central Council of
      trade Unions, and Factory Committees, On the
      Occasion of the Second anniversary of the
      October Revolution. November 7, 1919


Written: 5 November, 1919
First Published: Pravda No, 251, November 9, 1919; Published according to the verbatim report, verified with the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 127-137
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



      Comrades, two years ago, when the imperialist war was
      still raging, it seemed to all the supporters of the bourgeoisie in Russia,
      to the masses of the people and, I dare say, to most of the workers in other
      countries, that the uprising of the Russian proletariat and their conquest
      of political power was a bold but hopeless enterprise. At that time world
      imperialism appeared such a tremendous and invincible force that it seemed
      stupid of the workers of a backward country to attempt to revolt against it.
      Now, however, as we glance back over the past two years, we see that even
      our opponents are increasingly admitting that we were right. We see that
      imperialism, which seemed such an insuperable colossus, has proved before
      the whole world to be a colossus with feet of clay, and the two years
      through which we have passed and during which we have had to fight, mark
      with ever-growing clarity the victory not only of the Russian, but also of
      the international proletariat.

    

Comrades, during the first year of the existence of Soviet power we had to
experience the might of German imperialism, to suffer the coercive and
predatory peace that was forced on us; we were alone in issuing our call to
revolution, and met with no support or response. The first year of our
rule was also the first year of our struggle against imperialism, and we
soon became convinced that the struggle of the different parts of this
gigantic international imperialism was nothing but its death throes, and
that both German imperialism and the imperialism of the Anglo-French
bourgeoisie had an interest in this struggle. During that year we
established that this struggle only strengthened, only increased and
restored our forces and enabled us to direct them against imperialism as a
whole. We created such a situation during the first year but, during the
whole of the second year, we stood face to face with our enemy. There were
pessimists who even last year severely attacked us; even last year they said
that Britain, France and America were such a huge, such a colossal force
that they would crush our country. The year has passed, and as you see,
while the first year may be called that of the might of international
imperialism, the second year will be called that of the onslaught of
Anglo-American imperialism and of victory over that onslaught, of victory
over Koichak and Yudenicb, and the beginning of victory over Denikin.

    

Now we know perfectly well that all the military forces sent against us have
been directed from a definite source. We know that the imperialists have
given them all the military supplies, all the arms needed; we know that they
have handed over their global navies in part to our enemies, and now are
doing all they can to help and build up forces both in the South of Russia
and in Archangel. But we know perfectly well that all these seemingly huge
and invincible forces of international imperialism are unreliable, and hold
no terrors for us, that at the core they are rotten, that they are making us
stronger and stronger, and that this added strength will enable us to win
victory on the external front and to make it a thorough-going one. I shall
not dwell on this point as it will be dealt with by Comrade Trotsky.

    

 It seems to me that we must now try to draw general lessons from the two
years of heroic constructive work.

    

What, in my opinion, is the most important conclusion to be drawn from the
two years of developing the Soviet Republic, what, in my view, is most
important for us, is .the lesson we have had in organising working-class
power. It seems to me that in this we must not confine ourselves to the
various concrete facts that concern the work of some commissariat and which
most of you know of from your own experience. It seems to me that, in
glancing back over what we have gone through, we must draw a general lesson
from this work of construction, a lesson that we shall learn and carry
further afield among working people. The lesson is that only workers'
participation in the general administration of the state has enabled us to
hold out amidst such incredible difficulties, and that only by following
this path shall we achieve complete victory. Another lesson to be drawn is
that we must maintain the right attitude to the peasantry, to the many
millions of peasants, for that attitude alone has made it possible for us to
carry on successfully amid all our difficulties, and it alone shows us the
path along which we are achieving one success after another.

    

If you recall the past, if you recall the first steps of Soviet power, if
you recall the entire work of developing all branches of the administration
of the Republic, not excluding the military branch, you will see that the
establishment of working-class rule two years ago, in October, was only the
beginning. Actually, at that time, the machinery of state power was not yet
in our hands, and if you glance back over the two years that have since
elapsed you will agree with me that in each sphere-military, political and
economic-we have had to win every position inch by inch, in order to
establish real machinery of state power, sweeping aside those who before us
had been at the head of the industrial workers and working people in
general.

    

It is particularly important for us to understand the development that has
taken place in this period, because there is development along the same
lines all over the world. The industrial workers and other working people do
not take their first steps with their real leaders; the proletariat
themselves are now taking over the administration of state, political power,
and at their head we see everywhere leaders who are destroying the old
prejudices of petty-bourgeois democracy, old prejudices the vehicles of
which in our country are the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, and
throughout Europe are the representatives

      of bourgeois governments. Previously this was an exception, now
      it has become the general rule. Two years ago, in October, the
      bourgeois government in Russia—their alliance or coalition
      with the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries—was
      smashed, but we know how, in carrying on our work, we had
      subsequently to reorganise every branch of administration in
      such a way that genuine representatives, revolutionary workers,
      the vanguard of the proletariat, really took in hand the
      organisation of state power. That was in October, two years ago,
      when the work went on at terrific pressure; nevertheless we
      know, and we must say it, that this work is not finished even
      now. We know how those who formerly ran the state resisted us,
      how officials at first tried refusing to administrate, but this
      gross sabotage was stopped in a few weeks by the proletarian
      government. It showed that not the slightest impression could be
      made on it by such refusal; and after we had put an end to this
      gross sabotage this same enemy tried other methods.
Time and again it has happened that supporters of the
    bourgeoisie have been found even at the head of workers’
    organisations; we had to get down to the business of making the
    fullest use of the workers’ strength. Take, for example,
    what we experienced when the railway administration, the railway
    proletariat were headed by people who led them along the
    bourgeois, and not the proletarian path.46 We know that in all
    spheres wherever we could get rid of the bourgeoisie, we did so,
    but at what a price! In each sphere we gained ground inch by inch,
    and promoted the best of our workers, those who had gone through
    the hard school of organising the administration. Viewed from the
    side, all this is, perhaps, not very difficult, but actually, if
    you go into the matter, you will see with what difficulty the
    workers, who had been through all the stages of the struggle,
    asserted their rights, how they set things going—from
    workers’ control to workers’ management of industry,
    or how on the railways, beginning from the notorious Vikzhel,[Vikzhel—All-Russia Executive Committee of the
    Railwaymen’s Trade Union.—Editor] they
    got an efficient organisation working; you will see how
    representatives of the working class are gradually making their
    way into all our organisations and strengthening them by their
    activity. Take the co-operatives, for example, where we see huge
    numbers of workers’ representatives. We know that formerly
    they consisted almost entirely of non-working-class
    people. Furthermore, in the old co-operatives, there were people
    steeped in the views and interests of the old bourgeois
    society. In this respect the workers had to wage a long struggle
    before they could take power into their own hands and subordinate
    the co-operatives to their interests, before they could carry on
    more fruitful work.
But our most important work has been the reorganisation of the
    old machinery of state, and although this has been a difficult
    job, over the last two years we have seen the results of the
    efforts of the working class and we can say that in this sphere we
    have thousands of working-class representatives who have been all
    through the fire of the struggle, forcing out the representatives
    of bourgeois rule step by step. We see workers not only in state
    bodies; we see them in the food supply services, in the sphere
    that was controlled almost exclusively by representatives of the
    old bourgeois government, of the old bourgeois state. The workers
    have created a food supply apparatus, and although a year ago we
    could not yet fully cope with the work, although a year ago
    workers made up only 30 per cent of it, we now have as many as 80
    per cent workers in the food supply organisations. These simple
    and striking figures express the step taken by our country, and
    for us the important thing is that we have achieved great results
    in organising proletarian power after the political
    revolution.
Furthermore, the workers have done and are continuing to do the
    important job of producing proletarian leaders. Tens and hundreds
    of thousands of valiant workers are emerging from our midst and
    are going into battle against the whiteguard generals. Step by
    step we are gaining power from our enemy; formerly workers were
    not very skilful in this field, but we are now gradually winning
    area after area from our enemy, and there are no difficulties that
    can stop the proletariat. The proletariat is gaining in every
    sphere, gradually, one after another, despite all difficulties,
    and is attracting representatives of the proletarian masses so
    that in every branch of administration, in every little unit, from
    top to bottom, representatives of the proletariat themselves go
    through the school of administration, and then train tens and
    hundreds of thousands of people capable of independently
    conducting all the affairs of state administration, of building
    the state by their own efforts.
Comrades! Lately we have witnessed a particularly brilliant
    example of success in our work. We know how widespread subbotniks
    have become among class-conscious workers. We know those
    representatives of communism who most of all have suffered the
    torments of famine and bitter cold, but whose contribution in the
    rear is no smaller than that of the Red Army at the front; we know
    how, at the critical moment when the enemy was advancing on
    Petrograd, and Denikin took Orel, when the bourgeoisie were in
    high spirits and resorted to their last and favourite weapon, the
    spreading of panic, we announced a Party Week. At that moment the
    worker Communists went to the industrial workers and other working
    people, to those who most of all had endured the burden of the
    imperialist war and were starving and freezing, to those on whom
    the bourgeois panic-mongers counted most of all, to those who bore
    most of the burden on their backs; it was to them that we
    addressed ourselves during the Party Week and said: "You are
    scared by the burdens of working-class rule, by the threats of the
    imperialists and capitalists; you see our work and our
    difficulties; we appeal to you, and we open wide the doors of our
    Party only to you, only to the representatives of the working
    people. At this difficult moment we count on you and call you into
    our ranks there to undertake the whole burden of building the
    state." You know that it was a terribly difficult moment, both
    materially and because of the enemy’s successes in foreign
    policy and in the military sphere. And you know what unparalleled,
    unexpected and unbelievable success marked the end of this Party
    Week in Moscow alone, where we got over 14 thousand new Party
    members. There you have the result of the Party Week that is
    totally transforming, that is remaking the working class, and by
    the experience of work is turning those who were the passive,
    inert instruments of the bourgeois

    government, the exploiters, and the bourgeois state into real
    creators of the future communist society. We know that we have a
    reserve of tens and hundreds of thousands of working-class and
    peasant youths, those who saw and know to the full the old
    oppression of landowner and bourgeois society, who have seen the
    unparalleled difficulties of our constructive work, who saw what
    heroes the first contingent of Party functionaries proved to be in
    1917 and 1918, who have been coming to us in bigger numbers and
    whose devotion is the greater the severer our difficulties. These
    reserves give us confidence that in these two years we have
    achieved a firm and sound cohesion and now possess a source from
    which we shall for a long time be able to draw still more
    extensively, and so ensure that the working people themselves
    undertake to develop the state. In this respect we have had such
    experience during these two years in applying working-class
    administration in all spheres, that we can say boldly and without
    any exaggeration that now all that remains is to continue what has
    been begun, and things will proceed as they have done these two
    years, but at an ever faster pace.
In another sphere, that of the relation of the working class to
    the peasantry, we have had far greater difficulties. Two years
    ago, in 1917, when power passed to the Soviets, the relation was
    still totally unclear. The peasantry as a whole had already turned
    against the landowners, and supported the working class, because
    it saw they were fulfilling the wishes o the peasant masses, that
    they were real working-class fighters, and not those who, in
    league with the landowners, had betrayed the peasantry. But we
    know perfectly well that a struggle was only just beginning within
    the peasantry. In the first year the urban proletariat still had
    no firm foothold in the countryside. This is to be seen with
    particular clarity in those border regions where the rule of the
    whiteguards was for a time consolidated. We saw it, last summer,
    in 1918, when they won easy victories in the Urals. We saw that
    proletarian rule was not yet established in the countryside
    itself, and that it was not enough to introduce it from
    outside. What was needed was that the peasantry should, by their
    own experience, by their own organisational work, arrive at the
    same conclusions, and although this work is immeasurably more
    difficult, slower and harder, it is incomparably more fruitful so
    far as results go. This is our main achievement of the second year
    of Soviet rule.
I shall not speak of the military significance of our victory
    over Kolchak, but I shall say that had the peasantry not undergone
    the experience of comparing the rule of the bourgeois dictators
    with that of the Bolsheviks, that victory would not have been
    won. Yet the dictators began with a coalition, with a Constituent
    Assembly; in that government apparatus there participated the same
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks whom we meet at every
    step in our work as the people of yesterday, as the people who
    built co-operatives, trade unions, teachers’ organisations
    and a host of other organisations which we have to
    reorganise. Kolchak began in alliance with them, with individuals
    for whom the Kerensky experiment was not enough—they
    undertook a second. They did so in order to get the border
    regions, those farthest from the centre, to rise against the
    Bolsheviks. We could not give the peasants in Siberia what the
    revolution gave them in the rest of Russia. In Siberia the
    peasants did not get landed estates, because there were none of
    them there, and that was why it was easier for them to put faith
    in the white-guards. All the forces of the Entente and the
    imperialist army which had suffered least of all in the war,
    i. e., the Japanese army, were drawn into the struggle. We know
    that hundreds of millions of rubles were expended on assisting
    Kolchak, that all means were employed to support him. Was there
    anything he lacked on his side? He had everything. Everything
    possessed by the strongest powers in the world, as well as a
    peasantry and a huge territory almost devoid of an industrial
    proletariat. What caused the destruction of all this? The fact
    that the experience of the workers, soldiers and peasants showed
    once again that the Bolsheviks were right in their forecasts, in
    their appraisal of the relation of social forces, when they said
    that the alliance of the workers and peasants is effected with
    difficulty, but that at any rate it is the only invincible
    alliance against the capitalists.
This is science, comrades, if one may use that term here. This
    experience is one of the greatest difficulty, one that takes
    account of everything and consolidates everything—it is the
    experience of communism; we can only establish communism if the
    peasantry arrive consciously at a definite conclusion. We can do
    this only when we enter into alliance with the peasants. We were
    able to convince ourselves of this by the Koichak experience. The
    Kolchak revolt was an experience of great bloodshed, but that was
    no fault of ours.
You are now perfectly familiar with the second trouble that
    afflicts us; you know that famine and cold have affected our
    country more severely than any other. You know that the blame for
    this is thrown on communism, but you also know perfectly well that
    communism has nothing to do with it. In all countries we see
    increasing and growing famine and cold and soon everybody will be
    convinced that this situation in Russia is not the consequence of
    communism, but of four years of worldwide war. It is the war that
    has caused all the horror we are enduring, that has caused this
    famine and cold. But we believe that we shall soon emerge from
    this state of affairs. The whole problem is only that the workers
    must work, but work for themselves and not for those who for four
    years have been engaged in throat-cutting. As for the fight
    against famine and cold, it is going on everywhere. The most
    powerful states are now subject to this affliction.
We have had to resort to state requisitioning to collect grain
    from the many millions of our peasantry, and have done so not the
    way it was done by the capitalists, who operated along with the
    profiteers. In settling this problem we went with the workers, we
    went against the profiteers. We used the method of persuasion, we
    went to the peasantry and told them that all we were doing was in
    support of them and the workers. The peasant who has a grain
    surplus and delivers it to us at a fixed price, is our ally. The
    one, however, who does not do so is our enemy, is a criminal, is
    an exploiter and profiteer, and we can have nothing in common with
    him. We went with a message to the peasant, and this message has
    increasingly drawn the peasantry to our side. We have got quite
    definite results in this field. Between August and October of last
    year we procured 37 million poods of grain, but this year we have
    procured 45 million poods, and that without undertaking a special
    and careful check. An improvement, as you see, is taking place, a
    slow but undoubted one. And even if we reckon with the gaps made
    by Denikin’s occupation of our fertile region, there are
    nevertheless signs of our being able to carry through our plan of
    procurement and plan of distribution at state prices. In this
    respect, too, our machinery has in a sense become established, and
    we are now taking the socialist path.
Now we are faced with the problem of a fuel crisis. The grain
    problem is no longer so acute; the position is that we have grain,
    but have no fuel. We have been deprived of our coalfield by
    Denikin. The loss of this coalfield has brought us unprecedented
    difficulties, and in this case we are doing just what we did in
    relation to grain. As we did previously we are again addressing
    ourselves to the workers. In the same way as we reorganised our
    food supply machinery; which, after being strengthened and set
    going, fulfilled quite a definite job that has yielded splendid
    results, so we are now improving our fuel supply machinery day by
    day. We are telling the workers from what direction this or that
    danger is advancing on us, in which direction and from what region
    we must send new forces, and we are confident that, just as we
    conquered our grain difficulties last year, so now we shall
    conquer our fuel difficulties.
Allow me for the moment to confine myself to this summary of
    our work. In conclusion, I shall take the liberty of saying just a
    few words about how our international situation is improving. We
    have examined the path we have followed, and the results show that
    our path has been the right and proper one. When we took power in
    1917, we were alone. In 1917 it was said in all countries that
    Bolshevism could not take root. Now there is a powerful communist
    movement in those same countries. In the second year after we
    conquered power, six months after we founded the Third
    International, the Communist International, this International has
    in fact become the main force in the labour movement of all
    countries. In this respect the experience we have undergone has
    yielded the most splendid, unparalleled and rapid results, True,
    the movement to freedom in Europe is not proceeding in the same
    way as in our country. But if you recall our two years of
    struggle, you will see that in the Ukraine too, and even in some
    parts of Russia proper, where the population was of a specific
    composition—for instance, in the Cossack and Siberian areas,
    or in the Urals—the movement to victory was not so rapid and
    did not follow the same road as in Petrograd and in Moscow, in the
    heart of Russia. Of course, we cannot be surprised at the slower
    pace of the movement in Europe, where pressure of jingoism and
    imperialism that has to be surmounted is greater; nonetheless the
    movement is proceeding unswervingly, along the very road being
    indicated by the Bolsheviks. Everywhere we are witnessing this
    forward movement. The mouthpieces of the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries are yielding place everywhere to
    representatives of the Third International. The old leaders are
    falling, and the communist movement has risen everywhere, and that
    is why, after two years of Soviet rule, we can say, supported by
    the facts, we have every right to say, that not only on the scale
    of the Russian state, but also on an international scale we now
    have the following of all the politically conscious, all that are
    revolutionary among the masses, in the revolutionary world. And we
    can say that after what we have endured no difficulties hold any
    terrors for us, that we shall withstand all these difficulties,
    and then conquer them all. (Stormy applause.)


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the Communists of Turkestan











To the Communists of Turkestan



V. I. Lenin
To the Communists of Turkestan[1]


Delivered: 22 November, 1919
First Published: Turkestansky Kommunist, Izvestia TsIK Sovetov Turhestanskoi Respubliki and Krasny Front (Jubilee edition) November 7-10, 1919; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 138
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, permit me to address you not as Chairman
    of the Council of People’s Commissars and the Council of
    Defence, but as a member of the Party.
It is no exaggeration to say that the establishment of proper
    relations with the peoples of Turkestan is now of immense, epochal
    importance for the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet
    Republic.
The attitude of the Soviet Workers’ and Peasants’
    Republic to the weak and hitherto oppressed nations is of very
    pradtical significance for the whole of Asia and for all the
    colonies of the world, for thousands and millions of people.
I earnestly urge you to devote the closest attention to this
    question, to exert every effort to set an effective example of
    comradely relations with the peoples of Turkestan, to demonstrate
    to them by your actions that we are sincere in our desire to wipe
    out all traces of Great-Russian imperialism and wage an implacable
    struggle against world imperialism, headed by British
    imperialism. You should show the greatest confidence in our
    Turkestan Commission and adhere strictly to its directives, which
    have been framed precisely in this spirit by the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee.
I would very much appreciate a reply to this letter indicating
    your attitude.
Wilh communist greetings,

    

      V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

Endnotes
[1]
    This letter was written by Lenin in connection with the dispatch
    to Turkestan of a commission of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee and the Council of People’s Commissar,;. The
    commission included G. I. Bokia, F. I. Goloshchokin,
    V. V. Kuibyshev, Y. E. Rudzutak, M. V. Frunze and S. Z. Eliava. It
    was veste d with the powers of a state and Party body. Its
    main tasks were to strengthen the union of the peoples of
    Turkestan with Soviet Russia,to consolidate Soviet power,to
    rectify mistakes in the national policy in Turkestan, and to
    improve Party work. The members of the commission were to follow
    the instruction of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and
    the Council of People’s Commissars of October 8, 1919, which
    pointed out that self-determination of the peoples of Turkestan
    and the abolition of all national inequality and of the privileges
    of one nationality group at the expense of another form the basis
    of the policy of the Soviet Government of Russia and serve as the
    guiding principle in the entire work of all its bodies. Only by
    such work can we overcome the old mistrust of the local working
    masses of Turkestan for the workers and peasants of Russia due to
    the many years of the rule of Russian tsarism. The working people
    of Turkestan welcomed this decision of the All-Russia C.E.C. and
    C,P.C. The joint meeting of the Territorial Committee of the
    Communist Party of Turkestan, Territorial Moslem Bureau of the
    C.P.T. and the Presidium of the Turkestan C.E.C. studied
    Lenin’s letter and heard the report by Eliava, chairman of
    the commission, and adopted a resolution, which read as follows:
    “We promise to carry out all the tasks with which history
    has presented us in accordance with the instructions of the
    C.C. of our Party and the Third International,” In January
    1920 Lenin’s letter was discussed at the Fifth General
    Territorial Conference of the Communist Party of Turkestan. The
    Conference sent a letter to Lenin in which the Communists promised
    to rectify their blunders and render unanimous support to the
    Turkestan commission.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## The Fight to Overcome the Fuel
  Crisis











The Fight To Overcome The Fuel 
Crisis



V. I. Lenin
The Fight To Overcome The Fuel 
Crisis
Circular Letter To Party Organisations[1]


Delivered: 22 November, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 254, November 13, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text, verified with the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 139-142
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, to our Party, as the organised vanguard
    of the proletariat, has fallen the duty of uniting the working
    class in its struggle and of leading it in the fight for the
    victory of the workers’ and peasants’ Soviet power. We
    have carried on that fight triumphantly for two years and now know
    by what means we succeeded in overcoming the incredible
    difficulties placed in our way by the impoverishment of the
    country that resulted from four years of imperialist war and the
    resistance of all exploiters, Russian and international.
Comrades, the chief source of our strength is the
    class--consciousness and heroism of the workers, who had, and
    still have, the sympathies and support of the labouring
    peasants. Our victories were due to the direct appeal made by our
    Party and by the Soviet government to the working masses, with
    every new difficulty and problem pointed out as it arose; to our
    ability to explain to the masses why it was necessary to devote
    all energies first to one, then to another aspect of Soviet work
    at a given moment; to our ability to arouse the energy, heroism
    and enthusiasm of the masses and to concentrate every ounce of
    revolutionary effort on the most important task of the hour.
Comrades, at this juncture the most important task of the hour
    is the struggle to overcome the fuel crisis. We are finishing off
    olchak, we have vanquished Yudenich, we have begun a successful
    offensive against Denikin. We have considerably improved matters
    as regards the procure-ment and storage of grain. But the fuel
    crisis threatens to disrupt all Soviet work: factory workers and
    office employees are abandoning their jobs to escape cold and
    hunger, trains carrying grain are brought to a standstill, and
    veritable disaster is impending precisely on account of the fuel
    shortage.
The fuel problem has become the central problem. The fuel
    crisis must be overcome at all costs, otherwise it will be
    impossible to solve the food problem, or the war problem, or the
    general economic problem.
And the fuel crisis can be overcome. For although we have lost
    the coal of the Donets Basin, and although we are not in a
    position rapidly to increase the output of coal in the Urals and
    Siberia, we still have plenty of forests and we can cut and
    deliver a sufficient quantity of wood.
The fuel crisis can be overcome. The thing now is to
    concentrate our main forces against what is (at present) our main
    enemy: the fuel shortage. We must arouse enthu-siasm in the
    working masses and achieve a revolutionary harnessing of energies
    for the swiftest possible procurement and delivery of the largest
    possible quantity of fuel of every kind-coal, shale, peat, etc.,
    and in the first place wood, wood and wood.
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party is
    confident that all Party organisations and all Party members, who
    in the past two years have demonstrated their capacity and ability
    to solve problems no less and even more difficult in a
    revolutionary way, will solve this problem too.
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party proposes
    in particular the following measures to all Party
    organisations:
1. All Party organisations must henceforth make the fuel
    problem and measures to combat the fuel crisis a per-manent item
    on the agenda of Party meetings and espe-cially meetings of Party
    committees. What more can be done, what must be done to combat the
    fuel crisis, how can the work he intensified, how can it be made
    more produc-tive?-let these questions now occupy the attention of
    all Party organisations.
2. The same applies to all gubernia, city, uyezd and olost
    executive committees-in a word, to all leading

    Soviet bodies. Party people must assume the initiative in
    strengthening, co-ordinating and intensifying the work on a
    country-wide scale.
3. The widest possible propaganda must be carried on
    everywhere, especially in the countryside, to explain what the
    fuel problem means to the Soviet state. In particular, local,
    parochial, narrow egoistical interests in the matter of fuel
    supplies must he combated. It must be explained that without
    devoted effort to meet the general need of the state it will be
    impossible to save the Soviet Republic, to uphold the power of the
    peasants and workers.
4. The most careful supervision must be exercised over the way
    the assignments of the Party and the instructions, demands and
    commissions of the Soviet government are carried out. New members
    of the Party who joined during the last Party Week should all be
    enlisted in the work of checking up on the way everyone is
    performing his duties.
5. Labour conscription for the whole population must be carried
    out, or certain age categories must be mobilised as quickly as
    possible and in the most imperative fashion for the work of
    procuring and carting coal and shale or cutting wood and carting
    it to the railway station. Fix labour quotas and see that they are
    carried out at all costs. Punish with ruthless severity those who
    despite repeated insistence, demands and orders are found to have
    shirked the work. Any lenience or weakness will be a crime against
    the revolution.
We have improved discipline in the army. We must also improve
    labour discipline.
6. Subbotniks must be arranged more frequently, ener-getically
    and systematically, and must be better organised, primarily for
    fuel work. Party members must set an example to all in labour
    discipline and energy. Decisions of the Council of People’s
    Commissars, of the Council of Defence and of other central and
    also local Soviet bodies on the fuel question must be carried out
    conscientiously and scrupulously.
7. Local fuel bodies must be reinforced with the best of the
    Party workers. For this purpose the distribution of forces should
    be revised and appropriate changes made.
8. Comrades sent from the centre must be given the utmost
    assistance and the largest possible number of young people must be
    trained-and practically trained at that -in organising, arranging
    and maintaining fuel work. The local press must devote more
    attention to this work and must take pains to bring to public
    attention examples of really fine work and wage an implacable
    campaign against backwardness, lack of zeal or lack of ability
    displayed by any particular district, department or
    institution. Our press must become an instrument for bringing the
    backward into line and for inculcating industry, labour discipline
    and organisation.
9. The chief task of the food bodies must be to supply food and
    fodder for those engaged on fuel supply work. They must be given
    every assistance, their work must be intensified, and a check kept
    on the way it is carried out.
10. Indefatigable efforts must be made to ensure that in every
    fuel body (as in every Soviet institution generally)
    everyone is held personally responsible for a
    definite, strictly and precisely defined job or part of a
    job. Committee dis-cussion must be reduced to an absolute minimum
    and never be allowed to interfere with swiftness and firmness of
    decision or minimise the responsibility of each and every
    worker.
11. The clerical work connected with fuel matters must be
    particularly prompt and accurate. The slightest tendency towards
    red tape must be punished ruthlessly. Reporting to the centre must
    be put on exemplary lines.
12. All fuel work in general must be organised in mili-tary
    fashion, with the energy, speed and strict dis-cipline that is
    demanded in war. Without that we shall never overcome the fuel
    shortage. Without it we shall not escape from the crisis.
The Central Committee of the Russian Communist Party is
    confident that all comrades will bend every effort to carry out
    these instructions energetically and faithfully.
The fuel shortage must he fought and
    overcome!
Central Committee, Russian Communist Party

Endnotes
[1]
The Central Committee’s letter was drafted by Lenin, and was published in Pravda on November 13. The appeal of the C.C. of the Party met with a warm response in the country. On November 14 the Communists of Red Presnya district in Moscow adopted a decision to hold a ‘fuel week“ of communist labour and instructed all Party members to take part in subbotniks. The Moscow City Party Committee mobilised 200 Communists to the fuel front on November 18. The Vladimir Gubernia Party Conference resolved to send hundreds of worker Communists to the countryside to mobilise the local population to supply fuel and horses to deliver it to the cities. Labour enthusiasm in organising fuel supplies that swept the cities spread to the countryside. The week from November 24 to December 1 was proclaimed ‘fuel week“ by the Red Army. Measures adopted by the Party led to the easing of the fuel crisis. In October an average of 1,941 wagons were loaded per day and in December this figure rose to 2,895 wagonloads.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive




 

==========

## Speech Delivered at the First
  All-Russia Conference On Party Work In the Countryside











Speech Delivered At The First All-Russia Conference On Party Work In The Countryside November 18, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At The First All-Russia Conference 
On Party Work In The Countryside[1]
November 18, 1919


Delivered: 18 November, 1919
First Published: Pravda No. 259; November 19, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 143-150
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


  Comrades, unfortunately I have not been able to take part in
    the conference you have arranged, that is, in this conference on
    work in the countryside. Hence I shall have to limit myself to
    some general, basic considerations, and I am certain that you will
    be able gradually to apply these general considerations and
    fundamental principles of our policy to the various tasks and
    practical questions that come up before you.
   The question of our work in the countryside is now, strictly
    speaking, the basic question of socialist construction in general,
    for insofar as the work among the proletariat and the question of
    uniting its forces are concerned, we can safely say that during
    the two years of Soviet power communist policy has not only taken
    definite shape but has unquestionably achieved lasting results. At
    first we had to fight a lack of understanding of the common
    interests among the workers, to fight various manifestations of
    syndicalism when the workers of some factories or some branches of
    industry tended to place their own interests, the interests of
    their factory or industry, above the interests of society. We had
    to fight a lack of discipline in the new organisation of labour,
    and still have to. I believe you all remember the major stages
    through which our policy has passed, when, as we promoted more and
    more workers to new posts, we gave them an opportunity to
    familiarise 

 
      themselves with the tasks facing us, with the general mechanism
      of government. The organisation of the communist activity of the
      proletariat and the entire policy of the Communists have now
      acquired a final, lasting form; I am certain that we are on the
      right path and that progress along that path is fully ensured. 
 
    

      As regards work in the countryside, the difficulties here are
      undoubtedly great, and we gave this question full consideration
      at the Eighth Congress of the Party[2] as one of the most
      important issues. In the countryside as well as in the towns we
      can rely only on the working and exploited people, only on those
      who, under capitalism, bore the whole burden of the landowner
      and capitalist yoke. Since the time when the conquest of power
      by the workers abolished private property and enabled the
      peasants to sweep away the power of the landowners at one blow,
      they divided up the land and, of course, gave effect to the
      fullest equality and thus considerably improved the exploitation
      of the soil, raising it to a level above the average. It goes
      without saying, however, that we could not achieve everything we
      would have wished in this respect, for it would take tremendous
      funds to provide each with sufficient seed, livestock and
      implements as long as the land is tilled by individual
      peasants. Moreover, even if our industry were to achieve
      extraordinary progress and increase the production of
      agricultural machines, even if we were to imagine all our wishes
      fulfilled, it would still be obvious that to supply each small
      peasant with sufficient means of production is impossible and
      most irrational since it would mean a terrible fragmentation of
      resources; only joint, artel, co-operative labour can help us to
      emerge from the blind alley in which the imperialist war has
      driven us.
   In the mass, the peasants, whose economic position under
    capitalism made them the most downtrodden, find it hardest of all
    to believe in the possibility of sharp changes and
    transitions. The peasant's experience of Kolchak, Yudenich, and
    Denikin compels him to show especial concern about his gains. All
    peasants know that the permanence of their gains is not finally
    guaranteed, that their enemy—the landowner—has not yet
    been destroyed, but has gone into hiding and is waiting for his
    friends, the international capitalist brigands, to come to his
    aid. And although international capital is becoming weaker day by
    day and our international position has greatly improved in the
    recent period, if we soberly weigh all the circumstances, we have
    to admit that international capital is still undoubtedly stronger
    than we are. It no longer can openly wage war against us—its
    wings have already been clipped. Indeed, all these gentlemen in
    the European bourgeois press have latterly begun to say,
    “You are likely to get bogged down in Russia, perhaps it is
    better to make peace with her.”That is the way it always
    is—when the enemy is beaten, he begins talking peace. Time
    and again we have told these gentlemen, the imperialists of
    Europe, that we agree to make peace, but they continued to dream
    of enslaving Russia. Now they realise that their dreams are not
    fated to come true.
   The international millionaires and multimillionaires are
    still stronger than we are. And the peasants see perfectly well
    that the attempts to seize power by Yudenich, Kolchak, and Denikin
    were financed by the imperialists of Europe and America. And the
    mass of the peasants know very well what the slightest weakness
    will cost them. The vivid memory of the rule of the landowners and
    capitalists makes the peasants reliable supporters of Soviet
    power. With each passing month Soviet power becomes more stable
    and there is growing political consciousness among the peasants
    who formerly laboured and were exploited and who themselves
    experienced the full weight of the landowner and capitalist
    yoke.
   Things, of course, are different with the kulaks, with those
    who hired workers, made money by usury, and enriched themselves at
    the expense of the labour of others. Most of these side with the
    capitalists and are opposed to the revolution that has taken
    place. We must clearly realise that we still have a long and
    stubborn fight to wage against this group of peasants. Between the
    peasants who shouldered the full load of the landowner and
    capitalist yoke and those who exploited others there is, however,
    a mass of middle peasants. Here lies our most difficult
    task. Socialists have always pointed out that the transition to
    socialism will raise this difficult problem—the attitude of
    the working class to the middle peasantry. Here it is to be
    expected that Communists, more than anyone else, will show a
    serious understanding and intelligent approach to this complicated
    and difficult task, and will not try to solve it at one
    stroke.
   The middle peasants are undoubtedly accustomed to farming
    each for himself. They are peasant proprietors, and although they
    have no land as yet, although private property in land has been
    abolished, they remain proprietors, primarily because this group
    of peasants remain in possession of food products. The middle
    peasant produces more food than he needs for himself, and since he
    has surplus grain he becomes the exploiter of the hungry
    worker. Herein lies the main task and the main contradiction. The
    peasant as a working man, as a man who lives by his own labour, as
    one who has borne the yoke of capitalism, sides with the
    worker. But the peasant as a proprietor with a surplus of grain is
    accustomed to regarding it as his property which he can sell
    freely. Anyone who sells grain surpluses in a hunger-ridden
    country becomes a profiteer, an exploiter, because the starving
    man will give everything he has for bread. It is here that the
    biggest and hardest battle has to be fought, a battle which
    demands of all of us representatives of Soviet power, and
    especially the Communists working in the countryside, the greatest
    attention and most serious thought to the issue in hand and the
    way to approach it.
   We have always said that we do not seek to force socialism
    on the middle peasant, and the Eighth Party Congress fully
    confirmed this. The election of Comrade Kalinin as Chairman of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee was prompted by the need to
    build the closest of bonds between Soviet power and the
    peasantry. Thanks to Comrade Kalinin our work in the countryside
    has gained considerable momentum. The peasant is now undoubtedly
    in a position to keep in closer contact with the Soviet government
    through Comrade Kalinin, who represents the supreme authority of
    the Soviet Republic. In this way we said in effect to the middle
    peasant: “There can be no question of forcibly imposing
    socialism on anyone.”But we must make him understand this,
    we must know how to tell him this in a language the peasant
    understands best of all. Here we must rely only on the force of
    example, successfully organised socialised farming. To give an
    example of artel, co-operative labour we must first achieve
    success in organising such farming ourselves. In these past two
    years the movement to set up agricultural communes and
    co-operatives has acquired tremendous scope. Looking at things
    soberly, however, we must say that a great many of the comrades
    who tackled the organisation of communes started to farm without
    sufficient knowledge of the economic conditions of peasant
    life. Undue haste and wrong approach to the question led to a
    tremendous number of mistakes which have had to be rectified. Time
    and again the old exploiters, former landowners, wormed their way
    into state farms. They no longer dominate there, but they have not
    been eliminated. It is necessary either to squeeze them out or put
    them under the control of the proletariat.
   This is a task that confronts us in all spheres of life. You
    have heard of the series of brilliant victories won by the Red
    Army. There are tens of thousands of old colonels and officers of
    other ranks in that army and if we had not accepted them in our
    service and made them serve us, we could not have created an army,
    And despite the treachery of some military specialists, we have
    defeated Kolchak and Yudenich, and are winning on all fronts. The
    reason for this is the existence of communist cells in the Red
    Army; they conduct propaganda and agitation carrying a tremendous
    impact, and thanks to them the small number of old officers find
    themselves in such an environment, under such a tremendous
    pressure from the Communists, that the majority of them are unable
    to break out of the communist organisation and propaganda with
    which we have surrounded them.
   Communism cannot be built without knowledge, technique, and
    culture, and this knowledge is in possession of bourgeois
    specialists. Most of them do not sympathise with Soviet power, yet
    without them we cannot build communism. They must be surrounded
    with an atmosphere of comradeship, a spirit of communist work, and
    won over to the side of the workers' and peasants' government.
   Among the peasants there have been frequent manifestations
    of extreme distrust and resentment of state farms, even complete
    rejection of them; we do not want state farms, they say, for the
    old exploiters are to be found there. We have told them—if
    you are unable to organise farming along new lines yourselves, you
    have to employ the services of old specialists; otherwise there is
    no way out of poverty. We shall weed out old experts who violate
    the decisions of the Soviet government as ruthlessly as we do in
    the Red Army; the struggle goes on, and it is a struggle without
    mercy. But we shall force the majority of the experts to work as
    we want them to.
   This is a difficult, complex task, a task that cannot be
    solved at one blow. Here conscious working-class discipline and
    closer contact with the peasants are needed. The peasants must be
    shown that we are not blind to any of the abuses on the state
    farms, but at the same time we tell them that scientists and
    technicians must be enlisted in the service of socialised farming,
    for small-scale farming will not bring deliverance from want. And
    we shall do what we are doing in the Red Army—we may be
    beaten a hundred times, but the hundred-and-first we defeat all
    our enemies. But to do this, work in the countryside must proceed
    by joint efforts, smoothly, in the same strict, orderly way as it
    has proceeded in the Red Army and as it is proceeding in other
    fields of economy. We shall slowly and steadily prove to the
    peasants the superiority of socialised farming.
   This is the struggle we must wage on the state farms, this
    is where the difficulty of transition to socialism lies, and it is
    thus that Soviet power can be really and finally
    consolidated. When the majority of the middle peasants come to see
    that unless they ally themselves with the workers they are helping
    Kolchak and Yudenich, that in all the world only the capitalists
    remain with them—the capitalists who hate Soviet Russia and
    for years to come will repeat their attempts to restore their
    power—even the most backward middle peasants will realise
    that either they must forge ahead in alliance with the
    revolutionary workers toward complete emancipation or, if they
    vacillate even slightly, the enemy, the old capitalist exploiter,
    will gain the upper hand. Victory over Denikin is not enough to
    destroy the capitalists once and for all. This is something we all
    must realise. We know full well that they will try time and again
    to throw the noose around Soviet Russia's neck. Hence the peasant
    has no choice; he must help the workers, for the slightest
    hesitation will bring victory to the landowners and
    capitalists. Our primary, basic task is to help the peasants
    understand this. The peasant who lives by his own labour is a
    loyal ally of Soviet power, and the worker regards such a peasant
    as his equal, the workers' government does everything it can for
    him, indeed there is no sacrifice the workers' and peasants'
    government is not ready to make to satisfy the needs of such a
    peasant.
   But the peasant who makes use of the surplus grain he
    possesses to exploit others is our enemy. To satisfy the basic
    needs of a hungry country is a duty to the state. Yet far from all
    peasants realise that freedom to trade in grain is a crime against
    the state. “I have raised this grain, it is my product, and
    I have a right to do business with it,”the peasant reasons
    out of habit, as he used to. But we say this is a crime against
    the state. Freedom to trade in grain means enriching oneself by
    means of this grain, i.e., a return to the old way of life, to
    capitalism, and this we shall not allow, this we shall fight
    against at all costs.
   In the transition period we shall carry out state purchases
    of grain and requisition grain surpluses. We know that only in
    this way shall we be able to do away with want and hunger. The
    vast majority of the workers suffer hardship because of the
    incorrect distribution of grain; to distribute it properly, the
    peasants must deliver their quotas to the state as assessed,
    exactly, conscientiously, and without fail. Here Soviet power can
    make no concessions. This is not a matter of the workers'
    government fighting the peasants, but an issue involving the very
    existence of socialism, the existence of Soviet power. Today we
    cannot give the peasants any goods, because there is a shortage of
    fuel and railway traffic is being held up. We must start with the
    peasants lending the workers grain at fixed prices, not at
    profiteering prices, so that the workers can revive
    production. Every peasant will agree to this if it is a question
    of an individual worker dying from starvation before his eyes. But
    when millions of workers are in question, they do not understand
    this and the old habits of profiteering gain the upper hand.
  Prolonged and persistent struggle against such habits,
    agitation and propaganda, explanatory work, checking up on what
    has been done—these are the components of our policy toward
    the peasantry.
   We must render every support to the working peasant, treat
    him as an equal, without the slightest attempt to impose anything
    on him by force—that is our first task. Our second task is
    to wage an unswerving struggle against profiteering, huckstering,
    ruination.

    

      When we began to build the Red Army, we had only separate,
      scattered groups of guerrillas to start with. Lack of discipline
      and unity resulted in many unnecessary sacrifices, but we
      overcame these difficulties and built up a Red Army millions
      strong in place of the guerrilla detachments. If we were able to
      do this in the brief period of two years, and in a sphere as
      difficult and hazardous as the army, we are all the more certain
      that we can achieve similar results in all spheres of economic
      endeavour.
   I am certain that although this problem of the proper
    attitude of the workers to the peasantry and of the correct food
    policy is one of the most difficult, we shall solve it and win a
    victory in this field such as we have won at the front. 
Endnotes
[1]
    The First All-Russia Conference on Party Work in the
    Countryside was held from November 16 to November 19, 1919,
    in Moscow. 
Representatives of all gubernia and regional
    Party Committees (except Orenburg, Urals, Don, Orel, Voronezh,
    Astrakhan and Archangel) and from many uyezd and some volost Party
    Committees attended the Conference. The Conference was convened
    for the purpose of pooling experience of Party work in the
    countryside and for working out practical measures for its
    improvement. The agenda of the Conference was the following:
    reports by local Party organisations, report on organisational
    questions, work among peasant women and the peasant youth,
    cultural and educational work in the countryside, a newspaper for
    peasants, publishing literature for the countryside, Party Week in
    the countryside, and others. 
  The Conference approved the proposal
    submitted by the C.C., R.S.P.(B.) Rural Department to muster Party
    forces for work among the peasants, and also adopted, with some
    amendments, a draft instruction for work in the countryside. The
    Conference pointed out the necessity of drawing women into all
    spheres of state organisation, and of drawing peasant youths into
    the All-Russia Communist Youth League. The Conference passed a
    decision to hold a Party Week in the countryside, and approved of
    the practice of convening non-party conferences. 
On the first day the Conference adopted a
    decision to ask Lenin to take part in the Conference. Lenin made a
    speech at the Conference on November 18, in which he congratulated
    the delegates on the occasion of the liberation of Kursk by the
    Red Army. 
[2]
    The Eighth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) was held March
    18-23,1919 in Moscow. One of the most important questions
    discussed at the Congress was the attitude towards the middle
    peasants. In all his speeches and particularly in his report on
    work in the countryside, Lenin explained the Party's new policy in
    relation to the middle peasants passing from the policy of
    neutralising the middle peasants to one of firm alliance with
    them, while relying on the poor peasants and carrying the struggle
    against the kulaks, and preserving the leading role of the
    proletariat in that alliance. That slogan had been advanced by
    Lenin in November 1918. The Congress adopted a “Resolution
    on the Attitude Towards the Middle Peasants”written by
    Lenin. Lenin's policy helped to strengthen the military and
    political alliance of the working class and the peasantry, and
    played a decisive role in achieving victory over the
    interventionists and whiteguards, and later on in building
    socialism by the joint efforts of workers and peasants. 


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

##  Address to the Second All-Russia
  Congress of Communist Organisations of the Peoples of the
  East











Address to the Second All-Russia Congress of Communist Organisations of the Peoples of the East November 22, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Address To The Second All-Russia Congress Of Communist Organisations Of
The Peoples Of The East[1]
November 22, 1919


Delivered: 22 November, 1919
First Published: Bulletin of the CC. R.C.P.(B.) No. 9, December 20, 1919; Published according to the text of Bulletin of the CC., R.C.P.(B.)
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 151-162
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I am very glad of the opportunity to
    greet this Congress of Communist comrades representing Moslem
    organisations of the East, and to say a few words about the
    situation now obtaining in Russia and throughout the world. The
    subject of my address is current affairs, and it seems to me that
    the most essential aspects of this question at present are the
    attitude of the peoples of the East to imperialism, and the
    revolutionary movement among those peoples. It is self-evident
    that this revolutionary movement of the peoples of the East can
    now develop effectively, can reach a successful issue, only in
    direct association with the revolutionary struggle of our Soviet
    Republic against international imperialism. Owing to a number of
    circumstances, among them the backwardness of Russia and her vast
    area, and the fact that she constitutes a frontier between Europe
    and Asia, between the West and the East, we had to bear the whole
    brunt-and we regard that as a great honour of being the pioneers
    of the world struggle against imperialism. Consequently, the whole
    course of development in the immediate future presages a still
    broader and more strenuous struggle against international
    imperialism, arid will inevitably be linked with the struggle of
    the Soviet Republic against the forces of united imperialism-of
    Germany, France, Britain and the U.S.A. 

    

      As regards the military
    aspect of the matter, you know how favourable our situation now is
    on all the fronts. I shall not dwell in detail on this question; I
    shall only say that the Civil War which was forced upon us by
    international imperialism has in two years inflicted incalculable
    hardship upon the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic,
    and imposed upon the peasants and workers a burden so intolerable
    that it often seemed they would not be able to endure it. But at
    the same time, because of its brute violence, because of the
    ruthlessly brutal onslaught of our so-called allies, turned wild
    beasts, who robbed us even before the socialist revolution, this
    war has performed a miracle and turned people weary of fighting
    and seemingly incapable of bearing another war into warriors who
    have not only withstood the war for two years but are bringing it
    to a victorious end. The victories we are now gaining over
    Kolchak, Yudenich and Denikin signify the advent of a new phase in
    the history of the struggle of world imperialism against the
    countries and nations which have risen up to fight for their
    emancipation. In this respect, the two years of our Civil War have
    fully confirmed what has long been known to historythat the
    character of a war and its success depend chiefly upon the
    internal regime of the country that goes to war, that war is a
    reflection of the internal policy conducted by the given country
    before the war. All this is inevitably reflected in the
    prosecution of a war.
Which class waged the war, and is continuing to wage it, is a
    very important question. Only due to our Civil War being waged by
    workers and peasants who have emancipated themselves, and to its
    being a continuation of the political struggle for the
    emancipation of the working people from the capitalists of their
    own country and of the whole world-only thanks to this were people
    to be found in such a backward country as Russia, worn out as she
    was by four years of imperialist war, who were strong-willed
    enough to carry on that war during two years of incredible and
    unparalleled hardship and difficulty.
This was very strikingly illustrated in the history of the
    Civil War in the case of Kolchak. Kolchak was an enemy who had the
    assistance of all the world’s strongest powers; he had a
    railway which was protected by some hundred thousand foreign
    troops, including the finest troops of the world imperialists,
    such as the Japanese, for example, who had been trained for the
    imperialist war, but took practically no part in it and therefore
    suffered little; Kolchak had the backing of the Siberian peasants,
    who were the most prosperous and had never known serfdom, and
    therefore, naturally, were farthest of all from communism. It
    seemed that Kolchak was an invincible force, because his troops
    were the advance guard of international imperialism. To this day,
    Japanese and Czechoslovak troops and the troops of a number of
    other imperialist nations are operating in Siberia. Nevertheless,
    the more than a year’s experience of Kolchak’s rule
    over Siberia and her vast natural resources, which was at first
    supported by the socialist parties of the Second International, by
    the Mensheviks and the SocialistRevolutionaries, who set up the
    Constituent Assembly Committee front, and which therefore, under
    these conditions, from the standpoint of the man in the street and
    of the ordinary course ofhistory, appeared to be firm and
    invincible that experience actually revealed the following. The
    farther Kolchak advanced into the heart of Russia, the more he
    wore himself out, and in the end we have witnessed Soviet
    Russia’s complete triumph over Kolchak. Here we undoubtedly
    have practical proof that the united forces of workers and
    peasants who have been emancipated from the capitalist yoke can
    perform real miracles. Here we have practical proof that when a
    revolutionary war really does attract and interest the working and
    oppressed people, when it makes them conscious that they are
    fighting the exploiters-such a revolutionary war engenders the
    strength and ability to perform miracles.
I think that what the Red Army has accomplished, its struggle,
    and the history of its victory, will be of colossal, epochal
    significance for all the peoples of the East. It will show them
    that, weak as they may be, and invincible as may seem the power of
    the European oppressors, who in the struggle employ all the
    marvels of technology and of the military art-nevertheless, a
    revolutionary war waged by oppressed peoples, if it really
    succeeds in arousing the millions of working and exploited people,
    harbours such potentialities, such miracles, that the emancipation
    of the peoples of the East is now quite practicable, from the
    standpoint not only of the prospects of the international
    revolution, but also of the direct military experience acquired in
    Asia, in Siberia, the experience of the Soviet Republic, which has
    suffered the armed invasion of all the powerful imperialist
    countries.
Furthermore, the experience of the Civil War in Russia has
    shown us and the Communists of all countries that, in the crucible
    of civil war, the development of revolutionary enthusiasm is
    accompanied by a powerful inner cohesion. War tests all the
    economic and organisational forces of a nation. In the final
    analysis, infinitely hard as the war has been for the workers and
    peasants, who are suffering famine and cold, it may be said on the
    basis of these two years’ experience that we are winning and
    will continue to win, because we have a hinterland, and a strong
    one, because, despite famine and cold, the peasants and workers
    stand together, have grown strong, and answer every heavy blow
    with a greater cohesion of their forces and increased economic
    might. And it is this alone that has made possible the victories
    over Kolchak, Yudenich and their allies, the strongest powers in
    the world. The past two years have shown, on the one hand, that a
    revolutionary war can be developed, and, on the other, that the
    Soviet system is growing stronger under the heavy blows of the
    foreign invasion, the aim of which is to destroy quickly the
    revolutionary centre, the republic of workers and peasants who
    have dared to declare war on international imperialism. But
    instead of destroying the workers and peasants of Russia, these
    heavy blows have served to harden them.
That is the chief lesson, the chief content of the present
    period. We are on the eve of decisive victories over Denikin, the
    last enemy left on our soil. We feel strong and may reiterate a
    thousand times over that we are not mistaken when we say that
    internally the Republic has become consolidated, and that we shall
    emerge from the war against Denikin very much stronger and better
    prepared for the task of erecting the socialist edifice-to which
    we have been able to devote all too little time and energy during
    the Civil War, but to which, now that we are setting foot on a
    free road, we shall undoubtedly be able to devote ourselves
    entirely.
In Western Europe we see the decay of imperialism. You know
    that a year ago it seemed even to the German socialists, and to
    the vast majority of socialists-who did not understand the state
    of affairs-that what was in progress was a struggle of two world
    imperialist groups, and they believed that this struggle
    constituted the whole of history, that there was no force capable
    of producing anything else. It seemed to them that even socialists
    had no alternative but to join sides with one of the groups of
    powerful world predators. That is how it seemed at the close of
    October 1918. But we find that in the year that has since elapsed
    world history has witnessed unparalleled events, profound and
    far-reaching events, and these have opened the eyes of many
    socialists who during the imperialist war were patriots and
    justified their conduct on the plea that they were faced with an
    enemy; they justified their alliance with the British and French
    imperialists on the grounds that these were supposedly bringing
    delivery from German imperialism. See how many illusions were
    shattered by that war! We are witnessing the decay of German
    imperialism, a decay which has led not only to a republican, but
    even to a socialist revolution. You know that in Germany today the
    class struggle has become still more acute and that civil war is
    drawing nearer and nearer-a war of the German proletariat against
    the German imperialists, who have adopted republican colours, but
    who remain imperialists.
 Everyone knows that the social revolution is maturing in
    Western Europe by leaps and bounds, and that the same thing is
    happening in America and in Britain, the countries ostensibly
    representing culture and civilisation, victors over the Huns, the
    German imperialists. Yet when it came to the Treaty of Versailles,
    everyone saw that it was a hundred times more rapacious than the
    Treaty of B rest which the German robbers forced upon us, and that
    it was the heaviest blow the capitalists and imperialists of those
    luckless victor countries could possibly have struck at
    themselves. The Treaty of Versailles opened the eyes of the people
    of the victor nations, and showed that in the case of Britain and
    France, even though they are democratic states, we have before us
    not representatives of culture and civilisation, but countries
    ruled by imperialist predators The internal struggle among these
    predators is developing so swiftly that we may rejoice in the
    knowledge that the Treaty of Versailles is only a seeming victory
    for the jubilant imperialists, and that in reality it signifies
    the bankruptcy of the entire imperialist world and the resolute
    abandonment by the working people of those socialists who during
    the war allied themselves with the representatives of decaying
    imperialism and defended one of the groups of belligerent
    predators. The eyes of the working people have been opened because
    the Treaty of Versailles was a rapacious peace and showed that
    France and Britain had actually fought Germany in order to
    strengthen their rule over the colonies and to enhance their
    imperialist might. That internal struggle grows broader as time
    goes on. Today I saw a wireless message from London dated November
    21, in which American journalists—men who cannot be
    suspected of sympathising with revolutionaries—say that in
    France an unprecedented outburst of hatred towards the Americans
    is to be observed, because the Americans refuse to ratify the
    Treaty of Versailles.
Britain and France are victors, but they are up to their ears
    in debt to America, who has decided that the French and the
    British may consider themselves victors as much as they like, but
    that she is going to skim the cream and exact usurious interest
    for her assistance during the war; and the guarantee of this is to
    be the American Navy which is now being built and is overtaking
    the British Navy in size. And the crudeness of the
    Americans’ rapacious imperialism may be seen from the fact
    that American agents are buying white slaves, women and girls, and
    shipping them to America for the development of prostitution. Just
    think, free, cultured America supplying white slaves for brothels!
    Conflicts with American agents are occurring in Poland and
    Belgium. That is a tiny illustration of what is taking place on a
    vast scale in every little country which received assistance from
    the Entente. Take Poland, for instance. You find American agents
    and profiteers going there and buying up all the wealth of Poland,
    who boasts that she is now an independent power. Poland is being
    bought up by American agents. There is not a factory or branch of
    industry which is not in the pockets of the Americans. The
    Americans have become so brazen that they are beginning to enslave
    that “great and free victor”, France, who was formerly
    a country of usurers, but is now deep in debt to America, because
    she has lost her economic strength, and has not enough grain or
    coal of her own and cannot develop her material resources on a
    large scale, while America insists that the tribute be paid
    unreservedly and in full. It is thus becoming increasingly
    apparent that France, Britain and other powerful countries are
    economically bankrupt. In the French elections the Clericats have
    gained the upper hand. The French people, who were deceived into
    devoting all their strength supposedly to the defence of freedom
    and democracy against Germany, have now been rewarded with an
    interminable debt, with the sneers of the rapacious American
    imperialists and, or, top of it, with a Clerical majority
    consisting of representatives of the most savage reaction.
The situation all over the world has become immeasurably more
    complicated. Our victory over Kolchak and Yudenich, those lackeys
    of international capital, is a big one; but far bigger, though not
    so evident, is the victory we are gaining on an international
    scale. That victory consists in the internal decay of imperialism,
    which is unable to send its troops against us. The Entente tried
    it, but to no purpose, because its troops become demoralised when
    they contact our troops and acquaint themselves with our Russian
    Soviet Constitution, translated into their languages. Despite the
    influence of the leaders of putrid socialism, our Constitution
    will always win the sympathy of the working people. The word
    “Soviet” is now understood by everybody, and the
    Soviet Constitution has been translated into all languages and is
    known to every worker. He knows that it is the constitution of
    working people, the political system of working people who are
    calling for victory over international capital, that it is a
    triumph we have achieved over the international imperialists. This
    victory of ours has had its repercussions in all imperialist
    countries, since we have deprived them of their own troops, won
    them over, deprived them of the possibility of using those troops
    against Soviet Russia.
They tried to wage war with the troops of other
    countries-Finland, Poland, and Latvia-but nothing came of
    it. British Minister Churchill, speaking in the House of Commons
    several weeks ago, boasted-and it was cabled all over the
    world-that a campaign of fourteen nations against Soviet Russia
    had been organised, and that this would result in victory over
    Russia by the New Year. And it is true that many nations
    participated in it-Finland, the Ukraine, Poland, Georgia, as well
    as the Czechoslovaks, the Japanese, the French, the British, and
    the Germans. But we know what came of it! We know that the
    Estonians left Yudenich’s forces in the lurch; and now a
    fierce controversy is going on in the press because the Estonians
    do not want to help him, while Finland, much as her bourgeoisie
    wanted it, has not assisted Yudenich either. Thus the second
    attempt to attack us has likewise failed. The first stage was the
    dispatch by the Entente of its own troops, equipped according to
    all the rules of military technique, so that it seemed they would
    defeat the Soviet Republic. They have already withdrawn from the
    Caucasus, Archangel and the Crimea; they still remain in Murmansk,
    as the Czechoslovaks do in Siberia, but only as isolated
    groups. The first attempt of the Entente to defeat us with its own
    forces ended in victory for us. The second attempt consisted in
    launching against us nations which re our neighbours, and which
    are entirely dependent financially on the Entente, and in trying
    to force them to crush us, as a nest of socialism. But that
    attempt, too, ended in failure: it turned out that not one of
    these little countries is capable of waging such a war. What is
    more, hatred of the Entente has taken firm root in every little
    country. If Finland did not set out to capture Petrograd when
    Yudenich had already captured Krasnoye Solo, it was because she
    hesitated, realising that she could live independently side by
    side with Soviet Russia, but could not live in peace with the
    Entente. All little nations have felt that. It is felt in Finland,
    Lithuania, Estonia, and Poland, where chauvinism is rampant, but
    where there is hatred of the Entente, which is expanding its
    exploitation in those countries. And now, accurately assessing the
    course of developments, we may say without exaggeration that not
    only the first, but also the second stage of the international war
    against the Soviet Republic has failed. All that remains for us to
    do now is to defeat Denikin’s forces, and they are already
    half-defeated,
Such is the present Russian and international situation, which
    I have summarised briefly in my address. Permit me, in conclusion,
    to say something about the situation that is developing in respect
    of the nationalities of the East. You are representatives of the
    communist organisations and Communist Parties of various Eastern
    peoples. I must say that the Russian Bolsheviks have succeeded in
    forcing a breach in the old imperialism, in undertaking the
    exceedingly difficult, but also exceedingly noble task of blazing
    new paths of revolution, whereas you, the representatives of the
    working people of the East, have before you a task that is still
    greater and newer. It is becoming quite clear that the socialist
    revolution which is impending for the whole world will not be
    merely the victory of the proletariat of each country over its own
    bourgeoisie. That would be possible if revolutions came easily and
    swiftly. We know that the imperialists will not allow this, that
    all countries are armed against their domestic Bolshevism and that
    their one thought is how to defeat Bolshevism at home. That is why
    in every country a civil war is brewing in which the old socialist
    compromisers are enlisted on the side of the bourgeoisie. Hence,
    the socialist revolution will not be solely, or chiefly, a
    struggle of the revolutionary proletarians in each country against
    their bourgeoisie-no, it will be a struggle of all the
    imperialist-oppressed colonies and countries, of all dependent
    countries, against international imperialism. Characterising the
    approach of the world social revolution in the Party Programme we
    adopted last March, we said that the civil war of the working
    people against the imperialists and exploiters in all the advanced
    countries is beginning to be combined with national wars against
    international imperialism. That is confirmed by the course of the
    revolution, and will be more and more confirmed as time goes
    on. It will be the same in the East.
We know that in the East the masses will rise as independent
    participants, as builders of a new life, because hundreds of
    millions of the people belong to dependent, underprivileged
    nations, which until now have been objects of international
    imperialist policy, and have only existed as material to fertilise
    capitalist culture and civilisation. And when they talk of handing
    out mandates for colonies, we know very well that it means handing
    out mandates for spoliation and plunder-handing out to an
    insignificant section of the world’s population the right to
    exploit the majority of the population of the globe. That
    majority, which up till then had been completely outside the orbit
    of historical progress, because it could not constitute an
    independent revolutionary force, ceased, as we know, to play such
    a passive role at the beginning of the twentieth century. We know
    that 1905 was followed by revolutions in Turkey, Persia and China,
    and that a revolutionary movement developed in India. The
    imperialist war likewise contributed to the growth of the
    revolutionary movement, because the European imperialists had to
    enlist whole colonial regiments in their struggle. The imperialist
    war aroused the East also and drew its peoples into international
    politics. Britain and France armed colonial peoples and helped
    them to familiarise themselves with military technique and
    up-todate machines. That knowledge they will use against the
    imperialist gentry. The period of the awakening of the East in the
    contemporary revolution is being succeeded by a period in which
    all the Eastern peoples will participate in deciding the destiny
    of the whole world, so as not to be simply objects of the
    enrichment of others. The peoples of the East are becoming alive
    to the need for practical action, the need for every nation to
    take part in shaping the destiny of all mankind.
That is why I think that in the history of the development of
    the world revolution-which, judging by its beginning, will
    continue for many years and will demand much effort-that in the
    revolutionary struggle, in the revolutionary movement you will be
    called upon to play a big part and to merge with our struggle
    against international imperialism. Your participation in the
    international revolution will confront you with a complicated and
    difficult task, the accomplishment of which will serve as the
    foundation for our common success, because here the majority of
    the people for the first time begin to act independently and will
    be an active factor in the fight to overthrow international
    imperialism.
Most of the Eastern peoples are in a worse position than the
    most backward country in Europe-Russia. But in our struggle
    against feudal survivals and capitalism, we succeeded in uniting
    the peasants and workers of Russia;

      and it was because the peasants and workers united against
      capitalism and feudalism that our victory was so easy. Here
      contact with the peoples of the East is particularly important,
      because the majority of the Eastern peoples are typical
      representatives of the working people-not workers who have
      passed through the school of capitalist factories, but typical
      representatives of the working and exploited peasant masses who
      are victims of medieval oppression. The Russian revolution
      showed how the proletarians, after defeating capitalism and
      uniting with the vast diffuse mass of working peasants, rose up
      victoriously against medieval oppression. Our Soviet Republic
      must now muster all the awakening peoples of the East and,
      together with them, wage a struggle against international
      imperialism.
In this respect you are confronted with a task which has not
    previously confronted the Communists of the world: relying upon
    the general theory and practice of communism, you must adapt
    yourselves to specific conditions such as do not exist in the
    European countries; you must be able to apply that theory and
    practice to conditions in which the bulk of the population are
    peasants, and in which the task is to wage a struggle against
    medieval survivals and not against capitalism. That is a difficult
    and specific task, but a very thankful one, because masses that
    have taken no part in the struggle up to now are being drawn into
    it, and also because the organisation of communist cells in the
    East gives you an opportunity to maintain the closest contact with
    the Third International. You must find specific forms for this
    alliance of the foremost proletarians of the world with the
    labouring and exploited masses of the East whose conditions are in
    many cases medieval. We have accomplished on a small scale in our
    country what you will do on a big scale and in big countries. And
    that latter task you will, I hope, perform with success. Thanks to
    the communist organisations in the East, of which you here are the
    represelitatives, you have contact with the advanced revolutionary
    proletariat. Your task is to continue to ensure that communist
    propaganda is carried on in every country in a language the people
    understand.
It is self-evident that final victory can be won only by the
    proletariat of all the advanced countries of the world, and we,
    the Russians, are beginning the work which the British, French or
    German proletariat will consolidate. But we see that they will not
    be victorious without the aid of the working people of all the
    oppressed colonial nations, first and foremost, of Eastern
    nations. We must realise that the transition to communism cannot
    be accomplished by the vanguard alone. The task is to arouse the
    working masses to revolutionary activity, to independent action
    and to organisation, regardless of the level they have reached; to
    translate the true communist doctrine, which was intended for the
    Communists of the more advanced countries, into the language of
    every people; to carry out those practical tasks which must be
    carried out immediately, and to join the proletarians of other
    countries in a common struggle.
Such are the problems whose solution you will not find in any
    communist book, but will find in the common struggle begun by
    Russia. You will have to tackle that problem and solve it through
    your own independent experience. In that you will be assisted, on
    the one hand, by close alliance with the vanguard of the working
    people of other countries, and, on the other, by ability to find
    the right approach to the peoples of the East whom you here
    represent. You will have to base yourselves on the bourgeois
    nationalism which is awakening, and must awaken, among those
    peoples, and which has its historical justification. At the same
    time, you must find your way to the working and exploited masses
    of every country and tell them in a language they understand that
    their only hope of emancipation lies in the victory of the
    international revolution, and that the international proletariat
    is the only ally of all the hundreds of millions of the working
    and exploited peoples of the East.
Such is the immense task which confronts you, and which, thanks
    to the era of revolution and the growth of the revolutionary
    movement-of that there can be no doubt-will, by the joint efforts
    of the communist organisations of the East, be successfully
    accomplished and crowned by complete victory over international
    imperialism.

Endnotes
[1]
    This Congress was held in Moscow from November 22 to December 3,
    1919, on the initiative of the Central Bureau of Communist
    Organisations of the Peoples of the East at the CC.,
    B.C.P.(B.). On the eve of the Congress, November 21, a preliminary
    meeting of the Central Committee members with a group of delegates
    was held with Lenin presiding.The Congress was attended by 71
    delegates with the right to vote and by 11 delegates with voice
    but no vote. On the opening day of the Congress, November 22,
    Lenin delivered a report on the current situation. The resolution
    adopted on his report was submitted to the presidium “for
    concretisation and drafting of the chief theses that should serve
    as a basis for work in the East”. The Congress heard the
    report on the work of the Central Bureau of Communist
    Organisations of the Peoples of the East, reports from the
    localities, the reports of the Central Moslem War Collegium,
    Central Moslem Commissariat of the People’s Commissariat of
    Nationalities; it discussed the national question of the Bashkirs
    and Tatars and heard reports of sections on state organisation and
    Party work, on work among women in the East and among the youth,
    etc. The Congress outlined the tasks of the Party and the
    government in the East, and elected a new Central Bureau of
    Communist Organisations of the Peoples of the East


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Draft Resolution of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) On Soviet Rule In the Ukraine











On Soviet Rule In The Ukraine Draft Resolution Of The C.C., R.C.P.(B.)



V. I. Lenin
Draft Resolution Of The C.C., R.C.P.(B.)
On Soviet Rule In The Ukraine[1]


Delivered: November, 1919
First Published: Published according to a type written copy; the additional clause 2, according to the manuscript 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 163-166
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(1) The C.C., R.C.P.(B.), having discussed the question of relations with the working people of the Ukraine now being liberated from the temporary conquest of Denikin’s bands, is pursuing persistently the principle of the self-determination of nations and deems it essential to again affirm that the R.C.P. holds consistently to the view that the independence of the Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic be recognised.
(2) The R.C.P. will work to establish federal relations between the R.S,F.S.R, and the Ukrainian S.S.R., basing itself on the decisions of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of June 1, 1919, and the Ukrainian Central Executive Committee of May 18, 1919 (resolution attached).
(3) In view of the fact that Ukrainian culture (language, school, etc.) has been suppressed for centuries by Russian tsarism and the exploiting classes, the C.C., R.C.P. makes it incumbent upon all Party members to use every means to help remove all barriers in the way of the free development of the Ukrainian language and culture. Since the many centuries of oppression have given rise to nationalist tendencies among the backward sections of the population, R.C.P. members must exercise the greatest caution in respect of those tendencies and must oppose them with words of comradely explanation concerning the identity of interests of the working people of the Ukraine and Russia. R.C.P. members on Ukrainian territory must put into practice the right of the working people to study in the Ukrainian language and to speak their native language in all Soviet institutions; they must in every way counteract attempts at Russification that push the Ukrainian language into the background and must convert that language into an instrument for the communist education of the working people. Steps must be taken immediately to ensure that in all Soviet institutions there are sufficient Ukrainian-speaking employees and that in future all employees are able to speak Ukrainian.
(4) It is essential to ensure the closest contact between Soviet institutions and the native peasant population of the country, for which purpose it must be made the rule, even at the earliest stages, that when revolutionary committees and Soviets are being established the labouring peasants must have a majority in them with the poor peasants exercising a decisive influence.
(5) Since the population of the Ukraine is predominantly peasant to an even greater extent than that of Russia, it is the task of the Soviet government in the Ukraine to win the confidence, not only of the poor peasants, but also of the broad sections of the middle peasantry whose real interests link them very closely with Soviet power. In particu-lar, while retaining the food policy in principle (the state procurement of grain at fixed prices) the methods of its application must be changed.
The immediate purpose of the food policy in the Ukraine must be the requisitioning of grain surpluses to the strictly limited extent necessary to supply the Ukrainian rural poor, the workers and the Red Army. When requisitioning surpluses, special attention must be paid to the interests of the middle peasants, who must be carefully distinguished from kulak elements. It is essential to expose to the Ukrainian peasantry the counter-revolutionary demagogy that tries to impress on them that the purpose of Soviet Russia is to channel grain and other food products from the Ukraine into Russia.
It must be made incumbent on all agents of the central authorities, all Party officials, Party instructors, etc., to draw the poor and middle peasantry extensively into the work of government.
For the same purpose (the establishment of the real power of the working people) measures must be immediately taken to prevent Soviet institutions from being flooded with Ukrainian urban petty bourgeoisie, who have no conception of the living conditions of the peasant masses and who frequently masquerade as Communists.
A condition for the admission of such elements into the ranks of the Party and into Soviet institutions must be a preliminary practical verification of their competence and their loyalty to the interests of the working people, primarily at the front, in the ranks of the army. Everywhere and under all circumstances such elements must be placed under the strict class control of the proletariat.
We know from experience that due to the unorganised state of the poor the large number of weapons in the hands of the Ukrainian rural population is inevitably being concentrated in the hands of the kulaks and counter-revolutionaries which actually leads to the domination of kulak bandits instead of the dictatorship of the working people; in view of this a primary task in organising Soviet Ukraine is to withdraw all weapons and concentrate them in the hands of the workers’ and peasants’ Red Army.
(6) In the same way, the land policy must be effected with special attention paid to the farming of the poor and middle peasantry.
The tasks of the land policy in the Ukraine are:
(1) The complete abolition of the landed proprietorship re-established by Denikin and the transfer of the landed estates to peasants possessing little or no land.
(2) State farms to be organised in strictly limited numbers and of limited size and in each case in conformity with the interests of the surrounding peasantry.
(3) In organising peasants in communes, artels, etc., the Party policy must be strictly adhered to, which in this respect does not permit any coercion, leaving it to the peasants to decide freely for themselves and penalising all attempts to introduce the principle of coercion.
2. Regarding it as beyond dispute for every Communist and for every politically-conscious worker that the closest alliance of all Soviet republics in their struggle against the menacing forces of world imperialism is essential, the R.C.P. maintains that the form of that alliance must be finally determined by the Ukrainian workers and labouring peasants themselves.

Endnotes
[1]  This resolution was based on theses written by Lenin. On November 21, 1919, the Political Bureau of the CC., R.C.P.(B.) discussed the theses and submitted them to a commission for final editing. On the basis of the theses the commission drafted the resolution which, with the addition of Clause 2 introduced by Lenin, was ad opted by the plenary meeting of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) on November 29, 1919 and later endorsed by the Eighth All-Russia Party Conference


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Eighth All-Russia Conference of the
  R.C,P.(B)











Eighth All-Russia Conference Of The R.C.P(B.) December 2-4 1919



V. I. Lenin
Eighth All-Russia Conference Of The R.C.P(B.)[1]
December 2-4 1919 


Written & Delivered: December 2-4,
      1919
First Published: Part 1: Izvestia No. 271, December 3, 1919; Published according to the verbatim report, verified with the Izvestia text; Part 2: Bulletin of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.), No. 9 December 20, 1919; Published according to the text of the Bulletin of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.), verified with the verbatim report; Part 3: Bulletin of the CC., R.C.P.(B.) No. 9,; December 20, 1919; Published according to the text of the Bulletin of the CC., R.C.P,(B.), verified with the verbatim report; Part 4: Written on December 2, 1919; First published in 1932; Published according to the manuscript; Part 5: First published in 1932; Published according to the verbatim report 
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
      1965, Volume 30, pages 167-194
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
License


1
Speech At The Opening Of The Conference
      December 2

      Comrades, on behalf of the Central Committee of the Russian
      Communist Party (Bolsheviks) I declare the All-Russia Party
      Conference open.
Comrades, according to Party Rules this type of conference
    should be convened every three months, but the difficult situation
    obtaining a few months ago in connection with the war forced us to
    bend our efforts and to reduce all bodies, both government and
    Party, to such an extent that we were unfortunately unable to
    carry out the Rules to the letter and the conference was
    postponed.
Comrades, we are calling this conference in connection with the
    Congress of Soviets[2] at a time when we have succeeded in
    achieving a tremendous improvement on the fronts, and when we are
    certain that we are on the eve of a gigantic change for the better
    in the international situation, in respect of the war and in
    respect of our internal development. The tasks that are unfolding
    before us have been frequently discussed at Party meetings and in
    the press, and we shall return to them when discussing definite
    individual items on the agenda. I shall, therefore, get right down
    to business and propose that you elect a presidium for the
    conference.
Let me have your proposals on that point, please.
2
Political Report Of The Central Committee
      December 2
(Applause.) Comrades, the present report of the Central
    Committee should, from the formal point of view, give you mainly a
    summary of experience acquired during the period under review. I
    must say that such an approach—confining oneself to history
    or, at any rate, making a report that turns mainly on
    history—is too far removed from the spirit of the times in
    which we live and from the tasks that confront us. In the present
    report, which I should also like to present to the Congress of
    Soviets, I intend to transfer the centre of gravity more to the
    lessons we are receiving, and which we must receive for our
    immediate practical activity, rather than to a description of what
    we have passed through.
Although we may say, without any exaggeration, that in the
    period under review we have achieved tremendous successes,
    although our main difficulty is now behind us, we still have ahead
    of us difficulties that are without doubt very, very great. The
    Party must naturally concentrate its attention wholly on the
    solution of those problems and may permit itself excursions into
    history only insofar as it is absolutely necessary for the
    solution of the problems facing us.
It stands to reason that in the past period of Soviet power the
    war question has persistently been the one on which we have mostly
    fixed our attention. The Civil War has involved everyone and
    everything, of course, and it goes without saying that in our
    struggle for existence we had to divert the Party’s best
    forces from other work and other activities and use them for war
    work. It was all we could do under war conditions. And no matter
    how much we have suffered from this withdrawal of creative forces
    from many spheres of government and Party activity, in the
    military sphere we have actually managed to effect a concentration
    of forces and achieve excellent results such as not only our
    enemies, not only the waverers, but probably even most of our own
    milieu would formerly have considered impossible. To hold out for
    two years against all our enemies who were supported directly and
    indirectly, first by German imperialism and then by the much more
    powerful Entente imperialism that has mastered the whole
    world—to hold out for two years in a country so badly ruined
    and so backward was such a problem that its solution was an
    undoubted “miracle”. It seems to me, therefore, that
    we must look closely to see how this “miracle” was
    effected and what practical deductions are to be made from it,
    deductions which will enable us to say conclusively—and I
    think we may say conclusively that great as the difficulties of
    internal organisation are we shall surmount them in the near
    future with a success equal to that with which we have solved the
    problems of military defence.
World imperialism, that in reality brought about the Civil War
    in our country and is responsible for protracting it, has suffered
    defeat in these two years, and we must first of all ask ourselves
    the question, how could it have happened that we were able to
    achieve such tremendous success in the struggle against world
    imperialism that even today is undoubtedly many times stronger
    than we are? To find an answer to this question we must make a
    general review of the history of the Civil War in Russia, the
    history of Entente intervention. In this war we must distinguish
    two periods that differ radically according to the methods of
    Entente activity employed, two periods or two basic methods of
    conducting military operations against Russia.
When the Entente had defeated Germany, at first it naturally
    relied on its own troops to crush the Soviet Republic in
    Russia. It stands to reason that if the Entente had used but a
    fraction of the gigantic armies that were released after the
    defeat of Germany, if it had been able to use even one-tenth of
    those armies in a proper manner against the Russian Soviet
    Republic we should not, of course, have been able to hold out. It
    is typical of the first period of the Civil War in Russia that the
    attempt of the Entente to smash the Soviet Republic using its own
    troops was a failure. The Entente had to withdraw the British
    troops operating on the Archangel Front. The landing of French
    forces in the South of Russia ended in a number of mutinies on the
    part of French sailors, and today, no matter how frantically the
    wartime censor may operate—there is no war but the former
    wartime censor, now the non-war-time censor, continues to function
    in the supposedly free countries, Britain and France—and
    although copies of newspapers reach us on rare occasions we have
    very precise documentary evidence from Britain and France to the
    effect that information concerning, for instance, the mutiny of
    the sailors on French warships in the Black Sea has got into the
    French press, that the sentencing of several French sailors to
    penal servitude has become known in France, that the entire
    communist, the entire revolutionary working-class press in France
    and Britain refers to the facts; the name of Comrade Jeanne
    Labourbe, whom the French shot in Odessa for Bolshevik propaganda,
    has become a slogan for the French working-class socialist press,
    not only for the Communist wing, but even for a newspaper like l’Humanité
    that in its basic principles is actually closer to the point of
    view of our Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, even for
    that newspaper the name of Labourbe has become a slogan of
    struggle against French imperialism, for non-intervention in
    Russian affairs. In the same way letters from British soldiers on
    the Archangel Front have been discussed in the British
    working-class press. We have very exact documentary evidence of
    this. It is quite obvious to us, therefore, that the tremendous
    change that formerly we always spoke of and which we so deeply
    hoped for has taken place; it has undoubtedly become a fact even
    though the process is an unusually slow one.
This change had to be evoked by the very course of events. It
    is specifically those countries that always have been and still
    are regarded as the most democratic, civilised and cultured that
    conducted a war against Russia by the most brutal means, without
    even a shade of legality. The Bolsheviks are accused of violating
    democracy—this is the most popular argument against us among
    the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries and in the entire
    European bourgeois press. But not one of those democratic states
    has taken or would dare to take the risk under the laws of its own
    country of declaring war on Soviet Russia. Parallel to this there
    is a protest, outwardly unnoticeable but nevertheless a profound
    protest on the part of the working-class press which asks where,
    in their constitution, in the constitution of France, Britain or
    America, are to be found laws permitting the conduct of war
    without having declared war and without having consulted
    parliament? The press of Britain, France and America has proposed
    to arraign their heads of state for a crime against the state, for
    declaring war without the permission of parliament. Such proposals
    have been made, although it is true that it was in papers that
    come out not more than once a week and are probably confiscated
    not less than once a month and have a circulation of a few hundred
    or a few thousand copies. The leaders of the responsible
    government parties could afford to ignore such papers. But here we
    have to consider two different tendencies; the ruling classes
    throughout the world publish well-known capitalist dailies in
    millions of copies and these are packed with unprecedented lies
    and slander against the Bolsheviks. But down below, the
    working-class masses learn about the falsity of that whole
    campaign from the soldiers who have returned from Russia. That is
    why it became necessary for the Entente to withdraw its forces
    from Russia.
When we said at the very outset that we place our stakes on the
    world revolution we were laughed at, and hundreds of times it was
    said and is still being said that it cannot be realised. During
    the past two years we have obtained precise material with which to
    verify it. If we speak of that stake as meaning hopes for a rapid,
    immediate insurrection in Europe, then we know there has not been
    one. That stake, however, proved to be fundamentally a true one
    and from the very outset it removed all possibility of an armed
    intervention on the part of the Entente; after two years and
    especially since the defeat of Kolchak and since the withdrawal of
    British forces from Archangel and from the entire Northern Front
    this has become an undoubted historical fact. A very small part of
    the armies at the disposal of the Entente would have been enough
    to crush us. But we were able to defeat the enemy because the
    sympathy of the workers of the whole world made itself felt at the
    most difficult moment. And thus we succeeded in emerging
    honourably from this first period of the Entente invasion. I
    remember some article, Radek’s I think, said that the
    Entente troops’ contact with the hot soil of Russia, the
    country that had started the fire of the socialist revolution,
    would also set those troops on fire. Events showed that this
    really did happen. It goes without saying, furthermore, that the
    processes that are taking place among the British and French
    soldiers and sailors who know the names of those who have been
    shot for Bolshevik agitation, no matter how weak these processes
    are, no matter how weak the communist organisations are over
    there, are doing a gigantic job. The results are visible they have
    compelled the Entente countries to withdraw their forces. This
    alone gave us our first major victory.
The second method or second system employed by the Entente in
    its struggle was to use small states against us. It was reported
    in a Swedish newspaper[3] at the end of last August that the
    British Secretary for War, Churchill, had said that fourteen
    states would attack Russia so that the fall of Petrograd and
    Moscow was certain in the near future, at any rate by the end of
    the year. I believe Churchill later denied having made this
    statement and said that the Bolsheviks had invented it. We have,
    however, exact information as to which Swedish newspaper published
    it. We therefore insist that the report came from European
    sources. Furthermore it is supported by facts. We know from the
    example of Finland and Estonia that the Entente has bent all its
    efforts to force them to attack Soviet Russia. I personally read
    one leading article in the British newspaper The Times on
    the question of Finland[4] at the time when Yudenich’s
    troops were a few versts from Petrograd and the city was in
    tremendous danger. The article was seething with wrath and
    indignation, and was written in an unprecedentedly impassioned
    style, unusual for that newspaper (such newspapers usually write
    in diplomatic language similar to that used in Milyukov’s Rech
    in Russia). It was the wildest proclamation addressed to Finland
    and presenting the question bluntly—the fate of the world
    depended on Finland and the eyes of all civilised capitalist
    countries were fixed on her. We know that that was the decisive
    moment when Yudenich’s troops were a few versts from
    Petrograd. It makes no difference whether Churchill made the
    statement quoted or not, he certainly pursued that policy. It is
    well known what pressure the Entente brought to bear on those
    small countries that had been hastily formed, were weak and wholly
    dependent on the Entente even in such basic questions as that of
    food and in all other respects. They cannot break away from that
    dependence. All kinds of pressure—financial, food,
    military—have been applied to force Estonia, Finland, and no
    doubt Latvia, Lithuania and Poland as well, to force that whole
    group of states to make war on us. The history of Yudenich’s
    last campaign against Petrograd has shown to the full that the
    Entente’s second method of conducting war has failed. There
    can be no doubt that the least bit of aid from Finland or—a
    little more aid—from Estonia would have been enough to
    decide the fate of Petrograd. Nor is there any doubt that the
    Entente, realising the gravity of the situation, did everything it
    could to obtain that aid but nevertheless suffered defeat.
This was the second major international victory that we
    achieved and it was a more complicated victory than the first. The
    first was achieved because it turned out that British and French
    troops could not be retained on the territory of Russia; they did
    not fight but provided Britain and France with rebels who raised
    the British and French workers against their own governments. And
    so it has happened that although Russia has been deliberately
    encircled by a ring of small states obviously created and
    maintained for the struggle against Bolshevism, this weapon, too,
    has turned against the Entente. There are bourgeois governments in
    all these states and almost everywhere there are bourgeois
    collaborators in those governments, people who, because of their
    class position, go against the Bolsheviks. Every one of these
    nations, of course, is definitely hostile to the Bolsheviks, but
    we, nevertheless, have managed to turn those bourgeois and
    collaborators to our side. This seems improbable, but it is true,
    because each of those states, after what it has experienced in the
    imperialist war, is bound to hesitate on the question of whether
    it is now worth its while to fight against the Bolsheviks when the
    only other claimant to power in Russia—a claimant that they
    have reason to consider serious—is either Kolchak or
    Denikin, that is, representatives of old imperialist Russia; and
    there is no doubt that Kolchak and Denikin represent old
    Russia. We have, therefore, been given an opportunity to rely on
    another crack in the imperialist camp. During the first months
    following our revolution we were able to hold out because the
    German and British imperialists were at each other’s
    throats, but after those six months we were able to hold out for
    more than another six months because the troops of the Entente
    were in no condition to fight against us; the following year,
    however, the year that we now have mainly to render account for,
    we held out successfully because the attempt of the Great Powers
    under whose influence the small countries undoubtedly are, the
    attempt of those Great Powers to mobilise the small countries
    against us has been a failure because of the contradiction between
    the interests of world imperialism and the interests of those
    countries. The Entente has already had its paws on each of the
    small countries. They know that when the French, American or
    British capitalists say, “We guarantee you
    independence”, that means in practice, “We shall buy
    from you all the sources of your wealth and shall hold you in
    bondage. Furthermore, we shall treat you with the insolence of an
    officer who has come to a foreign country to administer it and to
    speculate in it and who will not consider anybody’s
    opinion”. They know that the British Ambassador in almost
    all such countries is of greater significance than a local king or
    parliament. And if petty-bourgeois democrats have so far been
    unable to comprehend this verity, reality has now compelled them
    to understand it. It has turned out that as far as concerns the
    bourgeois and petty-bourgeois elements of the small countries the
    imperialists are plundering, we are, maybe, not allies, but at any
    rate more reliable and more valuable neighbours than the
    imperialists.
That is the second victory over world imperialism that we have
    won.
That is why we now have every right to say that the main
    difficulties are behind us. There is no doubt that the Entente
    will make many more attempts at armed intervention in our
    affairs. Although the latest victories over Kolchak and Yudenich
    have now given spokesmen of all those powers cause to say that a
    campaign against Russia is hopeless and to offer us peace, we must
    realise clearly the meaning of such statements. What I am now
    going to say is not for the record ....
Since we have managed to extract admissions of this kind from
    bourgeois intellectuals, from our merciless enemies, we have every
    right to say that the sympathies, not only of the working class,
    but also of extensive circles of bourgeois intellectuals are on
    the side of Soviet power. The philistines, the petty bourgeoisie,
    those who wavered in the savage fight between labour and capital,
    have now come over definitely to our side, and we may to some
    extent anticipate their support.
We must take this victory into consideration and if we link it
    up with the way we, in the long run, achieved the victory over
    Kolchak, the conclusion becomes more convincing ... now you may
    begin writing again, the diplomacy is finished.
If we ask the question as to what forces made our victory over
    Kolchak possible, we have to admit that the victory over Kolchak,
    despite his having operated on territory where the proletariat was
    in a minority and we were unable to give the peasantry direct,
    real help to overthrow the power of the landowners as we did in
    Russia, despite Kolchak’s having begun on a front supported
    by Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries who established the
    front of the Constituent Assembly, despite there having been the
    most favourable conditions for the formation of a government that
    could rely on the aid of world imperialism—despite all this
    the experiment ended in the complete defeat of Kolehak. We have
    the right to draw the following conclusion from this, a conclusion
    that is very significant to us and should guide us in all our
    activities—the class that can lead the mass of the
    population must triumph historically. The Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries are still talking about the Constituent
    Assembly, about the will of the nation, and so on, but during this
    period experience has convinced us that in revolutionary times the
    class struggle is carried on in the most terrible forms but can
    lead to victory only when the class conducting the struggle is
    capable of giving leadership to the majority of the people. In
    this respect, the comparison that was made, not by voting with
    tickets, but by more than a year’s experience of the most
    arduous, most bloody struggle that demanded a hundred times more
    sacrifices than any political struggle—this experience in
    respect of Kolchak has shown that more than any other party we are
    putting into effect the rule of that class the majority of which
    we have proved capable of leading and that we are adding the
    peasantry to our ranks as friends and allies.The example of
    Kolchak demonstrated this. In the social sphere this exam ple has
    been the latest lesson for us; it shows on whom we can depend and
    who will go against us.
No matter how greatly the working class may have been weakened
    by the imperialist war and the economic ruin it is nevertheless
    effecting political leadership, but it would not be able to if it
    had not gained the majority of the working population, under
    Russian conditions the peasantry, as friends and allies. This has
    taken place in the Red Army where we have been able to employ
    specialists, the majority of whom were against us, and create the
    army which, according to the admission of our enemies, the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, as evidenced by a resolution of the
    last Council of their party, is a people’s and not a
    mercenary army.[5] The working class was able to build up
    an army the majority of which does not belong to that class and
    was able to employ specialists hostile to it only because it led
    and made friends and allies of that mass of working people
    connected with petty proprietorship, who have property connections
    and who, therefore, have a profound interest in free trading,
    i. e., in capitalism, in the return to the power of money. This is
    at the bottom of everything we have achieved in the past two
    years. In all our further work, in all our further activities, in
    those activities that must be begun in the Ukraine now being
    liberated, in all the organisational work that will he developing
    in all its difficulty and importance after the victory over
    Denikin, we must keep this basic lesson always before our eyes, we
    must remember it more than anything else. This, in my opinion,
    sums up the political results of all our work.
Comrades, it has been said that war is a continuation of
    politics. We have experienced that in our own war. The imperialist
    war that was a continuation of the politics of the imperialists,
    of the ruling classes, of landowners and capitalists, brought
    forth the hostility of the masses of the people and was the best
    means of revolutionising them. Here in Russia the war helped
    overthrow the monarchy, helped abolish landed proprietorship and
    overthrow the bourgeoisie, all of which was done with unparalleled
    ease only because the imperialist war was a continuation and an
    aggravation of imperialist politics that had become more
    insolent. And our war was a continuation of our communist
    politics, the politics of the proletariat. We still read in the
    Menshevik and Socialist-Revolutionary papers and we hear from
    non-party and from wavering people, “You promised peace and
    have given us war, you have deceived the working people.”And
    we say that the masses of the working people who have not studied
    Marxism have nevertheless learned full well the difference between
    imperialist and civil war, learned it through their class
    instinct, the instinct of oppressed people who have themselves for
    decades experienced what the landowner and capitalist are. Those
    who have experienced oppression for decades all realise that there
    is a difference between wars. The imperialist war was a
    continuation of imperialist politics; it aroused the masses
    against their masters. The Civil War is a war against the
    landowners and capitalists and is a continuation of the policy of
    overthrowing the power of those landowners and capitalists, and
    each month the development of the war has strengthened the bonds
    between the mass of working people and the proletariat that has
    assumed the leadership in the war. No matter how great the trials
    may have been, no matter how frequent the big defeats, no matter
    how serious those defeats have been, no matter how many times the
    enemy has achieved tremendous victories and the existence of
    Soviet power has hung by a thread—there have been such
    moments, and there is no doubt the Entente will again try to fight
    against us—it must be said that the experience we have
    gained is a very sound one. That experience has shown that war
    strengthens the political consciousness of the working people and
    shows them the advantages of Soviet power. NaÂve people or
    those who are wholly wrapped up in the prejudices of the old petty
    bourgeoisie or of the old bourgeois-democratic parliamentarisrn
    expect the peasant to decide through an election slip whether he
    will follow the Bolshevik Communists or the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries; they do not want to recognise any other
    decision because they are in favour of rights for the people,
    freedom, the Constituent Assembly, etc. Events made it necessary
    for the peasant to verify the issue in practice. After having
    given the Socialist-Revolutionaries the majority in the
    Constituent Assembly, after the policy of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries had failed and the peasants had to deal
    with the Bolsheviks in practice, they realised that our government
    is a sound one, it is a government that demands rather a lot, it
    is a government that is able to ensure the fulfilment of those
    demands at all costs, it is a government that regards the loan of
    bread to the hungry to be the absolute duty of the peasants even
    if they receive no equivalent in return, they realised that ours
    is a government that will ensure the supply of bread to the hungry
    no matter at what cost. The peasant saw this and compared our
    government with that of Kolchak and Denikin, and he made his
    choice, not through the ballot-box but by deciding the issue in
    practice when he ..ad had the experience of both kinds of
    government. The peasant is deciding and will continue to decide
    the question in our favour.
That is what the history of Kolchak’s defeat has taught
    us and that is what our victories in the South have proved. That
    is why we say that literally masses, millions of people living in
    the villages, millions of peasants are coming over completely to
    our side. I think this is the chief political lesson that we have
    learned in this period and which we must apply to the problems of
    internal organisation that will, with the victory over Denikin
    near, be placed on the order of the day now that it has become
    possible for us to concentrate on internal development.
The chief accusation made against us by the European petty
    bourgeoisie concerns our terrorism, our crude suppression of the
    intelligentsia and the petty bourgeoisie. “You and your
    governments have forced all that upon us,” we say in
    reply. When people shout about terror we answer, “When
    countries who have the world’s fleets at their disposal and
    have armed forces that are a hundred times greater than ours
    pounced upon us and compelled small states to make war on
    us—was that not terrorism?”
That was real terrorism when all the powers united against a
    country that was one of the most backward and most weakened by
    war. Even Germany kept helping the Entente from the time before
    her defeat when she was supplying Krasnov and up to the present
    day, when that same Germany is blockading us and giving direct
    help to our enemies. This attack by world imperialism, this
    campaign against us, this bribery of conspirators inside the
    country—was this not terrorism? The reason for our terrorism
    was that we were attacked by armed forces against which we had to
    bend all our efforts. Inside the country we had to act with all
    persistence, we had to muster all our forces. In this case we did
    not want to be—and we decided that we would not be—in
    the position in which those who collaborated with Kolchak in
    Siberia found themselves, the position in which the German
    collaborationists will find themselves tomorrow, those who imagine
    they represent a government and are relying on the Constituent
    Assembly although at any moment a hundred or a thousand officers
    can push that government out of office. This can be understood
    because those officers constitute a trained, organised mass with
    an excellent knowledge of the art of war, that holds all the
    strings in its hands, that is well informed about the bourgeoisie
    and the landowners and enjoys their sympathies.
This has been demonstrated by the history of all countries
    since the imperialist war, and today, when faced with such
    terrorism on the part of the Entente, we have the right to resort
    to terror ourselves.
It follows from this that the accusation of terror, insofar as
    it is justified, should be against the bourgeoisie and not against
    us. They forced terror upon us. And we shall be the first to take
    steps to confine it to the lowest possible minimum as soon as we
    put an end to the chief source of terrorism—the invasion of
    world imperialism, the war plots and the military pressure of
    world imperialism on our country.
While speaking of terrorism we must say something about our
    attitude to that middle stratum, the intelligentsia, that mostly
    complain about the brutality of Soviet power and that Soviet power
    puts them in a worse position than before.
Whatever we, with the meagre means at our disposal, can do for
    the intelligentsia we are doing. We know, of course, the little
    significance of the paper ruble, but we also know the significance
    of the black market as an aid to those who cannot get enough food
    through our food organisations. In this respect we give the
    bourgeois intelligentsia an advantage. We know that at the moment
    when world imperialism pounced on us we had to introduce strict
    military discipline and defend ourselves with all the forces we
    could muster. When we are pursuing a revolutionary war we cannot,
    of course, do what all bourgeois states do—leave the working
    people to bear the brunt of the war. The burden of the Civil War
    must be and will be shared by the entire intelligentsia, all the
    petty bourgeoisie, and all middle-class elements—all of them
    will bear the burden. It will naturally be more difficult for them
    to bear that burden because they have been privileged for decades,
    but in the interests of the social revolution we must place that
    burden on their shoulders, too. This is the way we reason and the
    way we act, and we cannot do otherwise.
The end of the Civil War will be a step towards improving the
    conditions of those groups. We have already shown by our tariff
    policy and by the declaration in our programme that we recognise
    the need to give these groups better conditions because the
    transition from capitalism to communism is impossible unless the
    bourgeois specialists are used; and all our victories—all
    the victories of the Red Army led by the proletariat that has
    drawn over to its side the peasantry who are half labourers and
    half property-owners—were achieved partly because of our
    ability to use bourgeois specialists. This policy of ours as
    expressed in matters military must become the policy of our
    internal development.
The experience gained in this period tells us that while laying
    the foundations of the building we have often undertaken work on
    the dome, on all sorts of ornament, etc. Perhaps this was, to a
    certain extent, necessary for a socialist republic. Perhaps we had
    to build up in all spheres of national life. The craving to build
    up in all spheres is perfectly natural. If we were to look at what
    has been done in the sphere of state organisation we would see
    almost everywhere many things begun and abandoned; these are the
    sort that make one want to say when looking at them that they
    could have waited and we should have begun with the main thing. It
    is quite natural that all our leading people should be interested
    in the tasks that can be carried out only after the foundations
    have been laid. But on the basis of this experience we can now say
    that in future we shall concentrate our efforts more on the main
    job, on the foundation, on those simple problems that are the most
    difficult to solve but which we shall nevertheless solve. These
    are the problem of bread, the problem of fuel and the problem of
    fighting the lice. These are three simple problems that will make
    possible the building of a socialist republic and then our victory
    throughout the world will be a hundred times more certain and more
    triumphant than that with which we repulsed the attack of the
    Entente.
The bread problem. We have achieved much with our
    requisitioning system. Our food policy has made it possible in the
    second year to acquire three times as much grain as in the
    first. During three months of the last campaign more grain was
    procured than during three months of last year, although, as you
    will hear in the report by the People’s Commissar for Food,
    it was accompanied by what were, without doubt, great
    difficulties. One raid by Mamontov that took in the whole southern
    part of the central agricultural zone cost us very dear. But we
    have learned to carry out the requisitioning system, i.e., we have
    learned to make the peasants sell their grain to the state at
    fixed prices, without an equivalent in exchange. We know full
    well, of course, that paper money is not the equivalent of
    grain. We know that the peasant is loaning us his grain, and we
    ask him, “Should you hold back your grain waiting for an
    equivalent so that the workers can die of starvation? Do you want
    to trade on a free market and take us thereby back to
    capitalism?” Many intellectuals who have read Marx do not
    understand that freedom to trade is a return to capitalism; the
    peasant, however, understands it more easily. He knows that to
    sell bread at free prices, when the starving are prepared to pay
    anything for it, are prepared to give up all they have to escape
    death from starvation—he knows that this is a return to
    exploitation, that it is freedom for the rich to make a profit and
    ruination for the poor. We say that this is a crime against the
    state and we shall not yield an inch in this struggle.
In this struggle to requisition grain the peasant will have to
    loan his grain to the hungry worker—that is the only way to
    begin proper organisation, to restore industry, etc. If the
    peasant does not do this, there will be a return to capitalism. If
    the peasant feels that he has ties with the workers he will be
    prepared to surrender his grain surpluses at fixed prices, i. e.,
    for a simple piece of coloured paper—this is something
    essential without which the starving worker cannot be saved from
    death, without which industry cannot be rehabilitated. It is an
    extremely difficult problem and it cannot be solved by force
    alone. NO matter bow much shouting there may be about the
    Bolsheviks being a party that coerces the peasantry, we still say,
    “Gentlemen, it is a lie!” If we were a party that
    coerces the peasantry, how could we have held out against Kolchak,
    how could we have formed a conscript army in which four-fifths of
    the, soldiers are peasants, all of whom are armed and who have the
    example of the imperialist war to show them that a rifle can
    easily be turned in any direction? How can we be a party that
    coerces the peasants—we, a party that is putting into effect
    the alliance between the working class and the peasantry, a party
    that tells the peasantry that the transition to free trading is a
    return to capitalism and that our requisitioning of surpluses by
    force is directed against the profiteer and not against the
    working people?
The requisitioning of grain must be the basis of all our
    activity. The food problem is at the basis of all problems. We
    have to devote a great deal of effort to defeat Denikin. There
    must not be the slightest hesitation or carelessness until the
    victory is complete, for all sorts of turns are possible. Whenever
    there is the slightest improvement in the war situation, however,
    we must devote ’greater effort to the work of food supplies
    because that is the basis of everything. The requisitioning must
    be carried out in full. Only when we have solved that problem
    shall. we have a socialist foundation, and on that socialist
    foundation we shall be able to erect the splendid edifice of
    socialism that we have so often begun to build from the top and
    which has so often collapsed.
Another basic problem is tha’t of fuel, the main
    foundation for our development. This is the problem we have come
    up against now, since we cannot take advantage of our successes in
    food supplies, since we cannot transport the grain, cannot make
    full use of our victories because there is no fuel. We still do
    not have a proper apparatus to settle the fuel problem, but it is
    possible to settle it.
There is a shortage of coal throughout Europe today. If the
    fuel problem is so acute in the richest of the victor countries,
    even those like America that has never been attacked or invaded,
    it naturally affects us too. It will take us several years to
    rehabilitate the coal industry, even under the best
    conditions.
We have to save ourselves with firewood. We are devoting more
    and more Party forces to this work. During the last week the
    greatest attention has been paid to this problem in the Council of
    People’s Commissars and the Council of Defence and a number
    of measures have been adopted that should effect a turningpoint in
    this sphere similar to that effected by our armies on the Southern
    Front. Our activities in this field must not slacken and every
    step must bring us closer to victory in the battle against the
    fuel hunger. The material supplies are available. Until we have
    restored the coal industry we can manage with firewood and keep
    industry supplied with fuel. We must devote all Party forces,
    comrades, to that basic problem.
Our third problem is that of the fight against lice, against
    the lice that carry typhus. Typhus among a population that is
    exhausted by hunger, is ill, has no bread, soap or fuel, may prove
    a calamity that will prevent our tackling any sort of socialist
    development.
This is the first step in our struggle for culture and this,
    too, is a struggle for existence.
These are the main problems. To these I should like to draw the
    attention, more than to anything else, of comrades who are members
    of the Party. So far the attention we have been paying to these
    problems is so little as to be out of all proportion. Nine-tenths
    of the forces that are not engaged in war activities—which
    must not be lessened for a single minute—must be directed to
    these priority tasks. We now have a clear picture of the issues at
    stake. Everyone must make the best possible effort; all our forces
    must be devoted to these tasks.
With this I shall end the political section of the report. As
    far as the international, part is concerned, Comrade Chicherin
    will report on that in detail and will read you the proposal we
    should like to make to the belligerent countries in the name of
    the Congress of Soviets.
I shall deal very briefly with Party tasks. In the course of
    the revolution our Party has been confronted with a most important
    task. It is natural, on the one band, that all the worst elements
    should cling to the ruling party merely because it is the ruling
    party. On the other hand, the working class is exhausted and is
    naturally weak in a country that is in ruins. Nevertheless it is
    only the advanced section of the working class, its vanguard, that
    is capable of leading the country. To accomplish this task in the
    sphere of state organisation we have employed subbotniks as one of
    the means. The slogan we have put forward is this—the first
    who can join our Party are those who have volunteered for the
    front; those who cannot fight must show in their own places that
    they understand what the workers’ party is, they must show
    it by applying the principles of communism in practice. And
    communism, if you take that word in its strict meaning, is
    voluntary unpaid work for the common good that does not depend on
    individual differences, that wipes out all memories of everyday
    prejudices, wipes out stagnation, tradition, differences between
    branches of work, differences in the rate of pay for labour,
    etc. This is one of the greatest guarantees that we are drawing
    the working class and all working people into the work of
    peace-time organisation as well as into war-time activities. The
    further development of communist subbotniks must be a
    school.. Every step must be accompanied by the attraction into the
    Party of working-class elements and the most reliable people from
    other classes. We achieve this by means of re-registration. We are
    not afraid to remove those who are not fully reliable. We also
    achieve this by trusting a Party member who comes to us in a
    difficult time. Those Party members, as today’s Central
    Committee report shows, who came to us in hundreds and thousands
    when Yudenich was a few versts from Petrograd and Denikin was
    north of Orel, when the bourgeoisie were already
    jubilant—those Party members are worthy of our trust. We
    value the extension of the Party on these lines.
After we have carried out the expansion of the Party on these
    lines we must shut the gates, we must be particularly cautious. We
    must say that now the Party is victorious we do not need new Party
    members. We know ’full well that in a disintegrating
    capitalist society a mass of harmful people will try to worm their
    way into the Party. We must create a party that will be a party of
    workers in which there is no place for alien elements, but we must
    also draw the masses into the work, those who are outside the
    Party. How is this to be done? The means to this
    end—workers’ and peasants’ non-party
    conferences. An article on non-party conferences[6] was
    recently published in Pravda. This article, written by Comrade
    Rostopehin, deserves special attention. I do not know any other
    way of solving this problem of profound historical importance. The
    Party cannot throw its doors wide open, because it is absolutely
    inevitable that in the epoch of disintegrating capitalism it will
    gather to itself the worst elements. The Party must be so narrow
    that it draws into its ranks only those elements from other
    classes that it has an opportunity to test with great caution.
But we have several hundred thousand.Party members in a country
    with a population of more than a hundred million. How can such a
    party govern? In the first place there are, and must be, the trade
    unions to assist it, and these have millions of members; the
    second assistant is non-party conferences. At these non-party
    conferences we must be able to approach the non-proletarian
    section, we must overcome prejudice and petty-bourgeois
    vacillation—that is one of our most important, fundamental
    tasks.
We must assess the success of our Party organisations, not only
    by the number of Party members engaged in some kind of work, not
    only by the degree of success in carrying out the re-registration,
    but by non-party workers’ and peasants’ conferences,
    whether they are arranged correctly and often enough, that is, by
    the ability of the organisation to approach those masses that
    cannot at the moment join the Party but which we must draw into
    the work.
If we have beaten the Entente it is probably because we have
    earned the sympathy of the working class, and of the non-party
    masses. If we have succeeded in defeating Kolchak it is probably
    because he was no longer able to draw more forces from the
    reservoir of the working people. We have a reservoir that no other
    government in the world has and which no government in the world
    except the government of the working class can have, because only
    the government of the working class can draw with absolute
    confidence on the most downtrodden and most backward working
    people. We can and must draw our forces from among the non-party
    workers and peasants because they are our true friends. For the
    solution of the bread and fuel problems and for the fight against
    typhus we can draw forces from these masses that were the most
    oppressed, by the capitalists and landowners. And we are assured
    of the support of those masses. We shall continue to draw more and
    more forces from these masses and we may say that in the end we
    shall defeat all our enemies. And we shall work miracles in the
    sphere of peaceful construction (to be developed in proper style
    after Denikin has been defeated) that will be greater than those
    we have worked in the military sphere in the past two years.
3
Concluding Speech On The Political 
      Report Of The Central Committee
      December 2

      I should have declined to reply to the discussion if Comrade
      Sapronov had not egged me on; I want to polemise a little with
      him. There is no doubt that we should listen to what experienced
      local functionaries have to say. All their advice is valuable to
      us. But I ask you, what is there bad in what is written here? I
      was not acquainted with that point. Sapronov gave it to me. It
      says here, “Draft Instructions to Gubernia, Uyezd and
      Volost Committees on Work in the Countryside.”[7] So the
      instructions are addressed to those local functionaries through
      whom the work in the localities is carried on. When agitators,
      commissars, agents or representatives of the Central Committee
      are sent they are undoubtedly always given instructions. Clause
      9 here says: “Obtain from state farms and from communes
      help for the neighbouring peasants, immediate and real
      help.” I assumed that even an agent of the Central
      Committee would have a head on his shoulders. If regulations
      have been approved, how can he demand that they give up a cart,
      a horse or something? On this score we have instructions
      enough—some people say there are too many of them. And an
      agent of the C.C. can make demands only insofar as the
      instructions allow it, and no commune manager would allow a
      cart, a horse or a cow to be given away. But this is a serious
      question, because it often spoils our relations with the
      peasants, and in the Ukraine they may be spoiled a second time,
      if we are unable to put our political line into effect. It is
      not difficult to carry it out, and the peasant will he glad of
      even a little help. It is not enough to adopt an instruction,
      you must be able to carry it out. If Comrade Sapronov is afraid
      that a state farm will be robbed of a cow, a horse or a cart,
      let him share his tremendous experience in this field with us
      and say “Let us give the peasants implements free of
      charge or at low cost”. That I can understand. And in any
      case Clause 9 will not be abolished by that, it will, on the
      contrary, receive confirmation. The relations between the
      communes and state farms and the neighbouring peasants is one of
      the most painful aspects of our entire policy. It will be still
      more serious in the Ukraine and tomorrow it will be the same in
      Siberia. Today we have won over the Siberian peasant
      ideologically by liberating him from Kolchak. But it will not be
      of any duration unless we can so arrange matters that the
      peasant gets real assistance, and it stands to reason that every
      agent working in the countryside must be given the relevant
      instructions. And when an agent makes his report he must be
      asked: “Where and in what way did the state farms help
      time peasant?” Comrade Sapronov’s directives on this
      point were incorrect. It is our basic, unconditional duty to
      make use of the experience of local Party
      functionaries. (Applause.)
4
Draft Resolution On Foreign Policy[8]
The Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic wishes to live
    in peace with all peoples and devote all its efforts to internal
    development so as to put production, transport and government
    affairs in order on the basis of the Soviet system; this has so
    far been prevented by the intervention of the Entente and the
    starvation blockade.
The workers’ and peasants’ government has made
    repeated peace proposals to the Entente powers—the message
    from the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs to the
    American representative, Mr. Poole, on August 5, 1918; to
    President Wilson on October 24, 1918; to all Entente governments
    through representatives of neutral countries on November 3, 1918;
    a message from the Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on
    November 7, 1918; Litvinov’s Note in Stockholm to all
    Entente representatives on December 23, 1918; then there were the
    messages of January 12, January 17 and February 4, 1919, and the
    draft treaty drawn up jointly with Bullitt on March 12, 1919; and
    a message through Nansen on May 7, 1919.
The Seventh Congress of Soviets fully approves these many steps
    taken by the Council of People’s Commissars and the
    People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, once more confirms
    its lasting desire for peace and again proposes to the Entente
    powers, Britain, France, the United States of America, Italy and
    Japan, individually and collectively, to begin immediately
    negotiations on peace; the Congress instructs the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee, the Council of People’s
    Commissars and the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs
    to continue this peace policy systematically (or: to continue this
    peace policy systematically, taking all appropriate measures to
    ensure its success).
5
Speech Summing Up The Debate On Soviet Power In The Ukraine
      December 3

      Comrades, there is little for me to say, although unfortunately
      I shall have to raise objections, not so much to Comrade
      Yakovlev who spoke before me, as to Comrades Bubnov and Drobnis
      who spoke after me. Nevertheless I shall have to make only a
      partial comment.
Insofar as Comrade Rakovsky’s speech is concerned, I must
    say that when he said that state farms must be the basis of our
    communist construction he was wrong. Under no circumstances can we
    organise our affairs in that way. We must accept the fact that we
    should convert only a very small part of the progressive farms
    into state farms, otherwise we shall not effect a bloc with the
    petty peasants—and we need that bloc. When some of the
    comrades said that I recommend a bloc, with the Borotba Party64
    they mistook my meaning. Here I compared the policy that must be
    pursued in respect of the Borotba Party with the policy we had
    pursued in respect of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. We were
    then accused, in the first week after October—at peasant
    congresses, incidentally—of not wanting to use the forces of
    the peasantry once we had seized power. In reply I said that we
    had taken over their programme in its entirety so as to use the
    forces of the peasantry—we want to do that, but we
    don’t want an alliance with
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. Comrade Manuilsky, like Comrades
    Drobnis and Bubnov, was, therefore, making an extremely strange
    mistake in asserting that I recommend a bloc with the Borotba
    Party. My opinion is that we must demonstrate that we need a bloc
    with the Ukrainian peasantry, and in order to achieve that bloc we
    must polemise with the Borotba people in away that differs from
    the present polemics. All those who spoke about the national
    question—Comrades Drobnis and Bubnov and many others spoke
    about it—show by their criticism of the C.C. resolution that
    they are pursuing the very same policy of
    “independence” we reproved the Kiev people
    for. Comrade Manuilsky is making a peculiar mistake in thinking
    that we accused them of independence in the national sense, in the
    sense of Ukrainian self-determination. We reproved them for their
    “independence” in the sense of their not wanting to
    consider Moscow’s views, the views of the Central Committee
    in Moscow. The word was used jokingly and had a completely
    different meaning.
The issue is now the following. Do we need a bloc with the
    Ukrainian peasantry, do we need a policy of the.type we needed at
    the end of 1917 and for many months in 1918? I maintain that we do
    and that for this reason most of the state farms must be handed
    over for actual distribution. We need a struggle against kulak
    farms, we need a struggle against petty-bourgeois prejudices, we
    need a struggle against the guerrilla bands. The Borotba Party
    talk a lot about the national question but they say nothing about
    the guerrillas. We must demand that the Borotba people disband the
    teachers’ union even though it uses the Ukrainian language
    and bears the state seal of the Ukraine—it must be disbanded
    for the sake of those principles of proletarian communist policy
    for which we disbanded our own All-Russia Teachers’ Union;
    we disbanded it because it did not implement the principles of
    proletarian dictatorship but defended the interests and pursued
    the policy of the petty bourgeoisie.

Endnotes
[1]
    The Conference was held in Moscow, and was attended by 45
    delegates with the right to vote. The agenda consisted of the
    following items: (1) Report of the CC.; (2) Report on the
    international situation; (3) The agenda of the Seventh All-Russia
    Congress of Soviets (state organisation); (4) Soviet power in the
    Ukraine; (5) The Party Rules; (6) Work with new Party members; (7)
    Fuel question.
Lenin directed the work of the Conference. He
    made a speech at the opening session, delivered the political
    report of the C.C. of the Party and closed the debate on it. Lenin
    spoke on Soviet power in the Ukraine and closed the discussion on
    this subject. The Conference delegates unanimously approved the
    C.C. political line and organisational work. Chicherin, People's
    Commissar for Foreign Affairs, delivered a detailed report on the
    international situation explaining the foreign policy of the
    Soviet state and the efforts being made for the immediate
    conclusion of peace. Another important question discussed at the
    Conference was state organisation. M. F. Vladimirsky made a report
    on this subject on behalf of the CC., R.C.P.(B, and T. V. Sapronov
    delivered a co-report. Vladimirsky summed up the results in
    organising the Soviet state and submitted concrete proposals for
    amending the Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R. Sapronov, Osinsky and
    their adherents opposed the C.C. line; they rejected one-man
    management and demanded preservation of “ the unlimited
    corporate principle” . This group of opportunists tried to
    impose their views on the Conference, which would have undermined
    centralism and the leading role of the Party in the Soviets. The
    Conference rejected the views of Sapronov and his followers as
    being contrary to the interests of the Party, and approved Lenin's
    principle of democratic centralism in the organisation of
    government bodies and in the interrelations of those bodies.
The Conference adopted a number of decisions
    directed at consolidating the dictatorship of the proletariat and
    at involving working masses in Soviet state development.
The Conference adopted new Party Rules which
    contained a new section on “Candidates” to Party
    Membership" introducing a probationary period for all new members,
    the length of which depended on social category; it was two months
    for factory workers and peasants, and no less than six months for
    other categories. A new section on “Groups in the
    Extra-Party Institutions and Organisations” was added to the
    Party Rules in order to spread Party influence to the extra-Party
    organisations and institutions, conduct them in accordance with
    the Party line and establish Party control over their
    activities. The new Party Rules had a special section on
    “Party Discipline” , which stated that strict
    observance of Party discipline was the prime duty of all Party
    members and all Party organisations.
The Conference approved the “Theses on
    the Employment of New Party Members” which outlined measures
    to raise the educational and ideological level of Communists, give
    them military training, and strengthen Party discipline. The
    Eighth Party Conference was of great significance; it summed up
    the experience gained by the Party in the two-year struggle to
    consolidate the dictatorship of the proletariat and implement the
    decisions of the Eighth Party Congress. The decisions of the
    Seventh All-Russia Congress of Soviets were based on the
    Conference's decisions on state, economic and military
    organisation.
[2]
    Lenin refers to the Seventh All-Russia Congress of Soviets held
    from December 5 to 9, 1919 in Moscow.
[3]
    Lenin refers to Folkets Dagblad Politikem, a newspaper of the
    Swedish Left Social-Democrats, who in 1917 founded the Left
    Social-Democratic Party of Sweden. It was published in Stockholm
    from April 1916, at first every other day, subsequently, daily (up
    to November 1917 it appeared under the name Politiken). In 1918-19
it was edited by Fredrik Strom. In 1921 the Left Social-Democratic Party joined the Communist International and became the Communist Party of Sweden, and the newspaper became its Central Organ.After the Communist Party of Sweden split in October 1929 the newspaper was taken over by the Right wing. Its publication 
ceased in May 1945. 
[4]
    Lenin refers to the article "Finland and the Bolshevists",
    published in The Times No. 42239 on October 24, 1919.
[5]
    This refers to the resolution of the Ninth Council of the
    S.R. Party On the Attitude to the Red Army published in
    the Supplement to Lislok Dyela Naroda No, 2.
[6]
    Lenin refers to N. P. Rostopchin's article Peasants—
    Non-Party
Conferences published in Pravda No. 20 on November 20, 1919.
[7]
    The Draft Instructions to Gubernia, Uyezd and Volost Committees of
    the R.C.P. on Work in the Countryside were drawn up by the
    relevant department of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) and published for
    discussion in Bulletin of the C .C., R.C.P.(B.) on September 20,
    1919; it defined the duties of local Party organisers who were to
    secure help for local peasants from neighbouring state farms and
    farming co-operatives. The draft was adopted with slight
    amendments by the First All-Russia Conference on Party Work in the
    Countryside and finally endorsed by the Eighth All-Russia
    Conference of the R.C.P.(B.).
[8]
    The draft resolution on foreign policy was written by Lenin at the
    session of the Eighth All-Russia Conference of the R.C.P.(B.),
    December 2, 1919. It was adopted by the Conference with slight
    amendments, and afterwards (on December 5) read out by Lenin in
    his report at the Seventh All-Russia Congress of Soviets (see
    p. 231 of this volume), which adopted it unanimously as a peace
    proposal to the countries of the Entente. The resolution of the
    Congress was published in the press on December 6, 1919. The peace
    proposal of the Congress was sent to the Entente 
powers on December 10, 1919. The governments of Britain, France, the U.S.A. and Italy refused to examine it.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech Delivered at the First
  Congress of Agricultural Communes and Agricultural Artels.











Speech Delivered at the First Congress of Agricultural Communes and Agricultural
Artels



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at the First Congress
of
 Agricultural Communes and Agricultural
Artels[1]
December 4, 1919 



Delivered: December 4, 1919
First Published: Pravda Nos. 273 and 274, December 5 and 6, 1919; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 195-204
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License



Comrades, I am very glad to greet your first congress of agricultural communes and agricultural artels on. behalf of the government. Of course, from, all the activities of. the Soviet government you know what tremendous signifi-cance we attach to the communes, artels, and all organisations generally that aim at transforming and at gradually assisting the transformation of small, individual peasant farming into socialised, co-operative, or artel farming. You are aware that the Soviet government long ago allotted the sum of one thousand million rubles to assist efforts of this kind.[2] The Statute on Socialist Agrarian Measures[3] particularly stresses the significance of communes, artels, and all enterprises for the joint cultivation of the land, and the Soviet government is exerting every effort to ensure that this law shall not remain on paper only, but shall really produce the benefits it is intended to produce.
The importance of all enterprises of this kind is tremendous, because if the old, poverty-stricken peasant farming remains unchanged there can be no question of building up a stable socialist society. Only if we succeed in proving to the peasants in practice the advantages of common, collective, co-operative, artel cultivation of the soil, only if we succeed in helping the peasant by means of co-operative or artel farming, will the working class, which wields state power, be really able to convince the peasant that its policy is correct and thus secure the real and lasting following of the millions fulfilling the letter of the law, such assistance will be not only useless but harmful. For the name “agricultural commune” is a great one; it is associated with the conception of communism. It will be a good thing if the communes show in practice that they are indeed seriously working for the improvement of peasant farming; that will undoubtedly enhance the prestige of the Communists and the Communist Party. But it has frequently happened that the communes have only succeeded in provoking a negative attitude among the peasantry, and the word “commune” has even at times become a call to fight communism. And this happened not only when stupid attempts were made to drive the peasants into the communes by force. The absurdity of this was so obvious that the Soviet government long ago forbade it. And I hope that if isolated examples of such coercion are to be met with now, they are very few, and that you will take advantage of the present congress to see to it that the last trace of this outrage is swept from the face of the Soviet Republic, and that the neighbouring peasant population may not be able to point to a single instance in support of the old opinion that membership of a commune is in one way or another associated with coercion.
But even if we eliminate this old shortcoming, completely suppress this outrage, it will still be only a small fraction of what has to be done. For it will still be necessary for the state to help the communes, and we would not be Communists and champions. of socialist economy if we did not give state aid to every kind of collective agricultural enterprise. We must do so because it is in accordance with all our aims, and because we know perfectly well that these co-operatives, artels, and collective organisations are innovations, and if support is not given them by the working class in power they will not take root. In order that they should take root, and in view of the fact that the state is affording them monetary and every other kind of support, we must see to it that they do not provoke the ridicule of the peasants. What we must be most careful about is that the peasants should not say of members of communes, artels and co-operatives that they. are state pensioners, that they differ from the peasants only by the fact that they are receiving privileges. If we are to give land and subsidies for building purposes ou of the thousand-million-ruble fund, any fool will live somewhat better than the ordinary peasant. What is. there communistic here; the peasant will ask, and where is the improvement? What are we to respect them for? If you pick out a few score or a few hundred individuals and give them a thousand million, of course they will work.
Such an attitude on the part of the peasants is most to be feared, and .1 should like to draw the attention of the comrades assembled at the congress to this. The problem must be solved practically, so as to enable us to say that we have not only averted this danger, but have also found means whereby the peasant will not be led to think in this way, but will, on the contrary, find in every commune and artel something which the state is assisting, will find in them new methods of farming which show their advantages over the old methods not by books and speeches (that is not worth much) but in practice. That is why the problem is so difficult to solve, and that is why it is hard for us, who have only dry figures before us, to judge whether we have proved in practice that every commune and every artel is really superior to every enterprise of the old system and that the workers’ government is here helping the peasant.
I think that for the practical solution of this problem, it would be very desirable for you, who have a practical acquaintance with a number of neighbouring communes, artels and co-operatives, to work out real, practical methods for the verification of the implementation of the law demanding that the agricultural communes give assistance to the surrounding population, the way the transition to socialist farming is being put into effect and what concrete forms it is taking in each commune, artel and co-operative farm, how it is actually being put into practice, how many co-operatives and communes are in fact putting it into practice, and how many are only preparing to do so, how many cases have been observed when the communes have given assistance, and what character this assistance bears philanthropic or socialist.
If out of the aid given them by the state the communes and artels set aside a portion for the peasants, that will only give the peasants grounds for believing that they are merely being helped by kind-hearted people, but will not by any means be proof of transition to a socialist system. The peasants have for ages been accustomed to regard such “kind-hearted people” with suspicion. We must know how to keep a check on the way this new social order has manifested itself, by what methods it is being proved to the peasants that co-operative, artel cultivation of the soil is better than individual peasant farming, and that it is better not because of state aid. We must be able to show the peasants the practical realisation of this new order even without state aid.
Unfortunately, I shall not be able to stay till the end of your congress and I shall therefore be unable to take part in elaborating these methods of control. But I am certain that with the aid of the comrades in charge of our Commissariat of Agriculture you will succeed in finding these methods. I have read with great satisfaction an article by the People’s Commissar of Agriculture, Comrade Sereda, in which he stresses that the communes and co-operatives must not isolate themselves from the surrounding peasant population but must endeavour to improve the latter’s farms. A commune must be organised so that it will serve as a model, and the neighbouring peasants will be attracted to it. We must be able to set them a practical example of how to assist people who are running their farms under the difficult conditions of a shortage of goods and general economic chaos. In order to define the practical methods of effecting this, instructions must be drawn up in the greatest detail and should enumerate all forms of assistance that can be given to neighbouring peasants; the instructions should ask each commune to give an account of what it has done to help the peasants, and indicate methods whereby each of the existing two thousand communes and nearly four thousand artels may become a nucleus capable of strengthening the peasants’ conviction that collective farming, as a form of transition to socialism, Is something of benefit to them, and not a whim or the ravings of a disordered mind.
I have already said that the law requires the communes to render assistance to the surrounding peasant population. We could not express ourselves otherwise in the law, or give any practical instructions in it. It was our business to establish the general principles, and to count on politically-conscious comrades in the localities scrupulously applying the law and being able to find a thousand ways of applying it practically in the concrete economic conditions of each given locality. But, of course, every law can be evaded, even under pretence, of observing it. And so the law on assisting the peasants, if it is not scrupulously applied, may become a mere game, and lead to results quite contrary to those intended.
The communes must develop in such a way that peasant farming conditions will begin to change by contact with them and by the economic help they give, so that every commune, artel, and co-operative will be able to make the beginnings of an improvement in these conditions and put them into effect, thereby proving to the peasants in practice that this change can be only of benefit to them.
Naturally, you may think we shall be told that in order to improve farming we need conditions that differ from the present economic chaos caused by four years of imperialist war and the two years of civil war forced on us by the imperialists. With such conditions as now exist in our country, how can one think of any widespread improvement in farming—God grant that we may carry on somehow and not die of starvation!
It will be only natural for doubts of this kind to be expressed. But if I had to reply to such objections, I would say this: assume that owing to the disorganisation of economic life, to economic chaos, goods shortage, poor transport and the destruction of cattle and implements, an extensive improvement of farming cannot be effected. But there is no doubt that a certain, not extensive, improvement is possible in a number of individual cases. But let us assume that even this cannot be done. Does that mean that the communes cannot produce changes in the life of the neighbouring peasants and cannot prove to the peasants that collective agricultural enterprises are not an artificial, hothouse growth, but a new form of assistance to the working peasants on the part of the workers’ government, and an aid to the working peasants in their struggle against the kulaks? I am convinced that even if the matter is regarded in this way, even if we grant the impossibility of effecting improvements under the present conditions of economic chaos, a very great deal may nevertheless be accomplished if there are conscientious Communists in the communes and artels. To bear this out, I would refer to what in our cities has been called subbotniks. This is the name given to the several hours’ unpaid voluntary work done by city workers over and above the usual working day and devoted to some public need. The subbotniks were initiated in Moscow by the workers of the Moscow-Kazan Railway. One of the appeals of the Soviet government pointed out that the Red Army men at the front are making unprecedented sacrifices, and that, in spite of all the hardships they are obliged to undergo, they are gaining unprecedented victories over our enemies, and at the same time stated that we can clinch our victories only if such heroism and such self-sacrifice are displayed not only at the front, but also in the rear. The Moscow workers responded to this appeal by organising subbotniks. There can be no doubt that the workers of Moscow are experiencing greater privation and want than the peasants. If you were to acquaint yourselves with their conditions of life and give some thought to the fact that in spite of these incredibly hard conditions they were able to organise subbotniks, you would agree that no reference to arduous conditions can serve as an excuse for not doing what can be done under any conditions by applying the method of the Moscow workers. Nothing helped so much to enhance the prestige of the Communist Party in the towns, to increase the respect of non-party workers for the Communists, as these subbotniks when they ceased to be isolated instances and when non-party workers saw in practice that the members of the governing Communist Party have obligations and duties, and that the Communists admit new members to the Party not in order that they may enjoy the advantages connected with the position of a governing party, but that they may set an example of real communist labour, i.e., labour performed gratis. Communism is the highest stage in the development of socialism, when people work because they realise the necessity of working for the common good. We know that we cannot establish a socialist order now—God grant that it may be established in our country in our children’s time, or perhaps in our grandchildren’s time. But we say that the members of the governing Communist Party assume the greater burden of the difficulties in the fight against capitalism, mobilise the best Communists for the front, and demand of such as cannot be used for this purpose that they take part in subbotniks.
By organising these subbotniks, which have become widespread in every large industrial city, participation in which the Party now demands from every one of its members, punishing non-fulfilment even by expulsion from the Party̬by applying this method in the communes, artels, and co-operatives, you can, and must, even under the very worst conditions, see to it that the peasant regards every commune, artel, and co-operative as an association which is distinguished not by the fact that it receives state subsidies, but by the fact that within it are gathered some of the best working-class people who not only preach socialism for others, but are themselves capable of realising it, who are capable of showing that even under the worst conditions they can conduct their farms on communist lines and help the surrounding peasant population in every possible way. On this question there can be no such excuses as the goods shortage, or absence of seed, or loss of cattle. This will be a test which, at all events, will enable us to say definitely to what extent the difficult task we have taken on ourselves has been carried out in practice.
I am certain that this general meeting of representatives of communes, co-operatives and artels will discuss this and will realise that the application of this method will really serve as a powerful instrument for the consolidation of the communes and co-operatives, and will achieve such practical results that nowhere in Russia will there be a single case of hostility towards the communes, artels, and co-operatives on the part of the peasants. But that is not enough. What is required is that the peasants should show a sympathetic attitude towards them. For our part, we representatives of the Soviet government will do everything in our power to help to bring this about and to see to it that state assistance from the thousand-million-ruble fund, or from other sources, shall be forthcoming only in cases when the labour communes or artels have actually established closer contacts with the life of their peasant neighbours. Unless these conditions are fulfilled, we consider any assistance given to the artels and the co-operatives not only useless, but definitely harmful. Assistance given by the communes to the neighbouring peasants must not be regarded as assistance which is merely given out of superfluity; this assistance must be socialist assistance, i. e., it must enable the peasants to replace their isolated, individual farming by co-operative farming. And this can be done only by the subbotnik method of which I have here spoken.
If you learn from the experience of the city workers, who, although living in conditions immeasurably worse than those of the peasants, initiated the movement for subbotniks, I am certain that, with your general and unanimous support, we shall bring about a situation when each of the several thousand existing communes and artels will become a genuine nursery for communist ideas and views among the peasants, a practical example showing them that, although it is still a small and feeble growth, it is nevertheless not an artificial, hothouse growth, but a true growth of the new socialist system. Only then shall we gain a lasting victory over the old ignorance, impoverishment and want, and only then will the difficulties we meet in our future course hold out no terrors for us.

Endnotes
[1] The First Congress of Agricultural Communes and Agricultural Artels was convened by the People's Commissariat of Agriculture and was held December 3-10, 1919 in Moscow. The Congress was attended by 140 delegates, of whom 93 were Communists. Lenin spoke on the second day of the Congress. The Congress adopted the Rules of the All-Russia Association of Agricultural Producers' Collectives (Communes and Artels), which were later endorsed by the People's Commissariat of Agriculture. The Rules stated that the main objects of the Association were the union of all agricultural collectives in a single producers' association, propaganda of the idea of collective farming and practical help for the neighbouring peasantry, especially the poor peasants and the families of Red Army men.


[2] The thousand-million-ruble fund was established by a decree of the Council of People's Commissars dated November 2, 1918 for the purpose of improving and developing agriculture and for its speediest reconstruction on socialist lines". Grants and loans from this fund were given to farming communes, producers' co-operatives and village societies and groups of peasants, provided they went over to collective farming. The People's Commissars of Agriculture and of Finance elaborated detailed rules for granting loans to develop agriculture (see Izvestia No. 42, February 23, 1919). 


[3] The Statute on Socialist Land Settlement and the Measures for the Transition to Socialist Farming was adopted by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee in February 1919. It tool; for its basis the decisions of the First All-Russia Congress of Land Departments, Poor Peasants' Committees and Communes, held in December 1918. Lenin directly participated in drafting and editing the Statute. It outlined a number of measures for the reconstruction of agriculture on a socialist basis, for raising agricultural productivity and extending the areas under crops. The Statute reads, "In order to put an end to all exploitation of man by man, to reconstruct agriculture on a socialist basis, to apply all the achievements of science and technology, to educate the working masses in the spirit of socialism and to unite the proletariat and poor peasants in their struggle against capital, it is necessary to go over from individual to collective forms of land tenure. Large state farms and communes, collective tilling and other types of collective work are the best ways of attaining this purpose, therefore all forms of individual land tenure should be regarded as transitory and outliving themselves" (Izvestia No. 34, February 14, 1919).


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Seventh All-Russia Congress of
  Soviets











Seventh All-Russia Congress
Of Soviets  December 5-9 1919



V. I. Lenin
Seventh All-Russia Congress
Of Soviets[1]
December 5-9, 1919


Written & Delivered: December 5-9, 1919
First Published: Published in Pravda Nos. 275, 276, 277, December 7, 9. 10, 1919; Published according to Seventh All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’, Red Army and Cossack Deputies. Verbatim Report, Moscow, 1920, verified with the shorthand notes 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 205-252
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


1
Reportof The All-Russia Central Executive Committee And The Council Of Peoples Commissars
December 5
(Applause. Delegates greet Lenin with a
    standing ovation.)

      Comrades, in accordance with a decision of the Presidium the
      political report I am making is to he the joint report of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee and the Council of
      People’s Commissars. I trust that you are not expecting me
      to enumerate the laws and administrative measures introduced by
      us during the year under review. No doubt the newspapers have
      made you familiar with them. Furthermore, small booklets
      published by most of our commissariats and describing their main
      activities during the period under review are being distributed
      to all Congress delegates. I should like to draw your attention
      to a number of summarised results, which in my opinion may be
      deduced from our experience and which may serve as useful
      instructions and material for the future work of all comrade
      delegates in the localities.
When speaking of the political results and lessons of our
    activities, the Soviet Republic’s international position
    naturally takes first place. Both prior to October and during the
    October Revolution, we always said that we regard ourselves and
    can only regard ourselves as one of the contingents of the
    international proletarian army, a contingent which came
    to the fore, not because of its level of development and
    preparedness, but because of Russia’s exceptional
    conditions; we always said that the victory of the socialist
    revolution, therefore, can only be regarded as final when it
    becomes the victory of the proletariat in at least several
    advanced countries. It was in this respect that we experienced the
    greatest difficulties.
Our banking on the world revolution, if you can call it that,
    has on the whole been fully justified. But from the point of view
    of the speed of its development we have endured an exceptionally
    difficult period; we have seen for ourselves that the
    revolution’s development in more advanced countries has
    proved to be considerably slower, considerably more difficult,
    considerably more complicated. This should not surprise us for it
    was naturally easier for a country such as Russia to start a
    socialist revolution than it is for the advanced countries. But,
    in any case, this slower, more complicated, more zigzag
    development of the socialist revolution in Western Europe has
    burdened us with incredible difficulties. The question that
    primarily comes to mind is: how was it possible for such a miracle
    to have occurred, for Soviet power to have held out for two years
    in a backward, mined and war-weary country, in the face of the
    stubborn struggle waged against it first by German imperialism,
    which at that time was considered omnipotent, and then by Entente
    imperialism, which a year ago settled accounts with Germany, had
    no rivals and lorded it over all the countries on earth? From the
    point of view of a simple calculation of the forces involved, from
    the point of view of a military assessment of these forces, it
    really is a miracle, because the Entente was and continues to be
    immeasurably stronger than we are. Nevertheless, the year under
    review is noteworthy most of all for our having won a tremendous
    victory, so great a victory that I think we may say without
    exaggeration that our main difficulties are already behind
    us. No matter how great the dangers and difficulties in store
    for us, the main ones are evidently behind us. We must understand
    the reasons for this, and, what is most important, must correctly
    determine our future policy, since the future will almost
    certainly bring many further attempts by the Entente at
    intervention, and possibly a rebirth of the previous predatory
    alliance between international and Russian capitalists to restore
    the power of the landowners and capitalists, to overthrow Soviet
    rule in Russia, in short, an alliance pursuing the old aim of
    extinguishing the centre of the world socialist
    conflagration—the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet
    Republic.
Examining the history of the Entente intervention and its
    political lesson for us from this point of view, I would say that
    it could be divided into three main stages, each of which has
    successively given us full and lasting victory.
The first stage, naturally the most convenient and easiest for
    the Entente countries, involved their attempt to settle matters
    with Soviet Russia by using their own troops. Of course, after the
    Entente countries had defeated Germany they had armies of millions
    of men who had not yet openly declared for peace and who did not
    immediately recover from the fright given them by the bogey of
    German imperialism, which had been used to scare them in all the
    Western countries. At that time, of course, from the military
    point of view, and from the point of view of foreign policy, it
    would have been easy for the Entente countries to take a tenth
    part of their armies and dispatch them to Russia. Note that they
    completely dominated at sea, that they had complete naval
    supremacy. Troop transportation and supplies were always
    completely under their control. Had the Entente countries, who
    hated us as only the bourgeoisie can hate the socialist
    revolution, then been able to fling even a tenth part of their
    armies against us with any success, there cannot be the
    slightest doubt that Soviet Russia would have been doomed and
    would have met the same fate as Hungary.
Why did the Entente countries fail to achieve this? They landed
    troops in Murniansk. The drive into Siberia was undertaken with
    the aid of Entente troops, and Japanese troops continue to hold a
    distant slice of Eastern Siberia, while there were military units,
    even if not big ones, from all the Entente states in all parts of
    Western Siberia. Then French troops were landed in the South of
    Russia. That was the first stage of international intervention in
    our affairs, the first attempt, so to speak, to crush the Soviets
    with troops from the Entente’s own countries, i.e., with the
    aid of workers and peasants of the more advanced countries, who
    were splendidly equipped; generally speaking the Entente countries
    lacked nothing in the way of technical and material means for the
    campaign. There were no obstacles confronting them. How, then, are
    we to explain the failure of that attempt? It ended in the Entente
    countries having to withdraw their troops, because they proved
    incapable of waging a struggle against revolutionary Soviet
    Russia. That, comrades, has always been our main and principal
    argument. From the very outset of the revolution we have said that
    we constitute a party of the international proletariat, and that,
    however great the difficulties facing the revolution, there would
    come a time when, at the most decisive moment, the sympathy, the
    solidarity of the workers oppressed by international imperialism
    would make itself felt. For this we were accused of being
    utopians. But experience has shown that while we cannot always and
    in all cases rely on action by the proletariat, at any rate we may
    say that during these two years of the world’s history we
    have been proved correct a thousand times. The attempt by the
    British and French to crush Soviet Russia with their own troops,
    an attempt that promised them certain and very easy success in a
    minimum of time, ended in failure: the British troops have left
    Archangel, and the French troops that had landed in the South have
    all been sent home. Despite the blockade, despite the ring drawn
    around us, news does reach us from Western Europe, we do get
    British and French newspapers, even if only sporadically, from
    which we learn that letters sent by British soldiers from
    Archangel Region have somehow reached Britain and been published
    there. We know that the name of the Frenchwoman, Comrade Joanne
    Labourbe, who engaged in communist activity among French soldiers
    and workers and was shot in Odessa, became known to the entire
    French proletariat and became a battle-cry, a name around which
    all French workers united for action against international
    imperialism despite the apparently insurmountable factional trends
    of syndicalism. The words of Comrade Hadek, who fortunately, as
    today’s reports state, has been liberated by Germany and
    whom we shall perhaps see soon, that the soil of Russia, aflame
    with the fire of revolution, would prove inaccessible to the
    Entente troops—these words, which seemed to be just a
    writer’s flight of fancy, were actually realised. Despite
    all our backwardness, despite all the burden of our struggle, the
    troops of Britain and France proved incapable of fighting us on
    our own soil. The result was a victory for us. The first time that
    they tried to send massive military forces against us—and
    without them victory is impossible—the only result was that,
    thanks to their correct class instinct, the French and British
    soldiers brought home from Russia the very ulcer of Bolshevism
    that the German imperialists were fighting when they expelled our
    envoys from Berlin.[2] They thought they would protect
    themselves in this way against the ulcer of Bolshevism, which now
    spreads over the whole of Germany in the shape of a strengthened
    labour movement. The victory we won in compelling the evacuation
    of the British and French troops was the greatest of our victories
    over the Entente countries. We deprived them of their
    soldiers. Our response to the unlimited military and technical
    superiority of the Entente countries was to deprive them of it
    through the solidarity of the working people against the
    imperialist governments.
This revealed how superficial and uncertain it is to judge
    these so-called democratic countries by accepted criteria. Their
    parliaments have stable bourgeois majorities. This they call
    “democracy”. Capital dominates and weighs down
    everything and they still resort to military censorship. And they
    call that “democracy”. Among the millions of copies of
    their newspapers and magazines you would be hard put to find any
    but an insignificant few that contain even a hint of anything
    favourable about the Bolsheviks. That is why they say: “We
    are protected against the Bolsheviks, there is order in our
    countries”, and they call it ‘democracy”. How
    could it happen that a small section of British soldiers and
    French sailors were able to compel the withdrawal of the Entente
    troops from Russia? There is something wrong here. It means that
    even in Britain, France and America the mass of the people are for
    us; it means that all these external features, as socialists who
    refuse to betray socialism have always asserted, are a deception;
    it means that the bourgeois parliamentary system, bourgeois
    democracy, bourgeois freedom of the press are merely freedom for
    the capitalists, freedom to bribe public opinion, to exert
    pressure on it by all the power of money. That is what socialists
    always said until the imperialist war scattered them to their
    national camps and turned each national group of socialists into
    lackeys of their own bourgeoisie. That was said by socialists
    before the war, that was always said by the internationalists and
    Bolsheviks during the war—and it all proved to be absolutely
    correct. All the external features, all the window-dressings, are
    a fraud; and this is becoming increasingly obvious to the
    people. They all shout about democracy, but in no parliament in
    the world did they dare to say that they were declaring war on
    Soviet Russia. That is why we read in the numerous French, British
    and American publications now available the proposal to
    “place the heads of state in the dock for having violated
    the Constitution, for waging war on Russia without declaring
    war”. When and where was it sanctioned, what article of the
    Constitution, what parliament sanctioned it? Where did they gather
    their parliamentary representatives together, even after taking
    the precaution to imprison all Bolsheviks and near-Bolsheviks, to
    use the expression of the French press? Even under those
    conditions they did not dare to state in their parliaments that
    they were fighting Russia. That was why the splendidly armed,
    previously undefeated troops of Britain and France were unable to
    defeat us and departed from

    Archangel Region in the North, and from the South.
That was our first and chief victory, because it was not only a
    military victory, it was not really a military victory at
    all—it was actually a victory of that international
    solidarity of the working people for which we began the whole
    revolution, and which we pointed to and said that, however
    numerous the trials we would have to undergo, all these sacrifices
    would be repaid a hundredfold by the development of the world
    revolution, which is inevitable. It was apparent from the fact
    that in the sphere where the grossest material factors play the
    greatest part, namely, in the military sphere, we defeated the
    Entente countries by depriving them of the workers and peasants in
    soldiers’ uniforms.
The first victory was followed by the second period of Entente
    intervention in our affairs. Each nation is headed by a group of
    politicians who possess wonderful experience, and that is why,
    after losing this stake, they placed another, taking advantage of
    their dominant position in the world. There is not a single
    country, not a single bit of the earth’s surface, which is
    not in fact totally dominated by British, French and American
    finance capital. That was the basis for the new attempt they made,
    namely, to compel the small countries surrounding Russia, many of
    which had been liberated and had been able to declare themselves
    independent only during the war—Poland, Estonia, Finland,
    Georgia, the Ukraine, etc.—to compel these small states to
    go to war against Russia on British, French and American
    money.
You may remember, comrades, that our newspapers reported a
    speech by Churchill, the well-known British Cabinet Minister, in
    which he said that 14 states would attack Russia and that
    September would see the fall of Petrograd, and December that of
    Moscow. I heard that Churchill then disclaimed this report, but it
    was taken from the Swedish Folkets Dagblad-Politiken of
    August 25. But even if this source proved unreliable we know full
    well that Churchill and the British imperialists acted precisely
    in this way. We are perfectly well aware that everything was done
    to exert pressure on Finland, Estonia and other small countries,
    in order to persuade them to wage war on Soviet Russia. I happened
    to read a leading article in The Times, the most
    influential bourgeois newspaper in Britain, a leader written when
    Yudenich’s troops, obviously supplied, equipped and conveyed
    on board Entente transports, were a few versts from
    Petrograd, and Detskoye Solo had been taken. The article was a
    veritable onslaught, in which the maximum pressure was
    exerted—military, diplomatic and historical. British capital
    flung itself on Finland and faced her with an ultimatum: The eyes
    of the whole world are on Finland, said the British capitalists,
    the entire fate of Finland depends on whether she understands her
    role, whether she will help to crush the filthy, dirty, bloody
    wave of Bolshevism and liberate Russia. And in return for this
    “great and moral” work, for this ‘noble,
    civilised” work, Finland was promised so many million
    pounds, such-and-such a piece of territory, and such-and-such
    benefits. And what was the result? There was a time when
    Yudenich’s troops were a few versts away from
    Petrograd, when Denikin stood to the north of Orel, when the
    slightest assistance to them would have quickly settled the fate
    of Petrograd to the advantage of our enemies, in a minimum of time
    and at negligible cost. 

    

      The entire pressure of the Entente
      countries was brought to hear on Finland, a country that is up to
      its neck ill debt to them. And not only in debt: Finland cannot
      carry on for one month without the aid of these countries. But how
      did the “miracle” of our having won the battle against
    such an enemy happen? And win it we did. Finland did not enter the
    war, Yudenich was defeated, so was Denikin, and that at a time
    when joint action by them would most surely, most swiftly have
    settled the whole struggle to the advantage of international
    capitalism. We won the battle with international imperialism in
    this most serious and desperate trial of strength. But how did we
    do it? How could such a ‘miracle” have taken place? It
    took place because the Entente backed the same card as all
    capitalist states, which operate wholly and solely by deception
    and pressure; that was why everything they did aroused such
    resistance that the result was to our advantage. We were very
    poorly armed, worn out, and we said to the Finnish workers, whom
    the Finnish bourgeoisie had crushed, “You must not fight
    against us.” The Entente countries appeared strong in their
    armaments, with all their outward might, with the food they were
    in a position to supply to these countries, and demanded that they
    fight against us. We won this battle. We won because the Entente
    countries had no troops of their own to fling against us, they had
    to resort to the forces of the small nations, but here, not only
    the workers and peasants, but even the considerable section of
    that very bourgeoisie that had crushed the working class did not
    in the end go against us.
When the Entente imperialists spoke of democracy and
    independence, these nations had the impudence from the Entente
    viewpoint, and foolishness from our viewpoint, to take these
    promises seriously and to understand independence as really
    implying independence, and not a means of enriching the British
    and French capitalists, They thought that democracy meant living
    as free men, and not that all American multimillionaires would be
    able to plunder their country, or that every tinpot aristocrat of
    an officer should be able to behave like a swine and turn into a
    brazen black-marketeer prepared, for the sake of a few hundred per
    cent profit, to do the filthiest of jobs. That was how we won! The
    Entente encountered opposition to its pressure on these small
    countries, on each of these 14 countries. The Finnish bourgeoisie
    who employed White Terror to crush tens of thousands of Finnish
    workers know that this will not he forgotten, and that the German
    bayonets that made it possible no longer exist these Finnish
    bourgeois hate the Bolsheviks as intensely as an exploiter would
    hate the workers who kicked him out. Nevertheless the Finnish
    bourgeoisie said to themselves, “If we follow the
    instructions of the Entente, that means we shall undoubtedly lose
    all hope of independence.” And this independence was given
    to them by the Bolsheviks in November 1917, when Finland had a
    bourgeois government. The attitude of wide sections of the Finnish
    bourgeoisie, therefore, proved to be one of vacillation. We won
    the battle with the Entente countries because they counted on the
    small nations and at the same time repelled them.
This experience confirms, on an enormous, global scale, what we
    have always said. There are two forces on earth that can decide
    the destiny of mankind. One force is international capitalism, and
    should it be victorious it will display this force in countless
    atrocities as may be seen from the history of every small
    nation’s development. The other force is the international
    proletariat that is fighting for the socialist revolution through
    the dictatorship of the proletariat, which it calls workers’
    democracy. Neither the vacillating elements here in Russia, nor
    the bourgeoisie of the small countries believed us; they called us
    utopians or bandits or even worse, for there is no stupid and
    monstrous accusation that they will not fling at us. But when they
    faced up squarely to the issue of either going with the Entente
    countries and helping thent to crush the Bolsheviks, or of helping
    the Bolsheviks by neutrality, we proved to have won the battle and
    to have got that neutrality. We had no treaties, whereas Britain,
    France and America had all sorts of promissory notes, all sorts of
    treaties; nevertheless the small nations did as we wanted them to;
    they did so not because the Polish, Finnish, Lithuanian or Latvian
    bourgeoisie derived satisfaction from conducting their policy in a
    way that suited the Bolsheviks—that, of course, is
    nonsense—but because our definition of the historical forces
    involved was correct, namely, that either brute capital would be
    victorious, and then, even if it were in the most democratic
    republic, it would crush all the small nations of the
    world—or the dictatorship of the proletariat would be
    victorious, which is the sole hope of all working people and of
    the small, downtrodden and weak nations. It turned out that we
    were right not only in theory, but also in practical world
    politics. When this battle for the troops of Finland and Estonia
    took place we won it, although they could have crushed us with
    insignificant forces. We won the battle despite the Entente
    countries having thrown the enormous weight of their financial
    pressure, their military might, and their food supplies into the
    fray in order to compel Finland to take action.
That, comrades, was the second stage of international
    intervention, our second historic victory. First, we won the
    workers and peasants away from Britain, France and America. These
    troops could not fight against us. Secondly, we won away from them
    these small countries, all of which are against us, and in which
    not Soviet, but bourgeois rule dominates. They displayed friendly
    neutrality towards us and acted contrary to the desires of that
    mighty world force, the Entente, for it was a beast that wanted to
    crush them.
We witness here on a world scale the same thing that happened
    to the Siberian peasants, who believed in the Constituent Assembly
    and helped the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to join
    forces with Kolchak and to strike at us. When they learned to
    their own cost that Kolchak represented the dictatorship of the
    very worst exploiters, a plunderous dictatorship of landowners and
    capitalists which was worse than that of the tsar, they organised
    the tremendous number of revolts in Siberia about which comrades
    have

      given us reliable information, and which now guarantee the
      complete return to us of Siberia, this time politically
      conscious. What happened to the Siberian peasant, with all his
      backwardness and political ignorance, has now happened on a
      broader scale, on a world scale, to all the small nations. They
      hated the Bolsheviks; some of them had suppressed the Bolsheviks
      with a bloody hand, with furious White Terror, but when they saw
      their “liberators”, the British officers, they
      understood the meaning of British and American
      “democracy”. When representatives of the British and
      American bourgeoisie appeared in Finland and Estonia, the acts
      of suppression they began were more brazen than those of the
      Russian imperialists had been, because the Russian imperialists
      had belonged to an older period and did not know how to suppress
      properly, whereas these people do know, and go about it
      thoroughly.
That is why this victory at the second stage is a far more
    lasting one than is apparent at the moment. I am not exaggerating
    at all, and consider exaggerations to be extremely dangerous. I
    have not the slightest doubt that further attempts will be made by
    the Entente to set against us now one, now another of the small
    states that are our neighbours. Such attempts will occur because
    the small states are wholly de pendent on the Entente, because all
    this talk about freedom, independence and democracy is sheer
    hypocrisy, and the Entente may compel them once again to raise
    their hand against us. But if this attempt was foiled at such a
    convenient moment when it was so easy to wage a struggle against
    us, we may, I think, say definitely that in this respect the main
    difficulty is undoubtedly behind us. We are entitled to say this,
    and to say it without the slightest exaggeration, fully conscious
    that the Entente countries possess a tremendous advantage in
    strength. We have won a lasting victory. Attempts will be made
    against us, but we shall defeat them with greater ease, because
    the small states, despite their bourgeois system, have become
    convinced by experience, not theory—these gentlemen are
    theory-proof—that the Entente is a more brazen and predatory
    brute than the one they have in their minds when they think of the
    Bolsheviks, the bogey used to scare children and cultured
    philistines all over Europe.
But our victories were not limited to this. In the first place
    we won over to our side the workers and peasants of the Entente
    countries; secondly, we gained the neutrality of the small nations
    under the Entente’s domination and, thirdly, we began to win
    over, within the Entente countries, the petty bourgeoisie and
    educated townsfolk who had been completely opposed to us. To prove
    this I will quote the newspaper I’Humanité of
    October 26 which I have here. This newspaper has always belonged
    to the Second International, was rabidly chauvinistic during the
    war, adhered to the viewpoint of socialists similar to our
    Mensheviks and Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, and still plays
    the role of a conciliator; it now announces that it has become
    convinced of a change in mood among the workers. The paper did not
    see this in Odessa but on the streets and at meetings in Paris,
    when the workers stopped everyone who dared say a word against
    Bolshevik Russia. As politicians who have learned a fair amount
    during the course of several revolutions, as persons who
    understand what sort of force the people are, they dare not say a
    word in favour of intervention, and are all speaking against
    it. Moreover, it is not only the socialists who say this (they
    call themselves socialists, but for a long time we have been aware
    what sort of socialists they are); the same issue of
    l’Humanité of October 26, which I quoted,
    contains a statement by a large number of French intellectuals,
    representative of French public opinion. The signatories to this
    statement are headed by Anatolo France and include Ferdinand
    Buisson; altogether I counted the names of 71 bourgeois
    intellectuals famed throughout France, who state that they are
    against intervention in Russia’s affairs, because the
    blockade of Russia, the attempt to starve her out from which
    children and the aged are perishing, cannot be tolerated it is
    incompatible with culture and civilisation. The well-known French
    historian Aulard, who supports the bourgeois point of view in
    full, writes in his letter, “As a Frenchman I am an enemy of
    the Bolsheviks, as a Frenchman I support democracy, it is
    ridiculous to suspect me of the contrary, but when I read that
    France has invited Germany to participate in the blockade of
    Russia, when I read that France has approached Germany with this
    proposal—then I feel myself blushing with shame.” It
    may he that this is just an expression of an intellectual’s
    feelings but we are justified in saying that this is our third
    victory, a victory over imperialist France within the country
    itself. Such is the implication of this statement, feeble and
    pathetic as it is, the statement of intellectuals whose bark, as
    we know. from hundreds of examples, is far worse than their bite,
    but who serve as a good barometer, an indicator of the trend
    developing amongst the petty bourgeoisie, of the way in which
    public opinion is reacting, permeated as it is with bourgeois
    sentiment. If we have achieved such results within France herself,
    where all the bourgeois papers write about us only in the most
    lying terms, then we say to ourselves: it looks as if a second
    Dreyfus case[3] is beginning in France,. only on a
    much larger scale. At that time the bourgeois intellectuals fought
    against clerical and military reactionaries, while the working
    class could not consider it their business, as the objective
    conditions were absent, the deep revolutionary feeling of today
    did not then exist. And now? If, after the recent electoral
    victory of the most rabid reactionaries and in the face of a
    regime hostile to the Bolsheviks, the French bourgeois
    intellectuals say that they are ashamed of the alliance between
    reactionary France and reactionary Germany for the purpose of
    starving out the workers and peasants of Russia, then we can say
    to ourselves that this is the third and greatest of our
    victories. And I should like to see how, with this situation
    within the country, Clemenceau, Lloyd George and Wilson will carry
    out the plan of fresh attacks on Russia they dream of. Just try
    it, gentlemen! (Applause.)
Comrades, I repeat that it would be a great mistake to jump to
    hasty conclusions because of all this. There can be no doubt that
    the imperialists will resume their attempts, but we are absolutely
    confident that these attempts, no matter by what powerful forces
    they may be undertaken, will end in failure. We can say that the
    Civil War which we conducted with such tremendous sacrifices has
    ended in victory. It has been victorious, not only on a Russian
    scale, but on a world-historical scale. Every argument I have
    presented to you has been based on the results of the military
    campaign. That is why, I repeat, new attempts are doomed to
    failure because the imperialists have become much weaker and we
    have become much stronger after our victory over Kolchak, over
    Yudenich, and when there are signs that the victory over Denikin,
    now in its early stages, is imminent. Did not Kolchak have the aid
    of the all-powerful Entente? Did not the peasants of the Urals and
    Siberia, who returned the smallest number of Bolsheviks to the
    Constituent Assembly, solidly support the Constituent Assembly
    front, which at that time was the front of the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries? Were not they the best human material
    against the Communists? Is it not a fact that Siberia was a
    country with no landed estates and where we were not immediately
    able to assist the mass of peasants in the same way as we were
    able to help all other Russian peasants? What did Kolchak lack to
    defeat us? He lacked what all imperialists lack. He remained an
    exploiter and had to act in the backwash of a world war, in
    circumstances in which he could only babble about democracy and
    freedom, but which made possible one of two
    dictatorships—either the dictatorship of the exploiters
    which frenziedly defends their privileges and insists on payment
    of interest on the bills, whereby they wish to squeeze millions
    out of all peoples, or the dictatorship of the workers which
    fights the power of the capitalists and wishes to establish firmly
    the power of the working people. It was only because of this that
    Kolchak came to grief. It was in this way—not by voting,
    which is, of course, in certain circumstances not a bad
    way—that the Siberian and Ural peasants actually determined
    their destiny. In the summer of 1918 they were dissatisfied with
    the Bolsheviks. They saw that the Bolsheviks forced them to sell
    their surplus grain at a non-speculative price and so they turned
    to Kolchak. Now the peasant has seen, compared and arrived at a
    different conclusion. Despite all he was taught in the past, he
    has understood, because he has learned from his own experience
    what many Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks do not want to
    understand from theory (applause)—that there must
    be one of two dictatorships, that he must choose either the
    dictatorship of the workers—and this means to assist all
    working people to throw off the yoke of the exploiters—or
    the dictatorship of the exploiters. We have won the peasants to
    our side, we have proved in practice through the most bitter
    experience, through unprecedented difficulties that we, as
    representatives of the working class, can give the peasants better
    and more successful leadership than any other party. Other parties
    like to accuse us of carrying on a struggle against the peasants,
    of being unable to arrive at a proper agreement with them, and
    they all offer their kind and noble services to reconcile us with
    the peasants. We are most grateful to you, gentlemen, but we do
    not think that you will manage it. We, at any rate, showed long
    ago that we were able to do this. We did not paint the peasant
    rosy pictures that told him he would be able to make the
    transition from capitalist society without iron discipline and the
    firm rule of the working class; or that merely gathering votes
    would decide the world-historical problem of the struggle against
    capital. We said openly that dictatorship is a harsh, severe and
    even bloody word, but we said that the dictatorship of the workers
    will ensure the end of the yoke of the exploiters, and we proved
    to be correct. The peasant, having experienced both dictatorships,
    chose the dictatorship of the working class, and will go forward
    with it to complete victory. (Applause.)
Comrades, from what I have said about our international
    successes it follows—and, I think, it is not necessary to
    dwell at length on this—that we must repeat our peace
    proposal in a manner that is calm and business-like to the maximum
    degree. We must do this because it is a proposal we have made many
    times, and each time we gained something in the eyes of every
    educated man, even if he was our enemy, that made him blush with
    shame. That was the case when Bullitt came here, was received by
    Comrade Chicherin, talked with him and with me, and when we
    concluded a preliminary agreement on peace in the course of a few
    hours. And he assured us (those gentlemen like to boast) that
    America is everything, and who would worry about France in face of
    America’s strength? But when we signed the agreement the
    French and British ministers did this. (Lenin makes an
    expressive gesture with his foot. Laughter.) Bullitt was
    left with a useless piece of paper and he was told, “Who
    would have thought you were naÃ¯ve and foolish enough to believe
    in the democracy of Britain and France?”
    (Applause.) The result is that in the same issue I read
    the full text of the agreement with Bullitt in French[4]—and it was published in all the
    British and American newspapers. The result is that they are
    showing themselves to the whole world to be either rogues or
    infants—let them take their choice! (Applause.) All
    the sympathies even of the petty bourgeoisie, even of those
    bourgeois who have any sort of an education and who recall how
    they once fought their own tsars and kings, are on our side,
    because we signed the hardest possible peace terms in a
    business-like manner and said, “The price of the blood of
    our workers and soldiers is too high for us; we shall pay you
    businessmen a heavy tribute as the price of peace; we consent to a
    heavy tribute to preserve the lives of our workers and
    peasants.” That is why I think there is no reason for us to
    dwell long on this, and in conclusion I shall read a draft
    resolution that will express, in the name of the Congress of
    Soviets, our unwavering desire to pursue a policy of
    peace. (Applause.)
Now I wish to pass from the international and military to the
    political section of the report.
We have gained three tremendous victories over the Entente, and
    they were not only military victories. They were victories
    achieved by the dictatorship of the working class, and each
    victory strengthened our position, and not only because it
    weakened our enemy and lost him his troops; our international
    position was strengthened because on each occasion we won out in
    the eyes of all working people and even of many bourgeois. In this
    connection, the victories which we won over Kolchak and Yudenich,
    and are now winning over Denikin, will make it possible in the
    future to gain much greater sympathy by peaceful means.
We have always been accused of terrorism. This is a favourite
    accusation that is never absent from the columns of the press. We
    are accused of making terrorism a principle. To this we reply,
    “You yourselves do not believe this slander.” The
    historian Aulard, who sent a letter to
    i’Humanité, writes, “I have studied
    history and taught it. When I read that the Bolsheviks are freaks,
    monsters and scarecrows, I say that the same things were written
    about Robespierre and Danton. By no means do I compare these great
    men to the present Russians, nothing of the sort, there is
    absolutely no resemblance between them. But I say as a historian
    that you must not believe every rumour.” When a bourgeois
    historian begins speaking in this way we see that the lie being
    spread about us is fizzling out. We say that terror was thrust
    upon us. They forget that terror was provoked by the attack of the
    all-powerful Entente Is it not terror for the world’s fleet
    to blockade a starving country? Is it not terror for foreign
    representatives, relying on their so-called diplomatic immunity,
    to organise whiteguard insurrections? You must, after all, take
    something of a sober view of things. It must be realised that
    international imperialism has staked everything on suppressing the
    revolution, that it stops at nothing, and says, “For one
    officer—one Communist, and we  shall win.” And they
    are right. If we had attempted to influence these troops, brought
    into being by international banditry and brutalised by
    war—if we had attempted to influence them by words and
    persuasion or by any means other than terror, we would not have
    held out for even two months and we would have been fools. The
    terror was forced on us by the terror of the Entente, the terror
    of mighty world capitalism which has been throttling the workers
    and peasants, and is condemning them to death by starvation
    because they are fighting for their country’s freedom. Our
    every victory over this prime cause of and reason for the terror
    will inevitably and invariably mean that we shall be able to run
    the country without this method of persuasion and influence.
What we say about terrorism also applies to our attitude
    towards all waverers. We are accused of having created
    extra-ordinarily difficult conditions for the middle sections of
    the population, for the bourgeois intellectuals. We reply that the
    imperialist war was a continuation of the imperialist politics and
    for this reason it led to revolution. During the imperialist war
    everyone felt that the war was being conducted by the bourgeoisie
    in their own selfish interests, that in this war the people died
    while the bourgeoisie profited. Profit is the basic motive behind
    the policy of the bourgeoisie in all countries, and it is ruining
    them and will seal their fate. Our war is the continuation of the
    politics of revolution, and every worker and peasant knows (and if
    he does not know, then he instinctively feels and sees) that this
    is a war of defence against the exploiters, a war demanding the
    greatest sacrifices from the workers and peasants, but which stops
    at nothing in order to ensure that these sacrifices are also borne
    by the other classes. We know that it is more difficult for them
    than it is for the workers and peasants, because they formerly
    belonged to a privileged class. But we say that when it is a case
    of freeing millions of working people from exploitation, a
    government that did not make other classes bear the burden would
    not be a socialist government but a traitor government. We have
    burdened the middle classes because we have been placed in
    extraordinarily difficult conditions by the Entente
    governments. Every step in our victories—as we see it from
    the experience of our 

    revolution, though I cannot deal with this in detail is
    characterised by the fact that through all the waverings and
    innumerable attempts to return to the past, more and more waverers
    are becoming convinced that the only real choice is between the
    dictatorship of the working people and the rule of the
    exploiters. If these waverers have had a hard time, it is not the
    fault of the Bolshevik government, but the fault of the
    whiteguards, the fault of the Entente; a victory over them will be
    a real and sound condition for improving the lot of all these
    classes. In this connection, comrades, I should like, in passing
    on to the lessons of the political experience inside the country,
    to say a few words about the significance of the war.
Our war is the continuation of the politics of
    revolution, the politics of overthrowing the exploiters,
    capitalists and landowners. The workers and peasants are therefore
    drawn to our side despite the infinite gravity of our war. War is
    not only a continuation of politics, it is the epitome of
    politics; this unprecedentedly difficult war which the landowners
    and capitalists have brought down on us with the aid of the mighty
    Entente is political education. The workers and peasants have
    learned a great deal during this ordeal. The workers have learned
    how to use state power, and how to utilise every step for
    propaganda and education, how to make the Red Army, consisting
    mainly of peasants, an instrument for their education, how to make
    it an instrument for the employment of bourgeois specialists. We
    know that in their overwhelming majority these bourgeois
    specialists are, and must be, against us because of their class
    character; we need have no doubts on this score. Hundreds and
    thousands of these specialists have betrayed us, and tens of
    thousands have come to serve us more faithfully, drawn to us in
    the course of the struggle itself because that revolutionary
    enthusiasm which did wonders in the Red Army came from our having
    served and satisfied the interests of the workers and
    peasants. This situation, in which masses of workers and peasants
    act in harmony and know what they are fighting for, has had its
    effect, and still larger and larger sections of the people who
    came over to our side from the other camp, some of them
    unknowingly, have turned and are turning into our conscious
    supporters.
Comrades, the task which now confronts us is to transfer our
    war-time experience to the sphere of peaceful construction. There
    is nothing which gives us so much pleasure or provides us with
    such an opportunity of greeting the Seventh All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets as the turning-point in the history of Soviet Russia, as
    the fact that the main period of the civil wars we have been
    fighting lies behind us, and that ahead of us lies the main period
    of peaceful construction which means so much to all of us, which
    we desire, which we must carry out and to which we shall dedicate
    all our energies and our whole lives. We can now say, on the basis
    of the severe ordeals of the war, that in the main, in the
    military and in the international sphere, we have been
    victorious. The path of peaceful construction opens up before
    us. We have, of course, to remember that the enemy is always
    watching every step we take and will make many more attempts to
    overthrow us by all the means in his powerforce, fraud, bribery,
    conspiracies, etc. Our task is to direct all the experience gained
    in war towards the solution of the main problems of peaceful
    construction which I shall now enumerate. First and foremost there
    is the question of food supplies, the question of
    grain.
We have pursued a most difficult struggle against prejudices
    and old customs. On the one hand, the peasant is a working man,
    who for decades suffered the oppression of the landowner and the
    capitalist; with the instinct of the oppressed man he knows that
    they are beasts who will walk through seas of blood to regain
    their power. On the other hand, the peasant is a proprietor. He
    wants to sell his grain freely, he wants “freedom of
    trade”, he does not understand that the free sale of grain
    in a starving country means freedom to profiteer, freedom for the
    rich to make profits. And we say that we shall never agree to
    this, all of us would sooner die than make this concession.
We know that in this case we conduct a policy whereby the
    workers persuade the peasants to loan them grain, because the
    piece of paper the peasants receive in return is not the
    equivalent of the grain’s value. The peasant sells us grain
    at fixed prices but does not receive goods in return because we
    have none; instead he receives a piece of coloured paper. He is
    giving us the grain as a loan and we say to him “If you are
    a working man, can you deny that this is fair? How can you not
    agree that it is essential to loan the existing grain surpluses at
    fixed prices and not to dispose of them by profiteering, which
    means a return to capitalism, a return to exploitation, to all
    that we have fought against?” It was extremely difficult to
    do this, and we hesitated a good deal. We have taken many steps
    gropingly and continue to do so but we have gained some
    fundamental experience. When you hear the report of Comrade
    Tsyurupa or of others concerned with food supplies you will see
    that when the government says to the peasants they must loan their
    grain they are becoming accustomed to this system of
    requisitioning, for we have information from a number of volosts
    of its 100 per cent fulfilment. Although the successes are meagre,
    they are nevertheless successes, and our food supply policy
    enables the peasants to understand more and more clearly—if
    you want free sale of grain in a ruined country, go back, try out
    Kolchak and Denikin! We shall fight against this to the last drop
    of blood. There can be no concessions in this matter. On this
    fundamental question, the question of grain, we shall fight with
    all our might to prevent profiteering, to ensure that the sale of
    grain does not enrich the already rich, and that all grain
    surpluses raised on state land by the efforts of generations of
    working people become the property of the state and that now, when
    the state is impoverished, these surpluses should be loaned by the
    peasants to the workers’ state. If the peasant does this, we
    shall emerge from all our difficulties, we shall rehabilitate
    industry, and the worker will repay his debt to the peasant a
    hundredfold. He, the worker, will guarantee the peasant and his
    children a livelihood without their having to work for the
    landowner and the capitalist. That is what we tell the peasant,
    and he is becoming convinced there is no alternative. The peasant
    is being convinced of this, not so much by us, as by our enemies,
    Kolchak and Denikin. They, more than anybody else, are giving the
    peasant practical lessons in living and sending him to our
    side.
However, comrades, after the problem of grain comes the second
    question—that of fuel. At the moment sufficient
    stocks of grain have been collected in the grain-growing regions
    to feed the starving workers of Petrograd and Moscow.

      But if you walk through the workers’ districts of Moscow
      you will find them in the grip of the most frightful cold,
      terrible privations intensified by the fuel problem. Here we are
      suffering from a desperate crisis, we are lagging behind
      requirements. Recently a number of meetings of the Council of
      Defence and the Council of People’s Commissars were
      devoted entirely to the elaboration of measures to solve the
      fuel crisis. Comrade Ksandrov has supplied me with figures for
      my speech which show that we have begun to emerge from this
      desperate crisis. At the beginning of October 16,000 railway
      trucks were loaded in a week; by the end of October this figure
      had dropped to 10,000 a week. This was a crisis, a catastrophe;
      it meant hunger for the workers of a whole number of factories
      in Moscow, Petrograd and many other places. The results of this
      catastrophe are still being felt. And then we came to grips with
      the problem, bent all our energies on solving it, and did the
      same as we had done in military matters. We said that all
      politically-conscious people must throw their full weight into
      solving the fuel problem, not in the old, capitalist way, when
      the profiteers were given a bonus and enriched themselves on
      contracts, no, we said, solve this problem in a socialist way,
      by self-sacrifice; solve this problem in the same way as we
      saved Red Petrograd, liberated Siberia, the way we gained
      victory in all those difficult moments, in the face of all the
      difficult problems of the revolution, the way that will always
      bring us victory. We have advanced from loading 12,000 trucks in
      the last week of October and now load 20,000. We are emerging
      from this catastrophe, but we are far from having solved the
      problem. It is essential that all workers know and bear in mind
      that without bread for the people, without bread for industry,
      that is, without fuel, the country is doomed to calamity. And
      this applies not only to us. Today’s newspapers carry the
      news that in France, a victor country, the railways are grinding
      to a halt. What can you expect of Russia? France will crawl out
      of the crisis the capitalist way, that is, through the
      enrichment of the capitalists and the continued deprivation of
      the people. Soviet Russia will emerge from the crisis through
      the discipline and devotion of the workers, through a firm
      attitude towards the peasants, that firm attitude which, in the
      final analysis, the peasant can always understand. The peasant
      is learning from experience that no matter how difficult the
      transition, no matter how firm the state rule of the workers, it
      is the rule of the working man who is fighting for the alliance
      of the working people, for the complete abolition of all
      exploitation.
A third scourge is assailing us, lice, and the typhus
    that is mowing down our troops. Comrades, it is impossible to
    imagine the dreadful situation in the typhus regions, where the
    population is broken, weakened, without material resources, where
    all life, all public life ceases. To this we say, “Comrades,
    we must concentrate everything on this problem. Either the
    lice will defeat socialism, or socialism will defeat the
    lice!” And here too, comrades, by using the same
    methods as elsewhere, we are beginning t achieve success. There
    are still some doctors, of course, who hold preconceived notions
    and have no faith in workers’ rule, who prefer to draw fees
    from the rich rather than fight the hard battle against
    typhus. But these are a minority, they are becoming fewer, and the
    majority see that the people are struggling for their very
    existence, they realise that by their struggle the people desire
    to solve the fundamental question of preserving
    civilisation. These doctors are behaving in this arduous and
    difficult matter with no less devotion than the military
    specialists. They are willing to put themselves at the service of
    the working people. I must say that we are beginning to emerge
    also from this crisis. Comrade Semashko has given me some
    information about this work., According to news from the front,
    122 doctors and 467 assistants had arrived at the front by October
    1. One hundred and fifty doctors have been sent from Moscow. We
    have reason to believe that by December 15 another 800 doctors
    will have arrived at the front to help in the battle against
    typhus. We must pay great attention to this affliction.
We must concentrate on consolidating our
    foundation—grain, fuel, and the battle against typhus. I
    particularly wish to mention these matters because a certain lack
    of co-ordination has been noted in our socialist construction, and
    understandably so. When people have decided to transform the whole
    world, it is only natural that inexperienced workers and
    inexperienced peasants should be drawn into this work. There can
    be no doubt that a considerable period must elapse before we are
    able to determine where our chief attention should be
    concentrated. It is not surprising that such great historical
    tasks frequently give rise to great visions, which develop side by
    side with many small, unsuccessful dreams. There have been many
    instances when we wanted to build a house from above, starting
    from a small upper wing, a cornice, but paid no real attention to
    the foundations. I must tell you that from my own experience, from
    my observations of the work being performed, it is my opinion that
    the essential task for our policy is to lay that foundation. It is
    necessary for every worker, every organisation, every institution
    to bear this in mind at every meeting. If we are able to supply
    grain, if we succeed in increasing the fuel supply, if we devote
    all our efforts to wiping out typhus in Russia—the typhus
    which comes from a lack of culture, from poverty, backwardness and
    ignorance—if we devote to this bloodless war all the
    strength and experience gained in a bloody war we can be certain
    that we shall achieve ever greater successes in this work, which
    is, after all, much easier and much more humane than a war.
We have carried out military mobilisation. The parties which
    were our most uncompromising opponents, which to a far greater
    extent than others supported and still support the ideas of
    capitalism (the Socialist-Revolutionaries, for instance), have had
    to recognise, despite all the accusations rained on us by the
    bourgeois imperialists, that the Red Army has become a
    people’s army. This indicates that in this most difficult,
    task we have achieved the alliance of the working class with the
    great mass of peasants who are coming over to the side of the
    working class, and we have, by this means, shown the peasants what
    is meant by the leadership of the working’ class.
The words “dictatorship of the proletariat”
    frighten the peasants. In Russia it was a bogey for the peasants
    but these words now recoil on the heads of people who try to use
    them as a bogey. The peasants now realise that, while the words
    “dictatorship of the proletariat” are perhaps too
    fancy Latin words, in practice they stand for that selfsame Soviet
    power which transfers the state apparatus to the workers. This
    being the case, the dictatorship is the true friend and ally of
    the working people and the merciless enemy of any form 

      of exploitation. That is why we shall ultimately defeat all
      imperialists, for we possess a profound source of strength, a
      deep and extensive reservoir of human material, such as has
      never been accessible to any bourgeois government and never will
      be. We possess the material from which we can draw ever greater
      and more profound strength starting from the most advanced
      workers and continuing with average workers, and even lower down
      the scale, with labouring peasants, poor and greatly
      impoverished peasants. The Petrograd comrades have recently said
      that Petrograd has given up all its workers and can supply no
      more. But When a critical hour struck, Petrograd showed itself
      to be remarkable, as Comrade Zinoviev justly said, it proved to
      be a town that seemed able to give birth to new forces. Workers,
      who had no experience in politics or government, who were
      considered below the average in political consciousness, drew
      themselves up to their full stature, provided the huge forces
      for propaganda, agitation, organisation, and performed new
      miracles. We still have a great deal of this source of new
      miracles. Every new section of workers and peasants that has not
      yet been drawn into our work is, nevertheless, our true friend
      and ally. At the present moment we frequently have to rely on a
      very small section of leading workers in government work. In the
      course of our Party work and our Soviet practice we must
      approach non-party people, non-party workers and peasants, more
      boldly, approach them again and again, not for the purpose of
      winning them over to our side immediately, or of drawing them
      into the Party—that is not so important for us—but
      of making them understand that their help is needed to save the
      country. When those whom the landowners and capitalists least of
      all permitted to participate in running the state are brought to
      realise that we are calling on them to join us in building the
      solid foundation for the Socialist Republic our cause will be
      really invincible.
That is why, on the basis of two years’ experience, we
    can say to you with absolute certainty that every one of our
    military victories will greatly hasten the approach of the
    time—now very near—when we can devote the whole of our
    energy to peaceful construction. On the basis of experience
    gained, we can guarantee that in the next few years we shall
    perform even greater miracles in peaceful construction than we did
    in the two years of victorious war against the all-powerful
    Entente. (Applause.)
Comrades, in conclusion, allow me to read to you the draft of a
    motion which I now put before you.
“The Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic wishes
    to live in peace with all peoples and devote all its efforts to
    internal development in order to establish the smooth running of
    production, transport and government affairs on the basis of the
    Soviet system; this has so far been prevented by the intervention
    of the Entente and the starvation blockade.
“The workers’ and peasants’ government has
    made frequent peace proposals to the Entente powers—the
    message from the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs to
    the American representative, Mr. Poole, on August 5, 1918; to
    President Wilson on October 24, 1918; to all Entente governments
    through representatives of neutral countries on November 3, 1918;
    a message from the Sixth All-Russia Congress of Soviets on
    November 7, 1918; Litvinov’s Note in Stockholm to all
    Entente representatives on December 23, 1918; then there were the
    messages of January 12, January 17 and February 4, 1919, and the
    draft treaty drawn up jointly with Bullitt on March 12, 1919; and
    a message through Nansen on May 7, 1919.
“The Seventh Congress of Soviets fully approves these
      many steps taken by the Council of People’s Commissars and
      the People’s Commissariat of Foreign Affairs, once more
      confirms its unwavering desire for peace and again proposes to the
      Entente powers, Britain, France, the United States of America,
      Italy and Japan, individually and collectively, to begin
      immediately negotiations on peace; the Congress instructs the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee, the Council or
      People’s Commissars and the People’s Commissariat of
      Foreign Affairs to continue this peace policy systematically,
      takingall appropriate measures to ensure its success,”
    
2
Concluding Speech On The Report
      Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee
      And The Council Of People’S Commissars
December 6

(Voices: “Long live Comrade Lenin! Hurrah!”
      Applause.) Comrades, it seems to me that in his speech and
      by his declaration, Martov has managed to give us an
      extraordinarily fine sample of the attitude towards Soviet power
      of the groups and parties that formerly belonged, and still
      belong, to the Second International, and against which we have
      now founded the Communist International. The difference between
      Martov’s speech and his declaration must have struck each
      one of you—the difference that Comrade Sosnovsky stressed
      in the remark he shouted to Martov from the presidium,
      “Isn’t that last year’s declaration you
      have?” Martov’s speech, indeed, most certainly
      belongs to 1919, to the end of that year, but his declaration is
      so compiled that it contains a complete repetition of what was
      said in 1918. (Applause.) And when Martov replied to Sosnovsky
      by saying that the declaration was “for all
      eternity” I was quite ready to take the Mensheviks under
      my wing and defend them from Martov. (Applause. Laughter.) I,
      comrades, have watched the development and activities of the
      Mensheviks, probably longer and more attentively—which has
      by no means been pleasant—than anybody else. On the basis
      of this fifteen years of study I assert that the declaration,
      far from being “for all eternity”, will not last a
      single year (applause), because the entire development of the
      Mensheviks, especially in a great period such as has begun in
      the history of the

      Russian revolution, reveals the greatest vacillation among them
      and, taken by and large, this boils down to their parting
      company with the bourgeoisie and their prejudices, only with the
      greatest difficulty and against their own will. A number of
      times they have fought shy of the dictatorship of the
      proletariat but they are now beginning to approach it—to
      approach it very slowly but very surely—and I am certain
      that in another year they will take a few more steps. And then
      it will be impossible to repeat that declaration, because if you
      remove its envelope of general democratic phrases and
      parliamentary expressions that would do credit to the leader of
      a parliamentary opposition, if you cast aside those speeches
      that so many people like but which we find boring, and get down
      to the real root of the matter, then the entire declaration says
      “Back to bourgeois democracy” and nothing
      more. (Applause.) And when we hear people who profess sympathy
      with us making such declarations we say to ourselves,
      “Yes, the terror and the Cheka[5] are absolutely
      indispensable.” (Applause.)
Comrades, so that you will not now accuse me, and so that
    nobody will be able to accuse me, of picking holes in that
    declaration, I assert, on the basis of political facts, that a
    Right Menshevik and a Right Socialist-Revolutionary would readily
    subscribe to it with both hands. I have proof of this. The Council
    of the Party of Right Socialist-Revolutionaries from which Voisky
    and his group had to break away—Volsky is the Chairman of
    the Constituent Assembly Committee, you heard him speak
    here—the Council of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries
    which met this year has resolved that they wish to merge with the
    Menshevik Party which they consider close to them. Why? Because
    Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, who support Mensheviks whose
    declaration is construed throughout on the same principles as that
    of the Right Socialist-Revolutionaries, stand behind the printing
    of the things that are in the declaration and in Menshevik
    publications (which are supposed to be purely theoretical and
    which we are wrong in prohibiting, as the Bund
    representative said when she complained that the country does not
    enjoy full freedom of the press). At that time, after a long
    struggle, Voisky’s group had to break away. That is the mess
    which shows quite clearly that the matter is not one of our
    cavilling at the Mensheviks but of the real state of
    affairs—this is shown by the Socialist-Revolutionary
    minority group. Here, quite rightly, the Menshevik Rozanov was
    mentioned, whom Martov and the party would probably have
    expelled—and it is this declaration the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks subscribe to.
This means that until now there are two different trends among
    them—one of them is sorry, weeps, condoles and wishes to
    return to democracy theoretically, while the other acts. And
    Martov was wrong in saying I was trying to justify myself on the
    question of terrorism. That one expression alone shows how
    infinitely far the views of the petty-bourgeois democrats
    are from ours and how close they are o those of the
    Second International. Actually there is nothing at all socialist
    in them, but the exact opposite. Now that socialism is near, old
    bourgeois views are again being preached to us. I did not try to
    justify myself, I spoke about a special party, a party that has
    been created by the war, a party of officers who were in command
    throughout the imperialist war, who have come to the fore in this
    war and who know what real politics are. When we are told
    “You must either abolish your Cheka or organise it
    better” we reply, comrades, by saying that we do not claim
    that everything we are doing is of the best and we are ready and
    willing to learn without the slightest bias. But as those people
    who were in the Constituent Assembly want to teach us how
    to organise a security force against sons of landowners, against
    whiteguard officers, we tell them, “You were in power and
    fought with Kerensky against Kornilov, and you were with Kolchak,
    and those same whiteguards kicked you out like little children
    without a struggle. And after that you still say that our Cheka is
    badly organised!” (Applause.) Oh, no, our Cheka is
    magnificently organised. (Applause.) And when the
    conspirators in Germany now mistreat workers, when officers led by
    Field Marshals over there shout “Down with the Berlin
    government”, when, over there, they can murder Communist
    leaders with impunity and when a crowd of whiteguards treats
    leaders of the Second international like children, we see clearly
    that this collaborationist government is nothing more than a
    plaything in the hands of the group of plotters. When we have this
    example before us, when we are only just stepping out on to the
    road, these people say “You have exaggerated
    terror”. How many weeks is it since we discovered the
    conspiracy in Petrograd[6] How many weeks is it since Yudenich
    was a few versts from Petrograd and Denikin a few
    versts from Orel? Spokesmen of those wavering parties and
    of that wavering democracy say to us “We are glad that
    Yudenich and Kolchak have been defeated”. I am quite willing
    to believe that they are glad because they know whatYudenichand
    Kolchak had in store for them. (Applause.) I do not
    suspect these people of insincerity. But I ask them: when the
    Soviet government is experiencing a difficult period and plots are
    being hatched by bourgeois elements and when at a critical moment
    we manage to lay bare these plots—do they think they are
    discovered accidentally? Oh, no, not accidentally. They are
    discovered because the plotters live among the masses, because
    they cannot succeed in their plots without the workers and
    peasants and it is there that, in the long run, they run up
    against people who go to that badly organised, as they said here,
    Cheka and say that exploiters are gathered in a certain
    place. (Applause.) And when some people come to us a
    short time after we have been in mortal danger and when we are
    faced with a conspiracy that is obvious to everyone, and tell us
    that the Constitution is not being observed and that the Cheka is
    badly organised, one may say that they have not learned any
    politics during the struggle against the whiteguards, they have
    not given any thought to their experience of Kerensky, Yudenich
    and Kolchak and have not been able to draw any practical
    conclusions from it. But since, gentlemen, you are beginning to
    understand that Kolchak and Denikin constitute a serious danger,
    that you must choose in favour o Soviet power, it is time for you
    to drop Martov’s declaration “for all
    eternity”. (Laughter.) The Constitution contains
    all the experience of our two years of rule, and without that
    rule, as I said in my speech, and nobody even tried to refute it,
    without it we could not have held out for two months, let alone
    two years. Let anyone who wishes to be at all objective about
    Soviet power, if only from the standpoint of an historian and not
    of a politician who wishes to talk to the working-class masses,
    act with them and influence them—let him try to refute
    that. 

    

      It is said that the Soviets meet rarely and are not
      re-elected often enough. It seems to me that such reproaches
      should not be answered by speeches and resolutions but by
      deeds. In my opinion the best answer would be for you to finish
      the work begun by the Soviet government of assessing how many
      elections to uyezd and urban Soviets there have been, how many
    congresses of Soviets, etc. Comrade Vlaclimirsky, Deputy
    People’s Commissar for Internal Affairs, has published
    material on the history of those congresses. When I saw that
    material I said that this is historical material that proves,
    among other things, that there has never been in the history of
    civilised nations a country that has applied proletarian democracy
    as widely as we have in Russia. It is said that Soviets are not
    re-elected often enough, that we rarely convene congresses, but I
    invite every delegate to apply to the relevant bodies for
    additional questionnaires to be distributed at this Congress on
    which every delegate can record on which day, month and year and
    in which uyezd, town or village congresses of Soviets met. If you
    do this simple job and each of you fills in a questionnaire of
    that sort you will obtain material to complement our incomplete
    data and which will show that in a time as difficult as war-time,
    when the century-old European constitutions that have become a
    matter of habit for the West-European people have been almost
    completely suspended, the Soviet Constitution is in force in the
    localities to a greater degree than a constitution anywhere else
    in the world insofar as concerns the participation of the masses
    in government and in the independent solution of government
    matters at congresses, in the Soviets and at elections. And if it
    is still said that this is not enough, and if there is criticism
    and it is asserted that It is really a terrible crime if your
    Central Executive Committee has not met”, well, Comrade
    Trotsky gave a splendid answer to the Bund representative on this
    score when he said that the Central Executive Committee was at the
    front. The representative of the Bund—that Bund which
    upholds the Soviet platform and for that reason might really be
    expected at long last to understand what the foundation of Soviet
    power is—said this (I wrote it down), “How strange
    that the Central Executive Committee was at the front, it could
    have sent others.”
We are fighting against Kolchak, Denikin and the
    others—there have been a lot of them! It ends with Russian
    troops chasing them away like children. We are conducting a
    difficult and victorious war. You know that with every invasion we
    had to send all the members of the Central Executive Committee to
    the front and then we are told “How strange, they should
    have found others”. Were we functioning outside time and
    space, or what? Or are we supposed to give birth to Communists
    (applause) at the rate of a few every week? That is something we
    cannot do; workers who have been tempered by several years of
    struggle and who have acquired the necessary experience to be able
    to lead are fewer in our country than in any other. We have to
    adopt all measures to train young workers, trainees, and that will
    take several months, years even. And when this is taking place
    under very difficult circumstances, we are treated to grins for
    our trouble. These grins only prove a complete failure to
    understand these conditions. It is really a ridiculous
    intellectualist lack of understanding, when we are compelled in
    these war conditions to act differently from the way we have acted
    up to now. We have to strain our forces to the utmost and for this
    reason have to give up our best officials and Central and local
    Executive Committee members for the front. I am sure that nobody
    who has any practical experience in administration will condemn
    us; he will, on the contrary, approve of our having done the
    maximum possible to reduce collegiate bodies belonging to
    executive committees to a minimum until, under pressure of war,
    only the executive committee itself was left, because the
    functionaries hurried to the front in the same way as they are now
    rushing in hundreds and thousands to engage in fuel supply
    work. That is the foundation without which the Soviet Republic
    cannot exist. And if the less frequent meetings of the Soviets for
    a few months is the price at which this has to’be purchased,
    then any sensible worker or peasant will understand the need for
    it and will approve of it.
I have said that in respect of democracy and the democrats we
    are still being offered the prejudices of bourgeois democracy in
    their entirety. An opposition party has said here that the
    suppression of the bourgeoisie must be stopped. One should think
    of what one is saying. What does the suppression of the
    bourgeoisie mean? The landowner could be suppressed and destroyed
    by abolishing landed proprietorship and transferring the land to
    the peasants. But can the bourgeoisie be suppressed and destroyed
    by the abolition of big capital? Anyone who knows the ABC of
    Marxism knows that the bourgeoisie cannot be suppressed in this
    way, knows that the bourgeoisie is born of commodity production;
    the peasant who has a surplus of hundreds of poods of grain that
    he does not need for his family and does not deliver, to the
    workers’ state as a loan to help the hungry worker, and
    profiteers under the prevailing conditions of commodity
    production—what is he? Is he not a bourgeois?Is the
    bourgeoisie not born in this way? On this issue, the grain issue,
    and on the question of the torments of hunger being suffered by
    all industrial Russia, do we get any assistance from those who
    reproach us with not observing the Constitution, with having
    suppressed the bourgeoisie? No! Do they help us in this respect?
    They hide behind the words “concord of the workers and
    peasants”. That concord, of course, is necessary. We showed
    how we achieve it on October 26, 1917, when we took that part of
    the programme of the Socialist-Revolutionaries which supports the
    peasants and put it into operation in full. In that way we showed
    that the peasant who had been exploited by the landowners, who
    lives by his own labour and does not profiteer, finds a true
    protector in the worker sent to him by the central state
    authority. In this way we have effected concord with the
    peasants. When we pursue a food policy requiring that surplus
    grain not needed by the peasant family be given to the workers as
    a state loan, any objection to it supports profiteering. This
    still exists among the petty-bourgeois masses who are accustomed
    to living in the bourgeois way. This is a terrible thing, this is
    a danger to the social revolution! Have the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries ever done anything to help us in this
    respect, even the most Left of them? No, they never have! And
    their publications, that we are supposed to permit for the sake of
    “principles of liberty” and samples of which we have
    in our possession, show that they never by a single word—to
    say nothing of deeds—do anything to help us. Until we have
    fully conquered the old habit, the accursed old gospel of everyone
    for himself and God for all, we have no alternative but to
    requisition grain surpluses as a loan to the hungry workers. It is
    terribly difficult to do this—we know that. Here nothing can
    be accomplished by force. Nevertheless it is ridiculous to say
    that we represent a minority of the working class—that can
    only make one laugh. That could be said in Paris, although
    workers’ meetings there would not listen to such statements
    either. In a country where the government has been overthrown with
    unusual ease, where the workers and peasants are defending their
    own interests arms in hand, where they employ the rifle as the
    instrument of their will—to say in such a country that we
    represent a minority of the working class is absurd. I can
    understand such statements on the lips of Clemenceau, Lloyd George
    or Wilson. They are their words and their ideas! But when the
    speeches of Wilson, Clernenceau, and Lloyd George, the worst of
    the predators, the wild beasts of imperialism, are repeated hero
    by Martov in the Dame of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
    Party (laughter), then I say to myself that we have to be
    on the alert and to realise that the Cheka is indispensable!
    (Applause.)


      All the opposition speakers, the Bund representatives included,
      accuse us of not abiding by the Constitution. I maintain that we
      observe the Constitution most strictly. (Voice from a
      box: “Oho!”) And although I hear an ironic
      “Oho!” from a box that was once the royal box arid
      is now the opposition box (laughter) I shall
      nevertheless prove it. (Applause.) I will read to you
      the article of the Constitution that we observe most strictly
      and which shows that in all our activities we stick to the
      Constitution. Whenever I have had to speak’ about the
      Constitution at meetings attended by followers of the Mensheviks
      and Socialist-Revolutionaries there has always been difficulty
      in finding the text of the Constitution to quote. The meetings,
      however, were mostly held in halls where there was a
      Constitution hanging on the wall. In this hall there is none,
      but Comrade Petrovsky has saved the situation by lending me a
      pamphlet entitled Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R. I
      shall read Article 23: “Guided by the interests of the
      working class as a whole, the R.S.F.S.R, deprives certain
      persons and certain groups of rights they use to the detriment
      of the interests of the socialist revolution.” 

    

      I say once
      again, comrades, that we have never regarded our activity in
      general and our Constitution in particular as models of
      perfection. The question of changes to the Constitution has been
      raised at this Congress. We agree to make changes, let us take a
      look at the changes; they will not, however, remain constant
      “for all eternity”. If you still want to fight, let
      it be a clean fight, If you want us to abide by the
      Constitution, why don’t you want us to abide by Article
      23? (Applause.) If this is not what you want, then let us
      discuss whether it is necessary to annul the article which says
      we should not go to the people with talk about universal freedom
      and the universal equality of the working people. You have made
      an excellent study of constitutional law, but you have learned
      from old bourgeois text-books. You recall words about
      “democracy and freedom”, you refer to the
      Constitution and you recall former words, and you promise the
      people everything in order not to fulfil that promise. We do not
      promise anything of the sort, we do not propose equality of
      workers and peasants. You do, so let’s dispute the
      issue. There shall be complete equality, friendship and a
      fraternal alliance with those peasants who were exploited by the
      landowners and capitalists and who are now working to support
      their families on land taken from the landowners. We shall not,
      however, grant equality to those peasants who, because of their
      old habits, ignorance and avarice, are pulling back towards the
      bourgeoisie. You use general phrases about freedom of equality
      for the working people, about democracy and alou the equality of
      workers and peasants. We do not promise that the Constitution
      will guarantee liberty and equality in
      general. Freedom—but for which class and for what purpose?
      Equality—who shall be equal to whom? For those who labour,
      who were exploited for dozens and hundreds of years by the
      bourgeoisie and who are now fighting against the bourgeoisie? It
      is so stated in the Constitution: “The dictatorship of the
      workers and poor peasants for the suppression of the
      bourgeoisie.” When you speak about the Constitution, why
      don’t you quote those words: “for the suppression of
      the bourgeoisie, for the suppression of the profiteers”?
      Show us a model country, a model of your splendid Menshevik
      constitution. Perhaps you will find such a model in the history,
      say, of Samara, where the Mensheviks were in power. Perhaps you
      will find it in Georgia where the Mensheviks are in power today,
      where the suppression of the bourgeoisie, the profiteers, is
      proceeding under conditions of complete freedom and equality,
      under conditions of consistent democracy and without a
      Cheka. Show us such a model and we shall learn from it. You
      cannot, however, demonstrate such a model for you know that in
      all places where the collaborationists hold power, where the
      government is Menshevik or semi-Menshevik, feverish, unhampered
      speculation reigns. And the Vienna that Trotsky justly spoke
      about in his speech, where people like Friedrich Adler are in
      the government and which does not know “the horrors of
      Bolshevism”,js as hungry and tormented as Petrograd and
      Moscow, but without the knowledge that the Viennese workers at
      the cost of hunger are breaking a road to victory over the
      bourgeoisie. Vienna is suffering more from hunger than Petrograd
      or Moscow and right there the Austrian and Viennese bourgeoisie
      are committing monstrous acts of speculation and, plunder in the
      Viennese streets, in the Nevsky Prospekt and Kuznetsky Most[Nevsky Prospekt and Kuznetsky Most were the
      shopping centres of pre-revolutionary Petrograd and Moscow
      respectively.—Editor.] of Vienna. You do
      not abide by the Constitution, but we do when we recognise
      freedom and equality only for those who help the proletariat
      defeat the bourgeoisie. And in Article 23 we say that the land
      will not flow with milk and honey during the transition
      period.

      We say that we have to hold out, not for months, but for years,
      in order to complete the transition period. After two years we
      can say (and we shall most likely be believed) that we are able
      to hold out for several years only because we have inscribed in
      the Constitution that certain persons and groups are deprived of
      rights. We do not conceal from whom we have taken away the
      rights, we say openly that it is the group of Mensheviks and
      Right Socialist-Revolutionaries. The leaders of the Second
      International condemned us for this, but we say outright to the
      group of Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries that we are
      ready to grant everything, but they must help us pursue the
      policy of the working people against the profiteers, against
      those who are helping food profiteering, those who are helping
      the bourgeoisie. Insofar  as you prove this to us by deeds we
      shall free you from what has been done to you by the
      Constitution, but until then your empty words are mere
      evasion. Our Constitution is not noted for its rhetoric, it says
      to the peasants—if you are a labouring peasant you possess
      all rights, but there can be no equality of rights for all in a
      society in which workers are starving and where a fight against
      the bourgeoisie is under way. And it says to the
      workers—equality for those peasants who are helping in the
      struggle against the bourgeoisie, but no generalisations! In
      this field there will be a hard struggle. We accept with the
      greatest pleasure anyone who wants to help, irrespective of his
      past and irrespective of all titles. And we know that more and
      more such people are coming to us from other parties and from
      among the non-party people and this is a guarantee of our
      victory. (Loud applause. Shouts of
      “Bravo”.)
3
Speech In The Organisation 
      Section[7]
December 8
Comrades, I have received a number of notes from delegates
    asking me to speak on this issue. I did not think there was any
    need for it, and I refrained from speaking until I received these
    invitations because I unfortunately have had no opportunity of
    acquiring a practical knowledge of work in the localities and it
    stands to reason that the knowledge obtained through work in the
    Council of People’s Commissars is insufficient. I am,
    furthermore, in complete agreement with what Comrade Trotsky has
    said and shall, therefore, confine myself to some brief
    comments.
When the question was raised in the Council of People’s
    Commissars of the state farms and their transfer to gubernia land
    departments, and when the question of chief administrations and
    central boards was raised, there was no doubt in my mind that
    there are more than a few counter-revolutionary elements in both
    types of institution. But when attempts are made to accuse the
    state farms of being particularly counter-revolutionary
    institutions it has always seemed to me, and still does, that it
    is missing the mark, for neither the state farms, nor the chief
    administrations and central boards, nor any kind of big industrial
    establishment, or, in general, any central or local organisation
    administering a branch of economy of any importance, can and does
    manage without solving the problem of the employment of bourgeois
    specialists. It seems to me that attacks on the chief
    administrations and boards, though fully justified because a
    thorough purge of them is needed, are nevertheless mistaken,
    because in the present case this type of institution is chosen
    indiscriminately from a number of similar institutions. It is,
    however, as clear as daylight from the work of the Economic
    Council that on no account must the chief administrations and
    boards and the state farms be specially selected in this matter
    because all our Soviet work, whether in the military field, or in
    the health services; or in education, has everywhere been up
    against, and is still up against, problems of this sort. We cannot
    recast the state apparatus and train a sufficient number of
    workers and peasants to make them fully acquainted with the
    government of the state without the aid of the old
    specialists. This is the main lesson to be learned from all our
    organisational work, and this experience tells us that in all
    spheres, including the military sphere, the old
    specialists—they are called old because of this—cannot
    be taken from anywhere except from capitalist society. That
    society made possible the training of specialists from far too
    narrow strata of the population, those that belonged to the
    families of landowners and capitalists, with only an insignificant
    number of peasant origin and only from among the wealthy peasants
    at that. If, therefore, we take into consideration the situation
    in which those people grew up and that in which they are now
    working, it is absolutely inevitable that these specialists, i.e.,
    those skilled in administration on a broad, national scale, are to
    nine-tenths permeated with old bourgeois views and prejudices and
    even in those cases when they are not downright traitors (and this
    is not something that happens occasionally but is a regular
    feature), even then they are not capable of understanding the new
    conditions, the new tasks and the new requirements. On these
    grounds friction, failures and disorder are apparent everywhere,
    in all commissariats.
It seems to me, therefore, that people are missing the mark
    when they shout about reactionaries in the state farms, chief
    administrations and boards, attempting to separate this question
    from the general one of how to teach a large number of workers and
    peasants to administrate on a broad national scale. We are doing
    this at a speed that, if you take into consideration the
    backwardness of the country and the difficulty of our conditions,
    is certainly unknown in world history. No matter how great that
    speed is, it still does not satisfy us, because our requirements
    in workers and peasants capable of administrative work and
    acquainted with special branches of administration are tremendous
    and are not being met even ten, even one per cent. When we are
    told, or when it is demonstrated at meetings of the Council of
    People’s Commissars, that the state farms everywhere are
    hiding-places for old landowners who are slightly disguised or are
    not disguised at all, that nests of the bureaucracy are being
    built there, and that similar things are often to be observed in
    chief administrations and central boards, I never doubt that it is
    true. But I did say that if you think you can remedy this evil by
    handing the state farms over to the gubernia land departments you
    are mistaken.
Why are there more counter-revolutionary elements left in the
    chief administrations and central boards and in the state farms
    than there are in the army? Why are there fewer of them among the
    military? Because greater attention was, on the whole, paid to the
    military sphere and more Communists, more workers and peasants
    were sent there, political departments worked on a broader scale
    there, in short, the influence of advanced workers and peasants on
    the entire military apparatus was broader, more profound and more
    regular. Owing to this we have succeeded, if not in eradicating
    the evil, at least in being close to eradicating it. To this, I
    say, the greatest attention should be paid.
We are taking only the first steps towards getting the state
    farms in close contact with the neighbouring peasants and with
    communist groups so that there will be commissars everywhere, not
    only in the army and not only on paper. No matter whether they
    will be called members of a collegiurn, assistant managers or
    commissars, there must be individual responsibility—this and
    individual management are as necessary as collectivism is
    essential in discussing basic questions if there is to be no red
    tape and no opportunity to evade responsibility. We need people
    who will learn to administer independently in all cases. If this
    is done we shall overcome the evil in the best manner.
I am in complete agreement, let me say in conclusion, with
    Comrade Trotsky when he says that here many incorrect attempts
    have been made to present our disputes as being between workers
    and peasants and that the question of the administrations and
    boards has been woven into the question of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. In my opinion this is radically wrong. The question
    of the dictatorship of the proletariat may be raised when the
    issue is that of suppressing the bourgeoisie. Then we have to
    think about this question, then we need the dictatorship because
    only through it can we suppress the bourgeoisie and place power in
    the hands of that section of the working people that is capable of
    acting unwaveringly and attracting to itself ever greater numbers
    of the vacillating. In the present case we are not faced with
    anything of the sort. We are discussing how much more or how much
    less centralism is needed in a certain field at a certain
    moment. Since the comrades from the localities assure us (and
    Comrade Trotsky and many people’s commissars confirm it)
    that in recent times in the gubernias and, to a considerable
    degree, in the uyezds, functionaries of a higher type have
    appeared (I am constantly hearing such an assertion also from
    Comrade Kalinin who has visited many places, and from comrades
    arriving here from the provinces), we shall have to take that into
    consideration and ask ourselves whether the matter of centralism
    is rightly understood in the present instance. I m sure we shall
    have to undertake a very great deal of this sort of correcting in
    the work of Soviet institutions. We are only now beginning to
    acquire organisational experience in this field. Insofar as we can
    see this experience from inside the Council of Defence arid the
    Council of People’s Commissars, it is quite obvious that it
    cannot be expressed by any figures and that it is impossible to
    talk about it in a short speech. We are sure, however, that in the
    localities work is being done in accordance with the general
    instructions of the central authorities. This has been achieved
    only in recent times.
This is by no means a question of a conflict between the
    dictatorship of the proletariat and other social elements. It is a
    matter of the experience of our Soviet organisational work,
    experience which, in my opinion, does not even concern the
    Constitution. Much has been said here about changes to the
    Constitution. But I do not think it has anything to do with
    this. The Constitution speaks of centralism s the basic
    principle. This basic principle is so indisputable for all of us
    (we all learned it from the impressive and even brutal
    object-lesson of Kolchak, Yudenih, Denikin and guerrilla bands)
    that here it cannot come into question. Nor does Comrade Sapronov
    reject the basic principle of centralism when it is a matter of
    granting a people’s commissar or the Council of
    People’s Commissars the right to challenge a candidate. It
    is not a constitutional question but one of practical
    convenience. We have to bring pressure to bear, first in one, then
    in another direction, in order to achieve positive results. When
    we are talking about gubernia state farm boards, or gubernia land
    departments, the stress is on placing them under the control of
    workers and neighbouring peasants. This is irrespective of whom
    they are subordinated to. It seems to me that no changes to the
    Constitution will ever enable you to kick outthe hidden landowners
    or the disguised capitalists and bourgeois. We must introduce into
    our institutions a sufficient number of workers and peasants who
    are loyal beyond all doubt and who have practical experience as
    members of small collegiums, as assistants to some managers or as
    commissars. That’s the crux of the matter! In this way you
    will have an ever greater number of workers and peasants who are
    learning to administer, and if they go through a complete
    schooling side by side with the old specialists they will take
    their places, carry out the same tasks and will train for our
    civil business, for the management of industry, for the direction
    of economic activities, a corps of officers to replace the
    personnel in the same way as that is being done in our war
    department. Therefore, I do not think there is any reason to
    proceed from considerations of principle as has here sometimes
    been the case; we must examine the question as one of practical
    experience and not as a constitutional one. If the majority of
    local functionaries, after an all-round discussion of the problem,
    come to the conclusion that gubernia state farm boards should be
    subordinated to the gubernia land departments—so well and
    good, we’ll experiment on those lines and then decide the
    issue from the point of view of practical experience. First of
    all, however, we have to decide whether we shall get rid of the
    disguised landowners in this way, whether we shall make better use
    of the specialists. Shall we in this way train a larger number of
    workers and peasants to take over the management themselves? Shall
    we be drawing the neighbouring peasantry into the practical
    check-up of the state farms? Shall we be elaborating practical
    forms, for that check-up? That is what really matters! If we solve
    these problems I do not think we shall have wasted our time and
    our labour. Let us try different systems in the different
    people’s commissariats; let us establish one system for
    state farms, chief administrations and central boards and another
    for the army or the Commissariat of Health. Our job is to attract,
    by way of experiment, large numbers of specialists, then replace
    them by training anew officers’ corps, a new body of
    specialists who will have to learn the extremely difficult, new
    and complicated business of administration. The forms this will
    take will not necessarily be identical. Comrade Trotsky was quite
    right in saying that this is not written in any of the books we
    might consider our guides, it does not follow from any socialist
    world outlook, it has not been determined by anybody’s
    experience but will have to be determined by our own
    experience. It seems to me that in this respect we must pool
    experience of communist organisation and test it by its practical
    implementation, so that we shall fully determine bow we must
    tackle the problems that confront us.
4
Speech Delivered On The Closing Of The Congress
December 9
(Prolonged applause. Delegates and visitors rise and
    applaud stormily for several minutes.) Comrades, I should
    like to say a few words apropos of the most important items we
    have dealt with at this Congress.
We had a brief discussion, comrades, on the question of
    democracy and Soviet power. Although it may seem at first glance
    that this discussion was far removed from the burning, practical,
    day-to-day problems of the Soviet Republic, I nevertheless think
    that it was far from useless. Comrades, in workers’
    organisations throughout the world and very often in bourgeois
    parliaments, and, in any case, during elections to bourgeois
    parliaments, there is today the same basic discussion on
    democracy—which, although many people do not realise it, is
    the old bourgeois democracy —and on the new, Soviet,
    power. Old or bourgeois democracy proclaims freedom and equality,
    equality irrespective of whether a person owns anything or not,
    irrespective of whether he is the owner of capital or not; it
    proclaims freedom for private owners to dispose of land and
    capital and freedom for those who have neither to sell their
    workers’ hands to a capitalist.
Comrades, our Soviet power has made a determined break with
    that freedom and that equality which is a lie (applause) and has
    said to the working people that socialists who understand freedom
    and equality in the bourgeois way have forgotten the germ, the ABC
    and all the content of socialism. We, and all the socialists who
    have not yet betrayed socialism, have always exposed the lies,
    fraud and hypocrisy of bourgeois society that talk about freedom
    and equality, or, at any rate, about the freedom and equality of
    elections, although actually the power of the capitalists, the
    private ownership of land and factories, predetermines not freedom
    but the oppression and deception of the working people under every
    possible kind of “democratic and republican”
    system.
We say that our aim, being the aim of world socialism, is the
    abolition of classes and that classes are groups of people, one of
    which lives by the labour of another, one of which appropriates
    the labour of another. And so, if we are to speak of that freedom
    and that equality we shall have to admit, as most of the working
    people in Russia do, that no other country has as yet given as
    much in such a short time for real freedom and real equality, no
    other country has, in such a short time, given the working people
    freedom from the main class that oppresses them, the class of
    land-owners and capitalists, and no other country has granted such
    equality in respect of the chief means of subsistence, the
    land. It is along this road, that of emancipation from the
    exploiting bourgeois classes up to the complete abolition of the
    classes, that we have begun and are continuing a resolute struggle
    for the complete abolition of classes. We know full well that
    those classes have been defeated but not destroyed. We know full
    well that the landowners and capitalists have been defeated but
    not destroyed. The class struggle continues, and the proletariat,
    together with the poor peasantry, must continue the struggle for
    the complete abolition of classes, attracting to their side all
    those who stand in the middle, and by their entire experience,
    their example of struggle they must ensure that all those who
    until now have stood in the ranks of the wavering are attracted to
    their side.
 Comrades, going over to the business of our Congress, I must
    say that the Seventh Congress is the first that has been able to
    devote a lot of time to the practical tasks of organisation, for
    the first time we have succeeded in making a start on a practical
    discussion, based directly on practical experience, of those tasks
    that concern the better organisa-tion of Soviet economy and the
    better organisation of Soviet government.
We have, of course, had too little time to deal with this
    problem in great detail but we have, nevertheless, done a lot
    here, and all the further work of the Central Executive Committee
    and of the comrades in the localities will follow the lines laid
    down here.
In conclusion, comrades, I should like to make special mention
    of the way the present Congress is to become effective insofar as
    our international situation is concerned.
Comrades, we have here repeated our peace proposal to all the
    powers and countries of the Entente. We have here expressed
    confidence based on experience that is already very rich and of a
    very serious nature—our confidence that the main
    difficulties are behind us and that we are undoubtedly emerging
    victorious from the war forced on us by the Entente, the war that
    we have been fighting for two years against an enemy considerably
    stronger than we are.
But I think, comrades, that the appeal we have just beard from
    a representative of our Red Army was nevertheless very timely. If
    the main difficulties have been left behind, comrades, we have to
    admit that ahead of us, too, organisational tasks are developing
    on an extremely broad scale. There can be no doubt that there are
    still very influential and very strong capitalist groups, groups
    that are obviously dominant in many countries and that have
    decided to continue the war against Soviet Russia to the end, cost
    what it may. There can be no doubt that now we have achieved a
    certain decisive victory we shall have to devote additional
    efforts, we shall have to bend still greater effort in order to
    exploit that victory and carry it through to the
    end. (Applause.)
Comrades, there are two things you must not forget—first,
    our general weakness connected, perhaps, with the Slav
    character—we are not stable enough, not persistent enough in
    pursuing the aims we set ourselves—secondly, experience has
    shown, once in the East and again in the South, that in a decisive
    moment we were unable to press hard enough on a fleeing enemy and
    have allowed him to rise to his feet again. There can be not a
    shadow of doubt that governments and the military classes of
    Western Europe are now drawing up new plans to save Denikin. There
    cannot be the slightest doubt that they will try to increase
    tenfold the aid they have been giving him because they realise how
    great is the danger threatening him from Soviet Russia. We must,
    therefore, tell ourselves at a time when the victories are
    beginning, as we did in times of difficulty, “Comrades,
    remember that it may now depend on a few weeks or perhaps two or
    three months whether we end this war, not merely with a decisive
    victory, but with the complete destruction of the enemy, or
    whether we shall condemn tens and hundreds of thousands of people
    to a lengthy and tormenting war. On the basis of the experience we
    have acquired we can now say with full confidence that if we can
    redouble our efforts the possibility of not only achieving a final
    victory, but also of destroying the enemy and gaining for
    ourselves a durable and lengthy peace depends on a few weeks or on
    two or three months ....”
Therefore, comrades, I should like more than anything to ask
    each of you on arriving in your locality to present this question
    to every Party organisation, to every Soviet institution and to
    every meeting of workers and peasants comrades, this winter
    campaign will most certainly lead to the complete destruction of
    the enemy if we, encouraged by success and by the clear prospects
    for Soviet development that now open up before us, regard the
    forthcoming weeks and months as a period of hard work in which we
    must redouble our war effort and other work connected with it, and
    we shall then in the shortest time destroy the enemy, and put an
    end to the Civil War, which will open up before us the possibility
    for peaceful socialist construction for a long
    time. (Applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    The Seventh All-Russia Congress of Soviets was held in Moscow. It
    was attended by 1,366 delegates (1,002 with the right to vote and
    364 with voice but no vote), of them 1,278 Communists. The agenda
    of the Congress was the following: (1) Report of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee and the Council of People’s
    Commissars, (2) War Situation, (3) the Communist International,
    (4) Food Situation, (5) Fuel Question, (6) Work of Soviet Bodies
    in the Centre and the Provinces, (7) Elections to the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee.
On the opening day of the Congress Lenin
    delivered the report on the work of the All-Russia C.E.C. and the
    C.P.C.; on the following day he closed the debate on the report,
    on December 8 he took part in a discussion of the report on the
    work of Soviet bodies at the session of the organisation section
    and on December 9 he made a speech closing the Congress. Lenin
    introduced addenda to the draft resolution on Soviet
    organisation.
 The Congress of Soviets approved the home and
    foreign policy of the Soviet Government. The detailed discussion
    of the reports on Soviet organisation, the food situation and the
    fuel question was entrusted to respective sections in view of
    their practical importance. The draft resolutions on the reports
    submitted by the sections were approved by the closing plenary
    meeting of the Congress on December 9. The resolution on "Soviet
    Organisation" envisaged the further consolidation of Soviet,
    government bodies, and gave an exact formulation of their rights
    and duties in the centre and in the provinces.
On Lenin’s proposal the Congress adopted
    a resolution on peace and an appeal to the governments of Britain,
    France, the U.S.A., Italy and Japan to begin peace negotiations
    (see p. 231 of this volume). The Congress of Soviets passed a
    resolution on ’Oppressed Nations" in which it once again
    confirmed the principles of the Soviet national policy. In a
    special resolution the Congress expressed its indignation at the
    reign of White Terror in Hungary. The Congress greeted the
    foundation of the Third International and stressed its tremendous
    international significance 
[2]
    On November 5, 1918, the German Government broke off diplomatic
    relations with the R.S.F.S.R. and expelled the staff of the Soviet
    Embassy from Berlin on the pretext that official Soviet
    representatives had been conducting revolutionary agitation in
    Germany. Diplomatic relations were not resumed until 1922.
[3]
    The Dreyfus case—a provocative trial engineered in 1894 by
    reactionary French militarists. Dreyfus, a Jewish officer of the
    French General Staff, was sentenced to life imprisonment by a
    court martial on a clearly fictitious charge of espionage and high
    treason. The trial was used by reactionary circles in France to
    incite anti-Semitism and to attack the republican regime and
    democratic liberties. When socialists and prominent bourgeois
    democrats (Emile Zola, Jean Jaurès, Anatole France and
    others) launched a campaign in 1898 for a review of the Dreyfus
    case, it immediately became a political issue and split the
    country into two camps—republicans and democrats on one side
    and the bloc of royalists, clericals, anti-Semites and
    nationalists on the other. In 1899 Dreyfus was pardoned and
    released under pressure of public opinion, but it was not until
    1906 that the Court of Cassation found him not guilty and
    reinstated him in the army.
[4]
    Lenin refers to the Texte integral des propositions accepiies par
    Lénine published in l'Humanité No. 5669 of October 26,
    1919
    
[5]
      Cheka (the All-Russia Extraordinary Commission) was set up on
      December 7 (20), 1917 by a decision of the Council of People's
      Commissars for the, purpose of "ruthlessly combating
      counter-revolution, sabotage and profiteering". As one of the
      most important levers of the dictatorship of the proletariat,
      the All-Russia Extraordinary Commission played an important part
      in checking counter-revolutionary sabotage and in protecting the
      security of the Soviet Republic. Appraising the work of this
      commission, Lenin pointed out in his report to the Ninth
      All-Russia Congress of Soviets in December 1921, "... this is
      the institution which has been our effective weapon against the
      innumerable conspiracies, against the innumerable attacks on
      Soviet power". In its resolution on the All-Russia Extraordinary
      Commission the Ninth Congress noted the commission's heroic work
      in protecting the gains of the October Revolution and, in view
      of the consolidation of Soviet power, proposed curtailing the
      commission's activity. This resolution reflected proposals made
      by Lenin in a draft decision of the Political Bureau of the
      C.C.of the R.C.P.(B.) on the All-Russia Extraordinary
      Commission, which he wrote on December 1, 1921 (see Lenin
      Miscellany XXXVI, p. 369). On February 6, 1922, the All-Russia
      C.E.C. passed a decree abolishing the All-Russia Extraordinary
      Commission.
[6]
    Lenin refers to the counter-revolutionary conspiracy exposed in
    Petrograd in November 1919. The conspiracy was organised by a
    counter-revolutionary organisation linked, up with Yudenich and
    subsidised by the Entente. Among its members were tsarist high
    officials, generals and admirals of the tsarist army and navy,
    Cadets, and people associated with the S .R .s and
    Mensheviks. They aimed at timing their revolt to Yudenich's
    offensive on Petrograd and setting up a white-guard
    government.
[7]
    The organisation section was set up at the Seventh
    All-Russia Con-gress of Soviets to examine the innovations in the
    practical work of building up the Soviet state that took place
    after the adoption of the Constitution of the R.S.F.S.R. by the
    Fifth Congress of Soviets in June 1918. Lenin took part in the
    debate on the report on Soviet develop-ment in the organisation
    section. The resolution of the section was endorsed at the closing
    plenary session of the Congress.
    


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## The Constituent Assembly Elections and  The Dictatorship of the Proletariat








The Constituent Assembly Elections And the Dictatorship of the Proletariat



V. I. Lenin
The Constituent Assembly Elections and
The Dictatorship of the Proletariat


Written: 16 December, 1919
First Published: December 1919; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Collected Works, Volume 30,
      pages 253-275 Progress Publishers, 1965
Translated: George Hanna
Transcribed/HTML Markup:  Robert Cymbala & David Walters
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

The symposium issued by the Socialist-Revolutionaries, A
    Year of the Russian Revolution. 1917-18 (Moscow,
    Zemlya i Volya Publishers, 1918), contains an extremely
    interesting article by N. V. Svyatitsky: “Results of the
    All-Russia Constituent Assembly Elections (Preface)”. The
    author gives the returns for 54 constituencies out of the total of
    79.
The author’s survey covers nearly all the gubernias of
    European Russia and Siberia, only the following being omitted:
    Olonets, Estonian, Kaluga, Bessarabian, Podolsk, Orenburg, Yakut
    and Don gubernias. 

    

      First of all I shall quote the main returns
    published by N. V. Svyatitsky and then discuss the political
    conclusions to be drawn from them.
I
The total number of votes polled in the 54 constituencies in
    November 1917 was 36,262,560. The author gives the figure of
    36,257,960, distributed over seven regions (plus the Army and
    Navy), but the figures he gives for the various parties total up
    to what I give.
The distribution of the votes according to parties is as
    follows: the Russian Socialist-Revolutionaries polled 16.5 million
    votes; if we add the votes polled by the Socialist-Revolutionaries
    of the other nations (Ukrainians, Moslems, and others), the total
    will be 20.9 million, i.e., 58 per cent.
The Mensheviks polled 668,064 votes, but if we add the votes
    polled by the analogous groups of Popular Socialists (312,000),
    Yedinstvo (25,000), Co-operators (51,000), Ukrainian
    Social-Democrats (95,000), Ukrainian socialists (507,000) German
    socialists (44,000) and Finnish socialists (14,000), the total
    will be 1.7 million.
The Bolsheviks polled 9,023,963 votes.
The Cadets polled 1,856,639 votes. By adding the Association of
    Rural Proprietors and Landowners (215,000), the Right groups
    (292,000), Old Believers (73,000), nationalists—Jews
    (550,000), Moslems (576,000), Bashkirs (195,000), Letts (67,000),
    Poles (155,000), Cossacks (79,000), Germans (130,000),
    Byelorussians (12,000)—and the “lists of various
    groups and organisations” (418,000), we get a total for the
    landowning and bourgeois parties of 4.6 million.
We know that the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks
    formed a bloc during the whole period of the revolution from
    February to October 1917. Moreover, the entire development of
    events during that period and after it showed definitely that
    those two parties together represent petty-bourgeois democracy,
    which mistakenly imagines it is, and calls itself, socialist, like
    all the parties of the Second International.
Uniting the three main groups of parties in the Constituent
    Assembly elections, we get the following total:


Party of the Proletariat (Bolsheviks)
9.02 million=25%


Petty-Bourgeois democratic parties
  (Socialist-Revolutionaries, Mensheviks, etc.)
 22.62 million=62%


Parties of landowners and bourgeoisie(Cadets, etc.)
4.62 million=13%


Total .   .   .   .   .   . .   .   .   .   .   .
36.26 million=100%

Here are N. V. Svyatitsky’s returns by regions:


Votes Polled (thousands)
Regions[*],(and armed forces separately)
S.R.s (Russian)
 % 
Bolsheviks
 % 
Cadets
 % 
Total
Northern
1,140.0381,77.240393.3132975.1
Central-Industrial1,987.9382305.644550.2105242.5
Volga-Black Earth4,733.9701115.61626746764.3
Western1,242.1431,282.24448.122,961.0
East-Urals1,547.743(62)[**]443.912181.353,583.5
Siberia2,094.875273.91087.532,786.7
Ukraine1,878.125(77)[***]754.010277.547,581.3

Army and Navy
1,885.1431,671.33851.914,363.6

From these figures it is evident that during the Constituent
    Assembly elections the Bolsheviks were the party of the
    proletariat and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the party of the
    peasantry. In the purely peasant districts, Great-Russian
    (Volga-Black Earth, Siberia, East-Urals) and Ukrainian, the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries polled 62-77 per cent. In the industrial
    centres the Bolsheviks had a majority over the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. This majority is understated in the
    district figures given by N. V. Svyatitsky, for he combined the
    most highly industrialised districts with little industrialised
    and non-industrial areas. For example, the gubernia figures of the
    votes polled by the Socialist-Revolutionary, Bolshevik, and Cadet
    parties, and by the “national and other groups”, show
    the following:
In the Northern Region the Bolshevik majority seems to be
    insignificant: 40 per cent against 38 per cent. But in this region
    non-industrial areas (Archangel, Vologda, Novgorod and Pskov
    gubernias), where the Socialist-Revolutionaries predominate, are
    combined with industrial areas:

    Petrograd City—Bolsheviks 45 per cent (of the votes)
    Socialist-Revolutionaries 16 per cent; Petrograd Gubernia—
    Bolsheviks 50 per cent, Socialist-Revolutiollaries 26 per cent
    Baltic—Bolsheviks 72 per cent,
    Socialist-Revolutionaries—0.
In the Central-Industrial Region the Bolsheviks in Moscow
    Gubernia polled 56 per cent and the Socialist-Revolutionaries 25
    per cent; in Moscow City the Bolsheviks polled 50 per cent and the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries 8 per cent; in Tver Gubernia the
    Bolsheviks polled 54 per cent and the Socialist-Revolutionaries 39
    per cent; in Vladimir Gubernia the Bolsheviks polled 56 per cent
    and the Socialist-Revolutionaries 32 per cent.
Let us note, in passing, how ridiculous, in face of such facts,
    is the talk about the Bolsheviks having only a
    “minority” of the proletariat behind them! And we hear
    this talk from the Mensheviks (668,000 votes, and with
    Transcaucasia another 700,000-800,000, against 9,000,000 votes
    polled by the Bolsheviks), and also from the social-traitors of
    the Second International
    
II
How could such a miracle have occurred? How could the
    Bolsheviks, who polled one-fourth of the votes, have won a victory
    over the petty-bourgeois democrats, who were in alliance
    (coalition) with the bourgeoisie, and who together with the
    bourgeoisie polled three-fourths of the votes?
To deny this victory now, after the Entente—the all
    mighty Entente—has been helping the enemies of Bolshevism
    for two years, is simply ridiculous. 

    

      The point is that the
    fanatical political hatred of those who have been defeated,
    including all the supporters of the Second International, prevents
    them from even raising seriously the extremely interesting
    historical and political question of why the Bolsheviks were
    victorious. The point is that this is a “miracle” only
    from the standpoint of vulgar petty-bourgeois democracy, the
    abysmal ignorance and deep-rooted prejudices of which are exposed
    by this question and the answer to it.
From the standpoint of the class struggle and socialism, from
    that standpoint, which the Second International has abandoned, the
    answer to the question is indisputable.
The Bolsheviks were victorious, first of all, because they had
    behind them the vast majority of the proletariat, which included
    the most class-conscious, energetic and revolutionary section, the
    real vanguard, of that advanced class. 

    

      Take the two metropolitan
    cities, Petrograd and Moscow. The total number of votes polled
    during the Constituent Assembly elections was 1,765,100, of which
    Socialist Revolutionaries polled 218,000, Bolsheviks—837,000
    and Cadets—515,400.
No matter how much the petty-bourgeois democrats who call
    themselves socialists and Social-Democrats (the Chernovs, Martovs,
    Kautskys, Longuets, MacDonalds and Co.) may beat their breasts and
    bow to the Goddesses of “equality”, “universal
    suffrage”, “democracy”, “pure
    democracy”, or “consistent democracy”, it does
    not do away with the economic and political fact of the
    inequality of town and country.
That fact is inevitable under capitalism in general, and in the
    period of transition from capitalism to communism in
    particular.
The town cannot be equal to the country. The country cannot be
    equal to the town under the historical conditions of this
    epoch. The town inevitably leads the country. The country
    inevitably follows the town. The only question is
    which class, of the “urban” classes, will
    succeed in leading the country, will cope with this task, and what
    forms will leadership by the town assume?
In November 1917, the Bolsheviks had behind them the vast
    majority of the proletariat. By that time, the party which
    competed with the Bolsheviks among the proletariat, the Menshevik
    party, had been utterly defeated (9,000,000 votes against
    1,400,000, if we add together 668,000 and 700,000-800,000 in
    Transcaucasia). Moreover, that party was defeated in the
    fifteen-year struggle (1903-17) which steeled,
    enlightened and organised the vanguard of the proletariat, and
    forged it into a genuine revolutionary
    vanguard. Furthermore, the first revolution, that of 1905,
    prepared the subsequent development, determined in a
    practical way the relations between-the two parties, and
    served as the general rehearsal of the great events of 1917-19.

    
The petty-bourgeois democrats who call themselves socialists of
    the Second International are fond of dismissing this extremely
    important historical question with honeyed phrases about the
    benefits of proletarian “unity”. When they use these
    honeyed phrases they forget the historical fact of the
    accumulation of opportunism in the working-class movement
    of 1871-1914; they forget (or do not want) to think about
    the causes of the collapse of opportunism in August 1914, about
    the causes of the split in international socialism in 1914-17.
Unless the revolutionary section of the proletariat is
    thoroughly prepared in every way for the expulsion and suppression
    of opportunism it is useless even thinking about the dictatorship
    of the proletariat. That is the lesson of the Russian revolution
    which should be taken to heart by the leaders of the
    “independent” German Social-Democrats,[1] French
    socialists, and so forth, who now want to evade the issue by means
    of verbal recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat.
To continue. The Bolsheviks had behind them not only the
    majority of the proletariat, not only the revolutionary
    vanguard of the proletariat which had been steeled in the long and
    persevering struggle against opportunism; they had, if it is
    permissible to use a military term, a powerful “striking
    force” in the metropolitan cities.
An overwhelming superiority of forces at the decisive point at
    the decisive moment—this “law” of military
    success is also the law of political success, especially in that
    fierce, seething class war which is called revolution.
Capitals, or, in general, big commercial and industrial centres
    (here in Russia the two coincided, but they do not everywhere
    coincide), to a considerable degree decide the political fate of a
    nation, provided, of course, the centres are supported by
    sufficient local, rural forces, even if that support does not come
    immediately.
In the two chief cities, in the two principal commercial and
    industrial centres of Russia, the Bolsheviks had an overwhelming,
    decisive superiority of forces. Here our forces were nearly
    four times as great as those of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. We had here more than the Socialist
    Revolutionaries and Cadets put together. Moreover, our
    adversaries were split up, for the “coalition” of the
    Cadets with the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks (in
    Petrograd and Moscow the Mensheviks polled only 3 per cent of the
    votes) was utterly discredited among the working people. Real
    unity between the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks and the
    Cadets against us was quite out of the question at that time.[It is interesting to note that the above figures
    also reveal the unity and solidarity of the party of the
    proletariat and the extremely fragmented state of the parties of
    the petty bourgeoisie and of the bourgeoisie.] It will be
    remembered that in November 1917, even the leaders of the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, who were a hundred times
    nearer to the idea of a bloc with the Cadets than the
    Socialist-Revolutionary and Menshevik workers and peasants, even
    those leaders thought (and bargained with us) about a bloc with
    the Bolsheviks without the Cadets!
We were certain of winning Petrograd and Moscow in
    October-November 1917, for we had an overwhelming superiority of
    forces and the most thorough political preparation, insofar as
    concerns both the assembly, concentration, training, testing and
    battle-hardening of the Bolshevik “armies”, and the
    disintegration, exhaustion, disunity and demoralisation of the
    “enemy’s” “armies”.
And being certain of winning the two metropolitan cities, the
    two centres of the capitalist state machine (economic and
    political), by a swift, decisive blow, we, in spite of the furious
    resistance of the bureaucracy and intelligentsia, despite
    sabotage, and so forth, were able with the aid of the central
    apparatus of state power to prove by deeds to the
    non-proletarian working people that the proletariat was their only
    reliable ally, friend and leader.

      III
    
But before passing on to this most important
    question—that of the attitude of the proletariat towards the
    non-proletarian working people—we must deal with the armed
    forces.
The flower of the people’s forces went to form the army
    during the imperialist war; the opportunist scoundrels of the
    Second International (not only the social-chauvinists, i.e., the
    Scheidemanns and Renaudels who directly went over to the side of
    “defence of the fatherland”, but also the Centrists[2]) by their words and deeds strengthened
    the subordination of the armed forces to the leadership of the
    imperialist robbers of both the German and Anglo-French groups,
    but the real proletarian revolutionaries never forgot what Marx
    said in 1870: “The bourgeoisie will give the proletariat
    practice in arms!”[3] Only the Austro-German and Anglo
    Franco-Russian betrayers of socialism could talk about
    “defence of the fatherland” in the imperialist war,
    i.e., a war that was predatory on both sides; the proletarian
    revolutionaries, however (from August 1914 onwards), turned all
    their attention to revolutionising the armed forces, to utilising
    them against the imperialist robber bourgeoisie, to
    converting the unjust and predatory war between the two groups of
    imperialist predators into a just and legitimate war of the
    proletarians and oppressed working people in each country against
    “their own”, “national” bourgeoisie.
During 1914-17 the betrayers of socialism did not make
    preparations to use the armed forces against the imperialist
    government of each nation.
The Bolsheviks prepared for this by the whole of their
    propaganda, agitation and underground organisational work from
    August 1914 onwards. Of course, the betrayers of socialism, the
    Scheidemanns and Kautskys of all nations, got out of this by
    talking about the demoralisation of the armed forces by
    Bolshevik agitation, but we are proud of the fact that we
    performed our duty in demoralising the forces of our class enemy,
    in winning away from him the armed masses of the workers
    and peasants for the struggle against the exploiters.
The results of our work were seen in, among other things, the
    votes polled in the Constituent Assembly elections in November
    1917, in which, in Russia, the armed forces also participated.
The following are the principal results of the voting as given
    by N. V. Svyatitsky:



  Number of Votes Polled in the Constituent Assembly Elections, November 1917
  (thousands)


Army and Navy units
S.R.s
Bolsheviks
Cadets
National and othergroups
Total



  Northern FrontWesternSouth-WesternRumanianCaucasianBaltic FleetBlack Sea Fleet

  240.0180.6402.9679.4360.4—22.2

  480.0653.4300.1167.060.0(120.0)[*]10.8

  ?16.713.721.4?——

  60.0[**]125.2290.6260.7——19.5

  780.0976.01,007.41,128.6420.0(120.0)[*]52.5



Total 1,885.1
  1,671.3+ (120.0)*=1,791.3

  51.8 +? 756.0 4,364.5+(120.0)*+ ?



Summary: the Socialist-Revolutionaries polled 1,885,100 votes;
    the Bolsheviks polled 1,671,300 votes. If to the latter we add the
    120,000 votes (approximately) polled in the Baltic Fleet, the
    total votes polled by the Bolsheviks will be 1,791,300.
The Bolsheviks, therefore, polled a little less than
    the Socialist-Revolutionaries. 

    

      And so, by October-November 1917,
    the armed forces were half Bolshevik.
If that had not been the case we could not have been
    victorious.
We polled nearly half the votes of the armed forces as a whole,
    but had an overwhelming majority on the fronts nearest to the
    metropolitan cities and, in general, on those not too far
    away. If we leave out the Caucasian Front, the Bolsheviks obtained
    on the whole a majority over the Socialist-Revolutionaries. And if
    we take the Northern and Western fronts, the votes polled by the
    Bolsheviks will amount to over one million, compared with
    420,000 votes polled by the Socialist-Revolutionaries.
Thus, in the armed forces, too, the Bolsheviks already had a
    political “striking force”, by November 1917,
    which ensured them an overwhelming superiority of forces at the
    decisive point at the decisive moment. Resistance on the part of
    the armed forces to the October Revolution of the proletariat, to
    the winning of political power by the proletariat, was entirely
    out of the question, considering that the Bolsheviks had an
    enormous majority on the Northern and Western fronts, while on the
    other fronts, far removed from the centre, the Bolsheviks had the
    time and opportunity to win the peasants away from the
    Socialist-Revolutionary Party. With this we shall deal later.
    
 IV
    
On the basis of the returns of the Constituent Assembly
    elections we have studied the three conditions which determined
    the victory of Bolshevism: (1) an overwhelming majority among the
    proletariat; (2) almost half of the armed forces; (3) an
    overwhelming superiority of forces at the decisive moment at the
    decisive points, namely: in Petrograd and Moscow and on the war
    fronts near the centre.
But these conditions could have ensured only a very short-lived
    and unstable victory had the Bolsheviks been unable to win to
    their side the majority of the non-proletarian working
    masses, to win them from the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the
    other petty-bourgeois parties.
That is the main thing.
And the chief reason why the “socialists” (read:
    petty-bourgeois democrats) of the Second International fail to
    understand the dictatorship of the proletariat is that they fail
    to understand that 

    

state power in the hands of one class, the
proletariat, can and must become an instrument for
winning to the side of the proletariat the non-proletarian working
masses, an instrument for winning those masses from the
bourgeoisie and from the petty-bourgeois parties.

      Filled with petty-bourgeois prejudices, forgetting the most
      important thing in the teachings of Marx about the state, the
      “socialists” of the Second International regard
      state power as something holy, as an idol, or as the
      result of formal voting, the absolute of “consistent
      democracy” (or what ever else they call this
      nonsense). They fail to see that state power is simply an
      instrument which different classes can and
      must use (and know how to use) for their class
      aims.
The bourgeoisie has used state power as an instrument of the
    capitalist class against the proletariat, against all the working
    people. That has been the case in the most democratic bourgeois
    republics. Only the betrayers of Marxism have
    “forgotten” this.
The proletariat must (after mustering sufficiently strong
    political and military “striking forces”) overthrow
    the bourgeoisie, take state power from it in order to use that
    instrument for its class aims.
What are the class aims of the-proletariat?
Suppress the resistance of the bourgeoisie;
Neutralise the peasantry and, if possible, win them overÂat
    any rate the majority of the labouring, non-exploiting
    section to the side of the proletariat;
Organise large-scale machine production, using factories, and
    means of production in general, expropriated from the
    bourgeoisie;
Organise socialism on the ruins of capitalism.
*  *  *
    
In mockery of the teachings of Marx, those gentlemen, the
    opportunists, including the Kautskyites, “teach” the
    people that the proletariat must first win a majority by means of
    universal suffrage, then obtain state power, by the vote of that
    majority, and only after that, on the basis of
    “consistent” (some call it “pure”)
    democracy, organise socialism.
But we say on the basis of the teachings of Marx and the
    experience of the Russian revolution:
the proletariat must first overthrow the bourgeoisie and win
    for itself state power, and then use that state power,
    that is, the dictatorship of the proletariat, as an instrument of
    its class for the purpose of winning the sympathy of the majority
    of the working people. 
*   *    *
    
How can state power in the hands of the proletariat become the
    instrument of its class struggle for influence over the
    non-proletarian working people, of the struggle to draw them to
    its side, to win them over, to wrest them from the
    bourgeoisie?
First, the proletariat achieves this not by putting
    into operation the old apparatus of state power, but by
    smashing it to pieces, levelling it with the ground (in
    spite of the howls of frightened philistines and the threats of
    saboteurs) and building a new state apparatus. That new
    state apparatus is adapted to the dictatorship of the proletariat
    and to its struggle against the bourgeoisie to win the
    non-proletarian working people. That new apparatus is not
    anybody’s invention, it grows out of the
    proletarian class struggle as that struggle becomes more
    widespread and intense. That new apparatus of state power, the new
    type of state power, is Soviet power.
The Russian proletariat, immediately, a few hours after winning
    state power, proclaimed the dissolution of the old state apparatus
    (which, as Marx showed, had been for centuries adapted to serve
    the class interests of the bourgeoisie, even in the most
    democratic republic[4]) and transferred all power to the
    Soviets ; and only the working and exploited people could
    enter the Soviets, all exploiters of every kind were excluded.
In that way the proletariat at once, at one stroke, immediately
    after it had taken state power, won from the
    bourgeoisie the vast mass of its supporters in the
    petty-bourgeois and “socialist” parties; for that
    mass, the working and exploited people who had been deceived by
    the bourgeoisie (and by its yes-men, the Chernovs, Kautskys,
    Martovs and Co.), on obtaining Soviet power, acquired,
    for the first time, an instrument of mass struggle for
    their interests against the bourgeoisie.
Secondly, the proletariat can, and must, at once, or at all
    events very quickly, win from the bourgeoisie and from
    petty-bourgeois democrats “their” masses,
    i.e., the masses which follow them—win them by
    satisfying their most urgent economic needs in a revolutionary way
    by expropriating the landowners and the bourgeoisie.
The bourgeoisie cannot do that, no matter how
    “mighty” its state power may be.
The proletariat can do that on the very next day after
    it has won state power, because for this it has both an apparatus
    (the Soviets) and economic means (the expropriation of the
    landowners and the bourgeoisie).
That is exactly how the Russian proletariat won the
    peasantry from the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and won them
    literally a few hours after achieving state power; a few
    hours after the victory over the bourgeoisie in Petrograd, the
    victorious proletariat issued a “decree on land”,[5] and in that decree it entirely, at
    once, with revolutionary swiftness, energy and devotion,
    satisfied all the most urgent economic needs of the
    majority of the peasants, it expropriated the landowners,
    entirely and without compensation.
To prove to the peasants that the proletarians did not want to
    steam-roller them, did not want to boss them, but to help them and
    be their friends, the victorious Bolsheviks did not put a
    single word of their own into that “decree on
    land”, but copied it, word for word, from the peasant
    mandates (the most revolutionary of them, of course) which the
    Socialist-Revolutionaries had published in the
    Socialist-Revolutionary newspaper.
The Socialist-Revolutionaries fumed and raved, protested and
    howled that “the Bolsheviks had stolen their
    programme”, but they were only laughed at for that; a fine
    party, indeed, which had to be defeated and driven from the
    government in order that everything in its programme that was
    revolutionary and of benefit to the working people could be
    carried out!
The traitors, blockheads and pedants of the Second
    International could never understand such dialectics; the
    proletariat cannot achieve victory if it does not win the majority
    of the population to its side. But to limit that winning to
    polling a majority of votes in an election under the rule of
    the bourgeoisie, or to make it the condition for it, is crass
    stupidity, or else sheer deception of the workers. In order to win
    the majority of the population to its side the proletariat must,
    in the first p]ace, overthrow the bourgeoisie and seize state
    power; secondly, it must introduce Soviet power and complete]y
    smash the old state apparatus, whereby it immediately undermines
    the rule, prestige and influence of the bourgeoisie and
    petty-bourgeois compromisers over the non-proletarian working
    people. Thirdly, it must entirely destroy the influence
    of the bourgeoisie and petty-bourgeois compromisers over the
    majority of the non-proletarian masses by satisfying
    their economic needs in a revolutionary way at the
    expense of the exploiters.
It is possible to do this, of course, only when capitalist
    development has reached a certain level. Failing that fundamental
    condition, the proletariat cannot develop into a separate class,
    nor can success be achieved in its prolonged training, education,
    instruction and trial in battle during long years of strikes and
    demonstrations when the opportunists are disgraced and
    expelled. Failing that fundamental condition, the centres will not
    play that economic and political role which enables the
    proletariat, after their capture, to lay hold of state power in
    its entirety, or more correctly of its vital nerve, its core, its
    node. Failing that fundamental condition, there cannot be the
    kinship, closeness and bond between the position of the
    proletariat and that of the non-proletarian working people which
    (kinship, closeness and bond) are necessary for the proletariat to
    influence those masses, for its influence over them to be
    effective.
V
Let us proceed further.
The proletariat can win state power, establish the Soviet
    system, and satisfy the economic needs of the majority of the
    working people at the expense of the exploiters.
Is that sufficient for achieving complete and final victory?
    No, it is not.
The petty-bourgeois democrats, their chief present-day
    representatives, the “socialists” and
    “Social-Democrats”, are suffering from illusions when
    they imagine that the working people are capable, under
    capitalism, of acquiring the high degree of class-consciousness,
    firmness of character, perception and wide political outlook that
    will enable them to decide, merely by voting, or at all
    events, to decide in advance, without long experience of
    struggle, that they will follow a particular class, or a
    particular party.
It is a mere illusion. It is a sentimental story invented by
    pedants and sentimental socialists of the Kautsky, Longuet and
    MacDonald type.
    
Capitalism would not be capitalism if it did not, on the one
    hand, condemn the masses to a downtrodden, crushed and
    terrified state of existence, to disunity (the countryside!) and
    ignorance, and if it (capitalism) did not, on the other hand,
    place in the hands of the bourgeoisie a gigantic apparatus of
    falsehood and deception to hoodwink the masses of workers and
    peasants, to stultify their minds, and so forth.
That is why only the proletariat can lead the working
    people out of capitalism to communism. It is no use thinking
    that the petty-bourgeois or semi-petty-bourgeois masses can decide
    in advance the extremely complicated political question: “to
    be with the working class or with the bourgeoisie”. The
    vacillation of the non-proletarian sections of the
    working people is inevitable; and inevitable also is their own
    practical experience, which will enable them to compare
    leadership by the bourgeoisie with leadership by the
    proletariat.
This is the circumstance that is constantly lost sight of by
    those who worship “consistent democracy” and who
    imagine that extremely important political problems can be solved
    by voting. Such problems are actually solved by civil war
    if they are acute and aggravated by struggle, and the
    experience of the non-proletarian masses (primarily of
    the peasants), their experience of comparing the rule of the
    proletariat with the rule of the bourgeoisie, is of tremendous
    importance in that war.
The Constituent Assembly elections in Russia in November 1917,
    compared with the two-year Civil War of 1917-19, are highly
    instructive in this respect.
See which districts proved to be the least Bolshevik. First,
    the East-Urals and the Siberian where the Bolsheviks polled 12 per
    cent and 10 per cent of the votes respectively. Secondly, the
    Ukraine where the Bolsheviks polled 10 per cent of the votes. Of
    the other districts, the Bolsheviks polled the smallest percentage
    of votes in the peasant district of Great Russia, the Volga-Black
    Earth district, but even there the Bolsheviks polled 16 per cent
    of the votes.
It was precisely in the districts where the Bolsheviks polled
    the lowest percentage of votes in November 1917 that the
    counter-revolutionary movements, the revolts and the


      organisation of counter-revolutionary forces had the greatest
      success. It was precisely in those districts that the rule of
      Kolchak and Denikin lasted for months and months.
The vacillation of the petty-bourgeois population was
    particularly marked in those districts where the influence of the
    proletariat is weakest. Vacillation was at first in favour of the
    Bolsheviks when they granted land and when the demobilised
    soldiers brought the news about peace; later—against the
    Bolsheviks when, to promote the international development of the
    revolution and to protect its centre in Russia, they agreed to
    sign the Treaty of Brest and thereby “offended”
    patriotic sentiments, the deepest of petty-bourgeois
    sentiments. The dictatorship of the proletariat was particularly
    displeasing to the peasants in those places where there were the
    largest stocks of surplus grain, when the Bolsheviks showed that
    they would strictly and firmly secure the transfer of those
    surplus stocks to the state at fixed prices. The peasants in the
    Urals, Siberia and the Ukraine turned to Kolchak and Denikin.
Further, the experience of Kolchak and Denikin
    “democracy”, about which every hack writer in
    Kolchakia and Denikia shouted in every issue of the whiteguard
    newspapers, showed the peasants that phrases about democracy and
    about the “Constituent Assembly” serve only as a
    screen to conceal the dictatorship of the landowners and
    capitalists.
Another turn towards Bolshevism began and peasant revolts
    spread in the rear of Kolchak and Denikin. The peasants welcomed
    the Red troops as liberators.
In the long run, it was this vacillation of the peasantry, the
    main body of the petty-bourgeois working people, that decided the
    fate of Soviet rule and of the rule of Kolchak and Denikin. But
    this “long run” was preceded by a fairly lengthy
    period of severe struggle and painful trial, which have not ended
    in Russia after two years, have not ended precisely in Siberia and
    in the Ukraine. And there is no guarantee that they will end
    completely within, say, another year or so.
The supporters of “consistent” democracy have not
    given thought to the importance of this historic fact. They
    invented, and are still inventing, nursery tales about the
    proletariat under capitalism being able to “convince”
    the majority of the working people and win them firmly to its side
    by voting. But reality shows that only in the course of a long and
    fierce struggle does the stern experience of the
    vacillating petty bourgeoisie lead it to the
    conclusion, after comparing the dictatorship of the proletariat
    with the dictatorship of the capitalists, that the former is
    better than the latter.
In theory, all socialists who have studied Marxism and are
    willing to take into account the lessons of the nineteenth century
    political history of the advanced countries recognise that the
    vacillation of the petty bourgeoisie between the
    proletariat and the capitalist class is inevitable. The economic
    roots of this vacillation are clearly revealed by economic
    science, the truths of which have been repeated millions of times
    in the newspapers, leaflets and pamphlets issued by the socialists
    of the Second International.
But these people cannot apply those truths to the peculiar
    epoch of the dictatorship of the proletariat. They substitute
    petty-bourgeois-democratic prejudices and illusions (about class
    “equality”, about “consistent” or
    “pure’ democracy, about solving great historic
    problems by voting, and so forth) for the class
    struggle. They will not understand that after capturing state
    power the proletariat does not thereby cease its class struggle,
    but continues it in a different form and by different means. The
    dictatorship of the proletariat is the class struggle of the
    proletariat conducted with the aid of an instrument like state
    power, a class struggle, one of whose aims is to demonstrate to
    the non-proletarian sections of the working people by means of
    their long experience and a long list of practical examples that
    it is more to their advantage to side with the dictatorship of the
    proletariat than with the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, and
    that there can be no third course.
The returns of the Constituent Assembly elections held in
    November 1917 give us the main background to the picture of the
    development of the Civil War that has raged for two years since
    those elections. The main forces in that war were already
    clearly evident during the Constituent Assembly
    elections—the role of the “striking force” of
    the proletarian army, the role of the vacillating peasantry, and
    the role of the bourgeoisie were already apparent. In his article
    N .V. Svyatitsky writes: “The Cadets were most successful in
    the same regions where the Bolsheviks were most
    successful—in the Northern and Central-Industrial
    regions” (p. 116). Naturally, in the most highly developed
    capitalist centres, the intermediary elements standing between the
    proletariat and the bourgeoisie were the weakest. Naturally, in
    those centres, the class struggle was most acute. It was there
    that the main forces of the bourgeoisie were concentrated and
    there, only there, could the proletariat defeat the
    bourgeoisie. Only the proletariat could rout the bourgeoisie, and
    only after routing the bourgeoisie could the proletariat
    definitely win the sympathy and support of the petty-bourgeois
    strata of the population by using an instrument like state
    power.
If properly used, if correctly read, the returns of the
    Constituent Assembly elections reveal to us again and again the
    fundamental truths of the Marxist doctrine of the class
    struggle.
These returns, incidentally, also reveal the role and
    importance of the national question. Take the Ukraine. At the last
    conferences on the Ukrainian question some comrades accused the
    writer of these lines of giving too much “prominence”
    to the national question in the Ukraine. The returns of the
    Constituent Assembly elections show that in the Ukraine, as early
    as November 1917, the Ukrainian Socialist-Revolutionaries
    and socialists polled a majority (3.4 million votes + 0.5 = 3.9
    million against 1.9 million polled by the Russian
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, out of a total poll in the whole of the
    Ukraine of 7.6 million votes). In the army on the South-Western
    and Rumanian fronts the Ukrainian socialists polled 30 per cent
    and 34 per cent of the total votes (the Russian
    Socialist-Revolutionaries polled 40 per cent and 59 per cent).
Under these circumstances, to ignore the importance of the
    national question in the Ukraine—a sin of which Great
    Russians are often guilty (and of which the Jews are guilty
    perhaps only a little less often than the Great Russians)—is
    a great and dangerous mistake. The division between the Russian
    and Ukrainian Socialist-Revolutionaries as early as 1917 could not
    have been accidental. As internationalists it is our duty, first,
    to combat very vigorously the survivals (sometimes unconscious) of
    Great-Russian imperialism and chauvinism among
    “Russian” Communists; and secondly, it is our duty,
    precisely on the national question, which is a relatively minor
    one (for an internationalist the question of state frontiers is a
    secondary, if not a tenth-rate, question), to make
    concessions. There are other questions—the fundamental
    interests of the proletarian dictatorship; the interests of the
    unity and discipline of the Red Army which is fighting Denikin;
    the leading role of the proletariat in relation to the
    peasantry—that are more important; the question whether the
    Ukraine will be a separate state is far less important. We must
    not be in the least surprised, or frightened, even by the prospect
    of the Ukrainian workers and peasants trying out different
    systems, and in the course of, say, several years, testing by
    practice union with the R.S.F.S.R., or seceding from the latter
    and forming an independent Ukrainian S.S.R., or various forms of
    their close alliance, and so on, and so forth.
To attempt to settle this question in advance, once and for
    all, “firmly” and “irrevocably”, would be
    narrow-mindedness or sheer stupidity, for the vacillation of the
    non-proletarian working people on such a question is
    quite natural, even inevitable, but not in the least frightful for
    the proletariat. It is the duty of the proletarian who is really
    capable of being an internationalist to treat such
    vacillation with the greatest caution and tolerance, it is his
    duty to leave it to the non-proletarian masses themselves
    to get rid of this vacillation as a result of their own
    experience. We must be intolerant and ruthless, uncompromising and
    inflexible on other, more fundamental questions, some of which I
    have already pointed to above.
VI
The comparison of the Constituent Assembly elections in
    November 1917 with the development of the proletarian revolution
    in Russia from October 1917 to December 1919 enables us to draw
    conclusions concerning bourgeois parliamentarism and the
    proletarian revolution in every capitalist country. Let me try
    briefly to formulate, or at least to outline, the principal
    conclusions.
1.Universal suffrage is an index of the level reached by the
    various classes in their understanding of their problems.
It shows how the various classes are inclined to solve their problems. The actual solution of those problems is not provided by voting, but by the class struggle in all its forms including civil war.
2.The socialists and Social-Democrats of the Second
    International take the stand of vulgar petty-bourgeois democrats
    and share the prejudice that the fundamental problems of the class
    struggle can be solved by voting.
3.The party of the revolutionary proletariat must take part in
    bourgeois parliaments in order to enlighten the masses; this can
    be done during elections and in the struggle between parties in
    parliament. But limiting the class struggle to the parliamentary
    struggle, or regarding the latter as the highest and decisive
    form, to which all the other forms of struggle are subordinate, is
    actually desertion to the side of the bourgeoisie against the
    proletariat.
4.All the representatives and supporters of the Second
    International, and all the leaders of the German, so-called
    “independent”, Social-Democratic Party, actually go
    over to the bourgeoisie in this way when they recognise the
    dictatorship of the proletariat in words, but in deeds, by their
    propaganda, imbue the proletariat with the idea that it must first
    obtain a formal expression of the will of the majority of the
    population under capitalism (i.e., a majority of votes in the
    bourgeois parliament) to transfer political power to the
    proletariat, which transfer is to take place later.
All the cries, based on this premise, of the German
    “independent” Social-Democrats and similar leaders of
    decayed socialism against the “dictatorship of a
    minority”, and so forth, merely indicate that those leaders
    fail to understand the dictatorship of the bourgeoisie, which
    actually reigns even in the most democratic republics, and that
    they fail to understand the conditions for its destruction by the
    class struggle of the proletariat.
5.This failure to understand consists, in particular, in the
    following: they forget that, to a very large degree, the bourgeois
    parties are able to rule because they deceive the masses of the
    people, because of the yoke of capital, and to this is added
    self-deception concerning the nature of capitalism, a
    self-deception which is characteristic mostly of the
    petty-bourgeois parties, which usually want to substitute more or
    less disguised forms of class conciliation for the class
    struggle.
“First let the majority of the population, while private
    property still exists, i.e., while the rule and yoke of capital
    still exist, express themselves in favour of the party of the
    proletariat and only then can and should the party take
    power“—so say the petty-bourgeois democrats who call
    themselves socialists but who are in reality the servitors of the
    bourgeoisie.
“Let the revolutionary proletariat first overthrow the
    bourgeoisie, break the yoke of capital, and smash the bourgeois
    state apparatus, then the victorious proletariat will be able
    rapidly to gain the sympathy and support of the majority of the
    non-proletarian working people by satisfying their needs at the
    expense of the exploiters“—say we. The opposite will
    be rare exception in history (and even in such an exception the
    bourgeoisie can resort to civil war, as the example of Finland
    showed[6]).
6.Or in other words:
“First we shall pledge ourselves to recognise the
    principle of equality, or consistent democracy, while preserving
    private property and the yoke of capital (i.e., actual inequality
    under formal equality), and try to obtain the decision of the
    majority on this basis”—say the bourgeoisie and their
    yes-men, the petty-bourgeois democrats who call themselves
    socialists and Social-Democrats.
“First the proletarian class struggle, winning state
    power, will destroy the pillars and foundations of actual
    inequality, and then the proletariat, which has defeated the
    exploiters, will lead all working people to the abolition of
    classes, i.e., to socialist equality, the only kind
    that is not a deception”— say we.
7.In all capitalist countries, besides the proletariat, or that
    part of the proletariat which is conscious of its revolutionary
    aims and is capable of fighting to achieve them, there are
    numerous politically immature proletarian, semi-proletarian,
    semi-petty-bourgeois strata which follow the bourgeoisie and
    bourgeois democracy (including the ‘’socialists”
    of the Second International) because they have been deceived, have
    no confidence in their own strength, or in the strength of the
    proletariat, are unaware of the possibility of having their urgent
    needs satisfied by means of the expropriation of the
    exploiters.
These strata of the working and exploited people provide the
    vanguard of the proletariat with allies and give it a stable
    majority of the population; but the proletariat can win these
    allies only with the aid of an instrument like state power, that
    is to say, only after it has overthrown the bourgeoisie and has
    destroyed the bourgeois state apparatus.
8.The strength of the proletariat in any capitalist country is
    far greater than the proportion it represents of the total
    population. That is because the proletariat economically dominates
    the centre and nerve of the entire economic system of capitalism,
    and also because the proletariat expresses economically and
    politically the real interests of the overwhelming majority of the
    working people under capitalism.
Therefore, the proletariat, even when it constitutes a minority
    of the population (or when the class-conscious and really
    revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat constitutes a minority
    of the population), is capable of overthrowing the bourgeoisie
    and, after that, of winning to its side numerous allies from a
    mass of semi-proletarians and petty bourgeoisie who never declare
    in advance in favour of the rule of the proletariat, who do not
    understand the conditions and aims of that rule, and only by their
    subsequent experience become convinced that the proletarian
    dictatorship is inevitable, proper and legitimate.
9.Finally, in every capitalist country there are always very
    broad strata of the petty bourgeoisie which inevitably vacillate
    between capital and labour. To achieve victory, the proletariat
    must, first, choose the right moment for its decisive assault on
    the bourgeoisie, taking into account, among other things, the
    disunity between the bourgeoisie and its petty-bourgeois allies,
    or the instability of their alliance, and so forth. Secondly, the
    proletariat must, after its victory, utilise this vacillation of
    the petty bourgeoisie in such a way as to neutralise them, prevent
    their siding with the exploiters; it must be able to hold on for
    some time in spite of this vacillation, and so on, and so
    forth.
10.One of the necessary conditions for preparing the
    proletariat for its victory is a long, stubborn and ruthless
    struggle against opportunism, reformism, social-chauvinism, and
    similar bourgeois influences and trends, which are inevitable,
    since the proletariat is operating in a capitalist environment. If
    there is no such struggle, if opportunism in the working-class
    movement is not utterly defeated beforehand, there can be no
    dictatorship of the proletariat. Bolshevism would not have
    defeated the bourgeoisie in 1917-19 if before that, in 1903-17, it
    had not learned to defeat the Mensheviks, i.e., the opportunists,
    reformists, social-chauvinists, and ruthlessly expel them from the
    party of the proletarian vanguard.
At the present time, the verbal recognition of the dictatorship
    of the proletariat by the leaders of the German
    “Independents”, or by the French Longuetists,[7] and the like, who are
    actually continuing the old, habitual policy of big and
    small concessions to and conciliation with opportunism,
    subservience to the prejudices of bourgeois democracy
    (“consistent democracy” or “pure
    democracy” as they call it) and bourgeois parliamentarism,
    and so forth, is the most dangerous self-deception—and
    sometimes sheer fooling of the workers.
December 16, 1919

Endnotes
Notes from above table [Votes Polled (thousands).
* The author divides Russia into districts in a rather unusual way: Northern: Archangel, Vologda, Petrograd, Novgorod, Pskov, Baltic. Central-Industrial: Vladimir, Kostroma, Moscow, Nizhni-Novgorod, Ryazan, Tula, Tver Yaroslavl. Volga-Black Earth: Astrakhan, Voronezh, Kursk, Orel Penza Samara, Saratov, Simbirsk, Tambov. Western: Vitebsk, Minsk, Mogilev, Smolensk. East-Urals: Vyatka, Kazan, Perm, Ufa. Siberia: Tobolsk, Tomsk, Altai, Yeniseisk, Irkutsk, Transbaikal, Amur. The Ukraine: Volhynia, Ekaterinoslav, Kiev, Poltava, Taurida, Kharkov, Kherson, Chernigov.
** Svyatitsky obtains the figure in brackets, 62 per cent, by adding the Moslem and Chuvash Socialist-Revolutionaries.
*** The figure in brackets, 77 per cent, is mine, obtained by adding the Ukrainian Socialist-Revolutionaries.
Notes from above table [Number of Votes Polled in the Constituent Assemby Elections].
* The figure is Approximate. Two Bolsheviks were elected. N. V. Svyatitsky counts an average of 60,000 votes per elected person. That is why I give the figure 120,000.
** No information is given as to which party polled 19,500 votes in the Black Sea Fleet. The other figures in this column evidently apply almost entirely to the Ukrainian socialists for 10 Ukrainian socialists and one Social-Democrat (i.e., a Menshevik) were elected.
[1]
    The Independent Social-Democratic Party of
    Germany—a Centrist party formed in April 1917 at the
    inaugural congress in Gotha. It advocated unity with
    social-chauvinists and went as far as to deny the class
    struggle. Kautsky’s group (Arbeitsgemeinschaft ) in
    Reichstag formed the core of the party. In October 1920 a split
    took place at a party congress in Halle. A considerable section of
    the party united with the Communist Party of Germany in December
    1920 and the Right wing formed a separate party, retaining its old
    name. It existed till 1922.
[2]
Centrists, Centrism—a variety of
    opportunism in the labour movement, hostile to
    Marxism-Leninism. It arose in Social-Democratic parties of the
    Second International prior to the First World War.
The Centrists used Marxist phrases and posed as
    “orthodox Marxists”, but in fact emasculated Marxism
    of its revolutionary content, and tried to retain the influence of
    open opportunists and hence of the bourgeoisie over the
    workers. The ideology of Centrism is the ideology of adaptation,
    of the subordination of the class interests of the proletariat to
    those of the bourgeoisie. Lenin said that Centrism was much more
    dangerous, much more harmful to the working-class movement than
    open opportunism; he described Centrism as “the social
    product of the contradictions within the Second International, a
    blend of loyalty to Marxism in word, and subordination to
    opportunism in deeds” (see present edition, Vol. 21, p. 312)
    [See Socialism and War, ch. 1, the section entitled
    “Kaukskyism”.—]
During the First World War the Centrists
    supported the policy of the opportunists, the social-chauvinists
    and at the same time they advanced pacifist slogans, in this way
    diverting the workers from the revolutionary struggle against the
    imperialist war. Lenin and other Bolsheviks considered Kautsky was
    one of the chief theoreticians of Centrism.
The Bolshevik Party headed by Lenin was an
    irreconcilable and consistent fighter against Centrism, against
    its Russian and international varieties. Exposing Centrism in
    Russia, the Bolsheviks helped the revolutionary elements in the
    parties of the Second International to get rid of Centrism, to
    break with the opportunists and to found genuinely Marxist,
    Communist Parties.[See also the Encyclopedia Of Marxism entry on
    Centrism]
[3]
    See Marx’s letter to Ludwig Kugelmann of December 13, 1870
    (Marx and Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, 1955,
    p. 305).[79]See Karl Marx, The
    Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte and The Civil War
    in France (Marx and Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1,
    Moscow, 1960, pp. 332-33, 48-85).
[4]The Decree on Land was adopted by the Second
    All-Russia Congress of Soviets on October 26 (November 8), 1917,
    the day following the establishment of Soviet power in Russia. The
    Decree on Land abolished the landed estates and all private
    ownership of land, and gave the land to the peasants for their
    use.
[5]
    This refers to the civil war waged by the Finnish bourgeoisie
    against the proletarian revolution in Finland. The revolution
    began in the middle of January 1918 in the southern industrial
    districts of the country. On January 15 (28),1918 the Finnish Red
    Guard captured the capital—Helsingfors (Helsinki), and the
    bourgeois government of Svinhufvud was overthrown. The workers
    seized power and set up a revolutionary government known as the
    Council of People’s Representatives; among its members were
    O. Kuusinen, J. Sirola A. Taimi. Seims of workers’
    organisations formed the basic type of state power in the
    country. Lenin called them a new type of power, “proletarian
    power” (see present edition, Vol. 27, p. 133). Among the
    most important steps taken by the workers’ government were
    the adoption of a law on the transfer without compensation of the
    lands tilled by the peasants to their ownership, exemption from
    taxation of the poor sections of the population, expropriation of
    the enterprises the owners of which had fled from the country, the
    establishment of state control over private banks (their functions
    were transferred to the state bank).
[6]On
    March 1, 1918 a treaty was signed in Petrograd between the Finnish
    Socialist Workers’ Republic and the R.S.F.S.R. It was based
    on the principles of complete equality and sovereignty, and was
    the first treaty in the world between two socialist countries.
However the proletarian revolution was
    victorious only in the towns and countryside of the South of
    Finland. The Svinhufvud government established itself in the North
    and appealed to the German Government for assistance. As a result
    of the intervention of the German armed forces, the revolution in
    Finland was defeated in May 1918 after a bitter civil war.
[7]Longuetists—a minority group of
    the French Socialist Party led by Jean Longuet. During the First
    World War of 1914-18 they held Centrist views and pursued a
    conciliatory policy towards the social-chauvinists. The
    Longuetists rejected revolutionary struggle and advocated
    “defence of the fatherland” in the imperialist
    war. Lenin called them petty-bourgeois nationalists (see present
    edition Vol. 28, p. 286). After the victory of the October
    Socialist Revolution, the Longuetists declared that they supported
    the dictatorship of the proletariat, but in practice they went
    against it. 

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the Younger Generation











To the Younger Generation



V. I. Lenin
To the Younger Generation[1]


Written: 18 December, 1919 
 
First Published: Smena No. 1, December 18, 1919; Published according to the Smena text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 276
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Greetings to the working-class and peasant youth of Petrograd Gubernia on the occasion of their communist labour week.
Intensify your work in this field, my young comrades, so that you can apply your fresh, young forces to the building of a new and brighter life.
V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

Endnotes
[1] This letter of greetings in the magazine Smena (The Younger Generation) was addressed to the youth of Petrograd Gubernia in connection with the “youth week” organised by the Young Communist League to enlist young workers and peasants in voluntary work for the public good on a widest possible scale.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech at a Meeting in Presnya
  District On the Anniversary of the December Uprising, 1905











On The Anniversary Of  The December Uprising, 1905 Speech At A Meeting In Presnya District



V. I. Lenin
Speech At A Meeting In Presnya District
On The Anniversary Of
The December Uprising, 1905
December 19, 1919


Delivered: 19 December, 1919 

      
First Published: Brief report
published December 20, 1919 in Izvestia No. 286;
First published in full in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the
Collected Works; Published according to the verbatim report


Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
1965, Volume 30, pages 277-282


Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet
Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy
and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free
Documentation License


Comrades, we are gathered here today to celebrate
      the anniversary of the December uprising in Moscow and the battle
      that took place in Presnya District fourteen years ago.
Comrades, the 

      
      1905

      insurrection in Moscow was one of the greatest movements by
      Russian worker revolutionaries and although it could not have been
      a success at that time it was nevertheless of tremendous
      significance. It is only today, when we have before us a picture
      of the many years of historical preparatory work for the Russian
      revolution, that we can properly appreciate the significance of
      the December uprising in 1905 and of the battles that the workers
      of Red Presnya then fought against the forces of
      tsarism. Comrades, we now see clearly how insignificant the forces
      of the Russian workers then were; and we see that the sacrifices
      made at that time have been repaid a hundredfold.
I must say, however, that in December 1905, tsarism had to
    muster all its forces in order to suppress the still weak,
    embryonic revolt of the workers. The Moscow organisation of our
    Party has recently published two collections of reminiscences of
    the December insurrection, the events in Presnya, and about the
    way the weak underground Party organisation of that time prepared
    the insurrection and about the tremendous enthusiasm with which
    not only factory workers, but all the working people of Moscow
    supported it. Among these newly published articles there is a
    particularly interesting one by a gendarme and police officer
    which admits that the revolutionaries in December 1905 still did
    not know how weak they, the supporters of tsarism, were at that
    time. “If the blow struck by the revolutionaries had been a
    little more powerful and had lasted a little longer,” admits
    this servant of the tsar, “we should not have been able to
    hold out, with the disorder that was beginning to make itself felt
    among us.” This admission, made by a member of the secret
    police, is especially interesting; it shows that the sacrifices
    made by the workers of Presnya in the cause of freedom and the
    emancipation of the workers were not made in vain, that even then
    their heroic example demonstrated the strength of the working
    class to all enemies and at the same time ignited those millions
    of sparks that later, in a long and toilsome manner, over a period
    of many years, burst into flame and produced the victorious
    revolution.
After 1905 the working-class movement in Russia experienced the
    most difficult and bloody period of its history. Tsarism showed
    unprecedented brutality in dealing with the heroes who revolted in
    Moscow in 1905. After the suppression of the Moscow uprising the
    working class of Russia made several more attempts to rise to the
    level of a mass struggle. In the spring of 1906 there were mass
    strikes and the beginnings of a peasant movement; in 1907 another
    attempt was made these attempts, however, could only slow down the
    forces of reaction but were unable to check them. And long years
    passed during which the movement was forced to hide in the
    underground, when hundreds and thousands of the sons of the
    working class perished on the gallows, in prisons, in exile and in
    penal colonies.
Then we saw that in 1910, 1911 and 1912 the working class again
    began to muster its forces and we saw how, after the Lena massacre
    in April 1912, a wave of powerful mass strikes began to rise which
    spread from one end of the country to the other and gave tsarism
    such a jolt that by the summer of 1914 events went as far as
    barricades in Petrograd; it is possible that one of the reasons
    accelerating the tsarist government’s desperate decision to
    start the war was their hope of crushing the revolutionary
    movement in that way. Instead of crushing it, however, the war was
    the cause of the revolutionary movement spreading to all advanced
    countries.
 As we can see clearly enough, the four-year war was carried on
    by predators, not only by German but also by British and French
    imperialism, for the purpose of plunder. When the Germans, in
    1918, imposed the plundering Treaty
    of Brest-Litovsk upon us, there was no end to the shouts
    disapproving of that treaty in France and Britain, and when a year
    later, in that same year of 1918, Germany was defeated and the
    German Empire collapsed, the French and British capitalists then
    imposed the Treaty of
    Versailles on conquered Germany; this is now an example of
    measures still more brutal, more violent, than we had at
    Brest-Litovsk.
We now see how, week by week, the eyes of hundreds, thousands
    and millions of workers in France, Britain and America are being
    opened; they were duped and were assured that they were fighting a
    war against German imperialism and they have now seen that
    millions of people were killed and maimed in that war. And for
    what? For the enrichment of an insignificant handful of
    millionaires who since the war have become multimillionaires and
    who have brought all countries to the brink of ruin.
Comrades, we are living in difficult times insofar as concerns
    the misfortunes that have overtaken the industrial, especially the
    urban, workers. You know how difficult this situation is and how
    hungry and cold our working class is. And we also know that not
    only backward Russia who was torn by war for four years and after
    that has had for another two years to pursue a war imposed on her
    with the help of Britain and France-Russia was not the only
    country that has been ruined, but the most advanced and wealthy
    countries, the victor countries such as, for instance, France and
    the U.S.A., have also been brought to the brink of ruin. They are
    experiencing a coal crisis, they have to curtail the railway
    services because their industry and transport were crushed and
    ruined to an unparalleled degree by four years of war. Huge
    productive forces were destroyed in that imperialist war and we
    see as a result that the road which the Russian working class
    showed all workers, showed the whole world as far back as 1905
    when it revolted against tsarism, the path which was followed by
    the Russian working class when it overthrew the
    bourgeoisie—that path is now attracting the attention and
    winning the sympathy of workers of all, even the most advanced,
    countries.
I have already said, comrades, that this winter we have to
    endure unparalleled hardships and calamities. We say to ourselves,
    however, that we shall stand firm to the end, because the best of
    the workers, the most politically conscious workers and peasants,
    have, despite all calamities and hardships, been helping us,
    helping us by forming the Red Army which is bringing us to final
    victory. We know that now that Kolchak’s forces have been
    completely routed and the recent revolts in Siberia have seemingly
    deprived the remnants of Kolchak’s army of the possibility
    of joining up with Denikin,
    and now that huge military forces have been captured at
    Novo-Nikolayevsk, there is obviously no longer Kolchak’s
    army. In the South, where Denikin was able to boast of his
    successes, we now see the steadily growing offensive of our Red
    Army. You know that Kiev, Poltava and Kharkov have been captured
    and our advance on the Donets Basin, the source of coal supplies,
    is proceeding at an extremely rapid rate.
We therefore see, comrades, that all those terrible misfortunes
    which the working class has borne for the sake of our full victory
    over capital, all the sacrifices that have been made are now
    bringing good results. We see that capitalists abroad who have,
    until now, been handing out millions of rubles and every kind of
    war materiel, first to Kolchak, and then to Yudenich and Denikin,
    are now beginning to hesitate.
You know that they cut Russia off from other countries by the
    iron ring of the blockade and you know that they did not let our
    representatives go to other countries. You know that Comrade
    Litvinov, one of the revolutionaries who fought with the
    Bolsheviks against tsarism even before 1905, was our Ambassador to
    Great Britain and that there was not a workers’ meeting that
    did not greet him with such applause and with such stormy protests
    against their own government, that the British went to the trouble
    of deporting him. Today, those people who hate Litvinov so
    heartily have given him permission to go to Copenhagen, and not
    merely permission, but also the means (Comrade Litvinov arrived
    there on a British cruiser). We also know that every day of
    Comrade Litvinov’s stay in Copenhagen is an ever greater
    victory for Russia. Workers’ representatives and the
    correspondents of thousands of bourgeois newspapers are constantly
    approaching him for an explanation of the change that has taken
    place. We know that the change has come because the Western
    bourgeoisie can no longer keep up the blockade and help the
    Russian counter-revolutionary generals with millions of rubles
    because the working class of each of those rich and advanced
    countries will not let them.
Perhaps the most vivid expression of the turn that has come in
    the politics of the European countries is the voting of the
    deputies in the Italian chamber which we know of from the report
    sent by wireless from France to America and picked up by our
    wireless station. The report was this. When the question of Russia
    was discussed in the Italian chamber, and when the socialists
    proposed the immediate recognition of the Soviet Republic, a
    hundred voted for and two hundred against the proposal; that means
    that only the workers were in favour of recognising the Soviet
    Republic and all the bourgeois deputies rejected it. After that,
    however, the Italian chamber passed a unanimous motion to the
    effect that the Italian Government approach the allies with a view
    to stop the blockade altogether and put an end to all intervention
    in Russian affairs. That was a decision adopted by a chamber that
    consists to the extent of two thirds, if not three-quarters, of
    landowners and capitalists, that was adopted in one of the victor
    countries and that was adopted simply under pressure from the
    working-class movement.
The decision shows clearly that a real turning-point in
    international politics is approaching arid that the tremendous
    inner forces of the working-class movement of every country have
    actually brought about what we have always hoped for, which we
    told the workers of Russia would happen, and for the sake of
    which, we told them, it was worth while struggling and making
    heavy sacrifices, that the sacrifices would have to be made, so
    that the troubles and torments, the hunger and cold that we are
    suffering from will not have been in vain. In this way we are not
    merely saving Russia, we are winning the sympathy and support of
    millions and millions of workers of other countries with every
    week of struggle. That is why today, when we remember our comrades
    who fell, the heroes of Red Presnya, the memory of them gives us
    greater enthusiasm and firm resolution to bring victory near.
Despite all difficulties and all sacrifices we shall go forward
    ourselves and will lead the workers of all countries to full
    victory over capital. (Applause.)

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Report on Subbotniks Delivered to a
  Moscow City Conference of the R.C.P.(B.).











Report On Subbotniks Delivered To A Moscow City Conference Of The R.C.P. (B.) December 20, 1919



V. I. Lenin
Report On Subbotniks
Delivered To A Moscow City Conference
Of The R.C.P. (B.)[1]
December 20, 1919


Delivered: 20 December, 1919 
 
First Published: Brief report published in Izvestia No. 287; December 21, 1919; First published in full in 1927; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 283-288
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, the organisers of the conference inform me that you have arranged for a report on subbotniks and divided it into two parts so that it would be possible to discuss the main thing in this field in detail; first, the organisation of subbotniks in Moscow and results achieved, and secondly, practical conclusions for their further organisation. I should like to confine myself to general propositions, to the ideas born of the organisation of subbotniks as a new phenomenon in our Party and governmental development. I shall, therefore, dwell only briefly on the practical aspect.
When the first communist subbotniks had just been organised it was difficult to judge to what extent such a phenomenon deserved attention and whether anything big would come of it. I remember that when the first news of them began to appear in the Party press, the appraisals of comrades close to trade union organisational affairs and the Commissariat of Labour were at first extremely restrained, if riot pessimistic. They did not think there were any grounds for regarding them as important. Since then subbotniks have become so widespread that their importance to our development cannot be disputed by anyone.
We have actually been using the adjective “communist” very frequently, so frequently that we have even included it in the name of our Party. But when you give this matter some thought, you arrive at the idea that together with the good that has followed from this, a certain danger for us may have been created. Our chief reason for changing the name of the Party was the desire to draw a clear line of distinction between us and the dominant socialism of the Second International. After the overwhelming majority of the official socialist parties, through their leaders, had gone over to the side of the bourgeoisie of their own countries or of their own governments during the imperialist war, the tremendous crisis, the collapse of the old socialism, became obvious to us. And in order to stress as sharply as possible that we could not consider socialists those who took sides with their governments during the imperialist war, in order to show that the old socialism had gone rotten, had died—mainly for that reason the idea of changing the Party's name was put forward. This the more so, since the name of “Social-Democratic” has from the theoretical point of view long ceased to be correct. As far back as the forties, when it was first widely used politically in France, it was applied to a party professing petty-bourgeois socialist reformism and not to a party of the revolutionary proletariat. The main reason, the motive for changing the name of our Party which has given its new name to the new International was the desire to cut ourselves off decisively from the old socialism.
If we were to ask ourselves in what way communism differs from socialism, we should have to say that socialism is the society that grows directly out of capitalism, it is the first form of the new society. Communism is a higher form of society, and can only develop when socialism has become firmly established, Socialism implies work without the aid of the capitalists, socialised labour with strict accounting, control and supervision by the organised vanguard, the advanced section of the working people; the measure of labour and remuneration for it must be fixed. It is necessary to fix them because capitalist society has left behind such survivals and such habits as the fragmentation of labour, no confidence in social economy, and the old habits of the petty proprietor that dominate in all peasant countries. All this is contrary to real communist economy. We give the name of communism to the system under which people form the habit of performing their social duties without any special apparatus for coercion, and when unpaid work for the public good becomes a general phenomenon. It stands to reason that the concept of “communism” is a far too distant one for those who are taking the first steps towards complete victory over capitalism. No matter how correct it may have been to change the name of the Party, no matter how great the benefit the change has brought us, no matter how great the accomplishments of our cause and the scale on which it has developed—Communist Parties now exist throughout the world and although less than a year has passed since the foundation of the Communist International, from the point of view of the labour movement it is incomparably stronger than the old, dying Second International—if the name “Communist Party” were interpreted to mean that the communist system is being introduced immediately, that would be a great distortion and would do practical harm since it would be nothing more than empty boasting.
That is why the word “communist” must be treated with great caution, and that is why communist subbotniks that have begun to enter into our life are of particular value, because it is only in this extremely tiny phenomenon that something communist has begun to make its appearance. The expropriation of the landowners and capitalists enabled us to organise only the most primitive forms of socialism, and there is not yet anything communist in it. If we take our present-day economy we see that the germs of socialism in it are still very weak and that the old economic forms dominate overwhelmingly; these are expressed either as the domination of petty proprietorship or as wild, uncontrolled profiteering. When our adversaries, the petty-bourgeois democrats, Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, assert in their objections to us that we have smashed large-scale capitalism but that the worst kind of profiteering, usury capitalism, persists in its place, we tell them that if they imagine that we can go straight from large-scale capitalism to communism they are not revolutionaries but reformists and utopians.
Large-scale capitalism has been seriously undermined everywhere, even in those countries where no steps towards socialism have yet been taken. From this point of view, none of the criticisms or the objections levelled against us by our opponents are serious. Obviously the beginnings of a new, petty, profiteering capitalism began to make their appearance after large-scale capitalism had been crushed. We are living through a savage battle against the survivals of large-scale capitalism which grasps at every kind of petty speculation where it is difficult to counteract it and where it takes on the worst and most unorganised form of trading.
The struggle has become much fiercer under war conditions and has led to the most brutal forms of profiteering, especially in places where capitalism was organised on a larger scale, and it would be quite incorrect to imagine that the revolutionary transition could have any other form. That is how matters stand in respect of our present-day economy. If we were to ask ourselves what the present economic system of Soviet Russia is, we should have to say that it consists in laying the foundations of socialism in large-scale industry, in reorganising the old capitalist economy with the capitalists putting up a stubborn resistance in millions and millions of different ways. The countries of Western Europe that have emerged from the war as badly off as we are—Austria, for instance—differ from us only in that the disintegration of capitalism and speculation are more pronounced there than in our country and that there are no germs of socialist organisation to offer resistance to capitalism. There is, however, not yet anything communist in our economic system. The “communist” begins when subbotniks (i. e., unpaid labour with no quota set by any authority or any state) make their appearance; they constitute the labour of individuals on an extensive scale for the public good. This is not helping one's neighbour in the way that has always been customary in the countryside; it is work done to meet the needs of the country as a whole, and it is organised on a broad scale and is unpaid. It would, therefore, be more correct if the word “communist” were applied not only to the name of the Party but also to those economic manifestations in our reality that are actually communist in character. If there is anything communist at all in the prevailing system in Russia, it is only the subbotniks, and everything else is nothing but the struggle against capitalism for the consolidation of socialism out of which, after the full victory of socialism, there should grow that communism that we see at subbotniks, not with the aid of a book, but in living reality.
Such is the theoretical significance of subbotniks; they demonstrate that here something quite new is beginning to emerge in the form of unpaid labour, extensively organised to meet the needs of he entire state, something that is contrary to all the old capitalist rules, something that is much more lofty than the socialist society that is conquering capitalism. When the workers on the Moscow-Kazan Railway, people who were living under conditions of the worst famine and the greatest need, first responded to the appeal of the Central Committee of the Party to come to the aid of the country,[2] and when there appeared signs that communist subbotniks were no longer a matter of single cases but were spreading and meeting with the sympathy of the masses, we were able to say that they were a phenomenon of tremendous theoretical importance and that we really should afford them all-round support if we wanted to be Communists in more than mere theory, in more than the struggle against capitalism. From the point of view of the practical construction of a socialist society that is not enough. It must be said that the movement can really be developed on a mass scale. I do not undertake to say whether we have proved this since no general summaries of the extent of the movement we call communist subbotniks have yet been prepared. I have only fragmentary information and have read in the Party press that these subbotniks are developing more and more widely in a number of towns. Petrograd comrades say that subbotniks are far more widespread in their city than in Moscow. As far as the provinces are concerned many of the comrades who have a practical knowledge of this movement have told me that they are collecting a huge amount of material on this new form of social labour. However, we shall only be able to obtain summarised data after the question has been discussed many times in the press and at Party conferences in different cities; on the basis of those data we shall be able to say whether the subbotniks have really become a mass phenomenon, and whether we have really achieved important successes in this sphere. Whatever may be the case, whether or not we shall soon obtain that sort of complete and verified data, we should not doubt that from the theoretical point of view the subbotniks are the only manifestation we have to show that we do not only call ourselves Communists, that we do not merely want to he Communists, but are actually doing something that is communist and not merely socialist. Every Communist, therefore, everyone who wants to be true to the principles of communism should devote all his attention and all his efforts to the explanation of this phenomenon and to its practical implementation. That is the theoretical significance of the subbotniks. At every Party conference, therefore, we must persistently raise this question and discuss both its theoretical and its practical aspect. We must not limit this phenomenon to its theoretical significance. Communist subbotniks are of tremendous importance to us not only because they are the practical implementation of communism. Apart from this, subbotniks have a double significance—from the standpoint of the state they are purely practical aid to the state, and from the standpoint of the Party—and for us, members of the Party, this must not remain in the shade—they have the significance of purging the Party of undesirable elements and are of importance in the struggle against the influences experienced by the Party at a time when capitalism is decaying.

Endnotes
[1] The Moscow City Conference of the R,C.P.(B.) was held December 20-21, 1919. The Conference discussed the convocation of an All-Russia Party Conference, the fuel problem, subbotniks, measures of combating typhus epidemics, the food situation in Moscow, universal military training, and special detachments.
A resolution on subbotniks underscored their tremendous significance as the first practical steps in building communism. The Party Conference recognised the great importance of subbotniks in achieving tangible results in raising labour productivity and in alleviating the transport, fuel, food and other crises of the Soviet Republic, and made it incumbent upon all Party members to take part in subbotniks and make their work the most productive.
After Lenin's report the Conference heard the report on the organisation of subbotniks and approved an instruction. The Moscow Party Committee worked out and approved the “Statute on Subbotniks” published in Pravda on December 27, 1919. A special department was formed at the Moscow Committee of the 
R.C.P.(B.) for their supervision.
[2]  Lenin refers to the “Theses of the CC., R.C.P.(B.) in Connection with the Situation on the Eastern Front” written on April 11, 1919, in which the Central Committee appealed to all Party organisations and all trade unions “to set to work in a revolutionary way” (see present edition, Vol. 29). 

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Letter to the Workers and Peasants of the Ukraine apropos of the Victories Over Denikin











Letter to the Workers and Peasants of the Ukraine Apropos of the Victories Over Denikin



V. I. Lenin
Letter to the Workers and Peasants of the Ukraine
Apropos of the Victories Over Denikin


Written: 28 December, 1919 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 3,; January 4, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text, verified with the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 291-297
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, four months ago, towards the end of August 1919, I had occasion to address a letter to the workers and peasants in connection with the victory over Kolchak.
I am now having this letter reprinted in full for the workers and peasants of the Ukraine in connection with the victories over Denikin.
Red troops have taken Kiev, Poltava and Kharkov and are advancing victoriously on Rostov. The Ukraine is seething with revolt against Denikin. All forces must he rallied for the final rout of Denikin’s army, which has been trying to restore the power of the landowners and capitalists. We must destroy Denikin to safeguard ourselves against even the slightest possibility of a new incursion.
The workers and peasants of the Ukraine should familiarise themselves with the lessons which all Russian workers and peasants have drawn from the conquest of Siberia by Kolchak and her liberation by Red troops after many months of landowner and capitalist tyranny.
Denikin’s rule in the Ukraine has been as severe an ordeal as Kolchak’s rule was in Siberia. There can be no doubt that the lessons of this severe ordeal will give the Ukrainian workers and peasants—as they did the workers and peasants of the Urals and Siberia—a clearer understanding of the tasks of Soviet power and induce them to defend it more staunchly.
In Great Russia the system of landed estates has been completely abolished. The same must be done in the Ukraine, and the Soviet power of the Ukrainian workers and peasants must effect the complete abolition of the landed estates and the complete liberation of the Ukrainian workers and peasants from all oppression by the landowners, and from the landowners themselves.
But apart from this task, and a number of others which confronted and still confront both the Great-Russian and the Ukrainian working masses, Soviet power in the Ukraine has its own special tasks. One of these special tasks deserves the greatest attention at the present moment. It is the national question, or, in other words, the question of whether the Ukraine is to be a separate and independent Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic bound in alliance (federation) with the Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic, or whether the Ukraine is to amalgamate with Russia to form a single Soviet republic. All Bolsheviks and all politically-conscious workers and peasants must give careful thought to this question.
The independence of the Ukraine has been recognised both by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee of the R.S.F.S.R. (Russian Socialist Federative Soviet Republic) and by the Russian Communist Party (Bolsheviks). It is therefore self-evident and generally recognised that only the Ukrainian workers and peasants themselves can and will decide at their All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets whether the Ukraine shall amalgamate with Russia, or whether she shall remain a separate and independent republic, and, in the latter case, what federal ties shall be established between that republic and Russia.
How should this question be decided insofar as concerns the interests of the working people and the promotion of their fight for the complete emancipation of labour from the yoke of capital?
In the first place, the interests of labour demand the fullest confidence and the closest alliance among the working people of different countries and nations. The supporters of the landowners and capitalists, of the bourgeoisie, strive to disunite the workers, to intensify national discord and enmity, in order to weaken the workers and strengthen the power of capital.
Capital is an international force. To vanquish it, an international workers’ alliance, an international workers’ brotherhood, is needed.
We are opposed to national enmity and discord, to national exclusiveness. We are internationalists. We stand for the close union and the complete amalgamation of the workers and peasants of all nations in a single world Soviet republic.
Secondly, the working people must not forget that capitalism has divided nations into a small number of oppressor, Great-Power (imperialist), sovereign and privileged nations and an overwhelming majority of oppressed, dependent and semi-dependent, non-sovereign nations. The arch-criminal and arch-reactionary war of 1914-18 still further accentuated this division and as a result aggravated rancour and hatred. For centuries the indignation and distrust of the non-sovereign and dependent nations towards the dominant and oppressor nations have been accumulating, of nations such as the Ukrainian towards nations such as the Great-Russian.
We want a voluntary union of nations—a union which precludes any coercion of one nation by another—a union founded on complete confidence, on a clear recognition of brotherly unity, on absolutely voluntary consent. Such a union cannot be effected at one stroke; we have to work towards it with the greatest patience and circumspection, so as not to spoil matters and not to arouse distrust, and so that the distrust inherited from centuries of landowner and capitalist oppression, centuries of private property and the enmity caused by its divisions and redivisions may have a chance to wear off.
We must, therefore, strive persistently for the unity of nations and ruthlessly suppress everything that tends to divide them, and in doing so we must be very cautious and patient, and make concessions to the survivals of national distrust. We must be adamant and uncompromising towards everything that affects the fundamental interests of labour in its fight for emancipation from the yoke of capital. The question of the demarcation of frontiers now, for the time being—for we are striving towards the complete abolition of frontiers—is a minor one, it is not fundamental or important. In this matter we can afford to wait, and must wait, because the national distrust among the broad mass of peasants and small owners is often extremely tenacious, and haste might only intensify it, in other words, jeopardise the cause of complete and ultimate unity.
The experience of the workers’ and peasants’ revolution in Russia, the revolution of October-November 1917, and of the two years of victorious struggle against the onslaught of international and Russian capitalists, has made it crystal clear that the capitalists have succeeded for a time in playing upon the national distrust of the Great Russians felt by Polish, Latvian, Estonian and Finnish peasants and small owners, that they have succeeded for a time in sowing dissension between them and us on the basis of this distrust. Experience has shown that this distrust wears off and disappears only very slowly, and that the more caution and patience displayed by the Great Russians, who have for so long been an oppressor nation, the more certainly this distrust will pass. It is by recognising the independence of the Polish, Latvian, Lithuanian, Estonian and Finnish states that we are slowly but steadily winning the confidence of the labouring masses of the neighbouring small states, who were more backward and more deceived and downtrodden by the capitalists. It is the surest way of wresting them from the influence of "their" national capitalists, and leading them to full confidence, to the future united international Soviet republic.
As long as the Ukraine is not completely liberated from Denikin, her government, until the All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets meets, is the All-Ukraine Revolutionary Committee.[1] Besides the Ukrainian Bolshevik Communists, there are Ukrainian Borotba Communists working on this Revolutionary Committee as members of the government. One of the things distinguishing the Borotbists from the Bolsheviks is that they insist upon the unconditional independence of the Ukraine. The Bolsheviks will not make this a subject of difference and disunity, they do not regard this as an obstacle to concerted proletarian effort. There must be unity in the struggle against the yoke of capital and for the dictatorship of the proletariat, and there should be no parting of the ways among Communists on the question of national frontiers, or whether there should be a federal or some other tie between the states. Among the Bolsheviks there are advocates of complete independence for the Ukraine, advocates of a more or less close federal tie, and advocates of the complete amalgamation of the Ukraine with Russia.
There must be no differences over these questions. They will be decided by the All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets.
If a Great-Russian Communist insists upon the amalgamation of the Ukraine with Russia, Ukrainians might easily suspect him of advocating this policy not from the motive of uniting the proletarians in the fight against capital, but because of the prejudices of the old Great-Russian nationalism, of imperialism. Such mistrust is natural, and to a certain degree inevitable and legitimate, because the Great Russians, under the yoke of the landowners and capitalists, had for centuries imbibed the shameful and disgusting prejudices of Great-Russian chauvinism.
If a Ukrainian Communist insists upon the unconditional state independence of the Ukraine, he lays himself open to the suspicion that he is supporting this policy not because of the temporary interests of the Ukrainian workers and peasants in their struggle against the yoke of capital, but on account of the petty-bourgeois national prejudices of the small owner. Experience has provided hundreds of instances of the petty-bourgeois "socialists" of various countries—all the various Polish, Latvian and Lithuanian pseudo-socialists, Georgian Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries and the like—assuming the guise of supporters of the proletariat for the sole purpose of deceitfully promoting a policy of compromise with “their” national bourgeoisie against the revolutionary workers. We saw this in the case of Kerensky’s rule in Russia in the February-October period of 1917, and we have seen it and are seeing it in all other countries.
Mutual distrust between the Great-Russian and Ukrainian Communists can, therefore, arise very easily. How is this distrust to be combated? How is it to be overcome and mutual confidence established?
The best way to achieve this is by working together to uphold the dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power in the fight against the landowners and capitalists of all countries and against their attempts to restore their domination. This common fight will clearly show in practice that whatever the decision in regard to state independence or frontiers may be, there must be a close military and economic alliance between the Great-Russian and Ukrainian workers, for otherwise the capitalists of the “Entente”, in other words, the alliance of the richest capitalist countries—Britain, France, America, Japan and Italy—will crush and strangle us separately. Our fight against Kolchak and Denikin, whom these capitalists supplied with money and arms, is a clear illustration of this danger.
He who undermines the unity and closest alliance between the Great-Russian and Ukrainian workers and peasants is helping the Kolchaks, the Denikins, the capitalist bandits of all countries.
Consequently, we Great-Russian Communists must repress with the utmost severity the slightest manifestation in our midst of Great-Russian nationalism, for such manifestations, which are a betrayal of communism in general, cause the gravest harm by dividing us from our Ukrainian comrades and thus playing into the hands of Denikin and his regime.
Consequently, we Great-Russian Communists must make concessions when there are differences with the Ukrainian Bolshevik Communists and Borotbists and these differences concern the state independence of the Ukraine, the forms of her alliance with Russia, and the national question in general. But all of us, Great-Russian Communists, Ukrainian Communists, and Communists of any other nation, must be unyielding and irreconcilable in the underlying and fundamental questions which are the same for all nations, in questions of the proletarian struggle, of the proletarian dictatorship; we must not tolerate compromise with the bourgeoisie or any division of the forces which are protecting us against Denikin.
Denikin must be vanquished and destroyed, and such incursions as his not allowed to recur. That is to the fundamental interest of both the Great-Russian and the Ukrainian workers and peasants. The fight will be a long and hard one, for the capitalists of the whole world are helping Denikin and will help all other Denikius.
In this long and hard fight we Great-Russian and Ukrainian workers must maintain the closest alliance, for separately we shall most definitely be unable to cope with the task. Whatever the boundaries of the Ukraine and Russia may be, whatever may be the forms of their mutual state relationships, that is not so important; that is a matter in which concessions can and should be made, in which one thing, or another, or a third may be tried—the cause of the workers and peasants, of the victory over capitalism, will not perish because of that.
But if we fail to maintain the closest alliance, an alliance against Denikin, an alliance against the capitalists and kulaks of our countries and of all countries, the cause of labour will most certainly perish for many years to come in the sense that the capitalists will be able to crush and strangle both the Soviet Ukraine and Soviet Russia.
And what the bourgeoisie of all countries, and all manner of petty-bourgeois parties, i.e., “compromising” parties which permit alliance with the bourgeoisie against the workers—try most of all to accomplish is to disunite the workers of different nationalities, to evoke distrust, and to disrupt a close international alliance and international brotherhood of the workers. Whenever the bourgeoisie succeeds in this the cause of the workers is lost. The Communists of Russia and the Ukraine must therefore by patient, persistent, stubborn and concerted effort foil the nationalist machinations of the bourgeoisie and vanquish nationalist prejudices of every kind, and set the working people of the world an example of a really solid alliance of the workers and peasants of different nations in the fight for Soviet power, for the overthrow of the yoke of the landowners and capitalists, and for a world federal Soviet republic.

N. Lenin
December 28, 1919

Endnotes
[1] The All-Ukraine Revolutionary Military Committee was a provisional revolutionary government in the Ukraine set up by decision of the C.E.C. and C.P.C. of the Ukraine on December 11, 1919 (the day Poltava and Kharkov were liberated). Among its members were G. I. Petrovsky (Chairman) and V. P. Zatonsky and D. Z. Manuilsky. The Committee was entrusted with the functions of the C.E.C. and C.P.C. of the Ukraine and was to give all-round assistance to the Red Army in finally routing the whiteguards; its tasks included abolition of land proprietorship; establishment of strong workers’ and peasants’ power on the territory of Soviet Ukraine; convocation of the Fourth All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets immediately after the liberation of the greater part of the Ukrainian lands.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Stop Spoiling the Russian Language. Some thoughts at Leisure, i.e., While Listening to Speeches at Meetings











Stop Spoiling The Russian Language



V. I. Lenin
Stop Spoiling The Russian Language
Some Thoughts At Leisure, I.E., While Listening To Speeches At 

      Meetings[1]


Written: December, 1919 

      
First Published: 
      First published in Pravda No. 275; December 3, 1924; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 298
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


We are spoiling the Russian language. We are using foreign
    words unnecessarily. And we use them incorrectly. Why use the
    foreign word defekty when we have three Russian
    synonyms—nedochoty nedosta tki, probely.
A man who has recently learned to read in. general, and to read
    newspapers in particular, will, of course, if he reads them
    diligently, willy-nilly absorb journalistic turns of
    speech. However, it is the language of the newspapers that is
    beginning to suffer. If a man who has recently learned to read
    uses foreign words as a novelty, he is to be excused, but there is
    no excuse for a writer. Is it not time for us to declare war on
    the unnecessary use of foreign words?
I must admit that the unnecessary use of foreign words annoys
    me (because it makes it more difficult for us to exercise our
    influence over the masses) but some of the mistakes made by those
    who write in the newspapers make me really angry. For
    instance—the word budirovat is used in the meaning
    of arouse, awaken, stir up. It comes from the French word
    bonder which means to sulk, to pout, which is what
    budirovat should really mean. This adoption of
    Nizhni-Novgorod French is the adoption of the worst from the worst
    representatives of the Russian landowning class, who learned some
    French but who, first, did not master the language, and who,
    secondly, distorted the Russian language.
Is it not time to declare war on the spoiling of Russian?


Endnotes
[1]
      This item was written by Lenin in 1919 or 1920 at one of the
      meetings of the Political Bureau of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.). It was
      found at the end of 1924 and first published in
      Pravda. The exact time when it was written has not been
      established. 


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## To the Bureau of the Women’s Congress in Petrograd Gubernia











To The Bureau Of The Women's Congress In Petrograd
      Gubernia




V. I. Lenin
To The Bureau Of The Women's Congress
In Petrograd Gubernia[1]


Written: 10 January, 1919 

      
First Published: 
      First published in Pravda Petrogradskaya Pravda No. 11,
      January 16, 1920; Published according to the manuscript

      
Source: Lenin’s Collected
Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow,
      1965, Volume 30, page 299

      
Translated: George Hanna

      
Transcription/HTML Markup: Sally Ryan
      (1st version); David Walters
      & Robert Cymbala (2nd version).

      
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive
      (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or
      distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation
License


Comrades, since I have no opportunity of attending
      your Congress I should like to send you in writing my greetings
      and my best wishes for success.

We are now happily ending the Civil War. The Soviet Republic is
      becoming stronger through its victories over the exploiters. The
      Soviet Republic can and must, from now on, concentrate its forces
      on a more important task, one that is nearer and dearer to us, to
      all working people—on a bloodless war, a war for victory
      over hunger, cold and economic chaos. In this bloodless war, women
      workers and peasants have an especially big role to play.

May the Women's Congress in Petrograd Gubernia help found,
      consolidate and organise an army of working women for this
      bloodless war which should and will bring still greater victories
      to Soviet power.

With communist greetings,

    

      V. Ulyanov (Lenin)

    

      January 10, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
The First Congress of Women Workers and Peasants of Petrograd
    Gubernia was held January 15-16, 1920. It was attended by 403
    delegates, of whom 157 were Communists and 246 non-party; among
    them were 91 peasant women, 131 workers, 133 intellectuals, 15
    dressmakers, 11 housewives and two militia women. Though the
    non-party delegates constituted the majority, the Congress was
    communist in spirit. The agenda was as follows: the present
    situation, the Communist Party and its attitude to women workers
    and
      peasants, the land question, the consumers' commune, social
    education, etc. On the opening day a telegram of greetings from
    Lenin was read out to which the Congress sent a reply. Yelena
    Stasova greeted the Congress on behalf of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) and
    the central department of women workers and peasants. She stressed
    the importance of the coming “week for the front” and
    called upon women delegates to strain every effort to restore
    normal life to the country. The Congress demonstrated the striving
    of the women workers and peasants to take an active part in
    building up the Soviet Republic.


Women
and Marxism - Lenin Index
Collected Works
Volume 30

Collected Works Table of
      Contents

Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Remarks on and addenda to “Drafts for Rules for the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection’”











Remarks On And Addenda To Drafts For “Rules For The Workers’ And Peasants’ Inspection



V. I. Lenin
Remarks on and Addenda to Drafts for
Rules for the Workers’ and Peasants’
Inspection 


Written: 24 January, 1920 
 
First Published: First published in 1928;Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 300-301
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Comrade Stalin. Copies to Avanesov and Tomsky,
    and also to Kiselyov, Member of the Presidium of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee
On the basis of directive given by the Central Committee[1] the three drafts should, in my
    opinion, be worked up into one.
I think you should add:
(1) The “Department” of the Workers’ and
    Peasants’ Inspection at the State Control Commission should
    be a temporary one for the purpose of involving the Workers’
    and Peasants’ Inspection in all departments of the
    State Control Commission, and should then disappear as a special
    department.
(2) Purpose: all working people, both men and
    particularly women, should serve in the Workers’
    and Peasants’ Inspection.
(3) For this draw up lists in the localities (in accordance
    with the Constitution), excluding clerks, etc.
--all others in turn to participate in the
    Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection.
(4) Participation to vary according to the degree of
    development of the participants—beginning with the role of
    “listener”, or witness, or learner for the illiterate
    and completely undeveloped workers and peasants, and ending with
    the granting of all rights (or almost all) to the literate and
    developed who have been tested in some way or
    another.
(5) Pay special attention to (and make strictly precise rules
    for), and extend control by the Workers’ and
    Peasants’

    Inspection over accounting for food, goods, warehouses, tools,
    materials, fuel, etc., etc. (in dining-rooms, etc.,
    especially).
Women, literally every woman, must be drawn
    into thiswork.
(6) So as not to get into a mess with the involvement of masses
    of participants they must be drawn into the work gradually, in
    turn, etc. The ways in which they participate must also be
    carefully planned (two or three at a time, rarely, in special
    cases, more, so that they will not waste the working time of the
    clerks).
(7) Detailed instructions must be compiled.
(8) Officials of the State Control Commission must (in
    accordance with a special instruction), first, invite
    representatives of the Workers’ and Peasants’
    Inspection to all their operations, and secondly, deliver lectures
    to non-party conferences of workers and peasants (popular lectures
    according to a specially approved programme on the principles of
    the State Control Commission and its methods; perhaps the lectures
    could be replaced by the reading of a pamphlet that we shall
    publish—that is, the State Control Commission, Stalin and
    Avanesov, will publish it with the special participation of the
    Party—and commenting on that pamphlet).
(9 Gradually summon peasants from the localities (they
    must be non-party peasants) to participate in the State Control
    Commission at the centre; begin with at least (if it is impossible
    to do more) one or two from each gubernia and then, depending on
    transport and other conditions, increase the number. The
    same thing for non-party workers.
(10) Gradually introduce the verification of the participation
    of working people in the State Control Commission by the Party and
    the trade unions, i.e., through these organisations verify whether
    everyone participates and what results come from the participation
    insofar as learning the business of state administration is
    concerned.
Lenin

    

      January 24, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    This refers to the directive adopted on Lenin’s proposal by
    the Political Bureau of the CC, R.C.P.(B.) on January 23, 1920 on
    the organisation of a workers’ and peasants’
    inspection. On February 7, 1920 the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee endorsed the Rules for the Workers’ and
    Peasants’ Inspection according to which the state control
    bodies were reorganised “into a single body of socialist
    control by workers and peasants”.
Lenin attached great importance to
    workers’ and peasants’ inspection. In the articles
    written in 1923, “How We Should Reorganise the
    Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection” and
    “Better Fewer, but Better”, Lenin proposed to unite
    the workers’ and peasants’ inspection bodies with the
    Central Control Commission. In April 1923, the Twelfth Party
    Congress adopted a decision that followed Lenin’s proposal
    to found a joint body with Party and state control functions.
At the time of the Stalin cult Lenin’s
    principles of the organisation of Party and state control were
    grossly violated and a bureaucratic control apparatus was
    substituted for the Leninist system of control.
In November 1962 a plenary meeting of the C.C.,
    C.P.S.U. considered it necessary to reorganise the system of
    supervision on Leninist principles. It decided to set up a
    Committee of Party and State Control of the C.C., C.P.S,U. and the
    Council of Ministers of the USSR to unite and direct theentire
    work of supervision in the country.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at a Non-Party
  Conference of Workers and Red army Men of Presnya
  District. Moscow











Speech Delivered at a Non-Party Conference of Workers and Red army Men of Presnya District. Moscow.



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At A Non-Party 
Conference
Of Workers And Red Army Men
Of Presnya District, Moscow
January 24, 1920
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 24 January, 1920 
 
First Published: Pravda No. 18, January 28, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 302-306
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


“In connection with the recent victories of the Red Army there has been a marked change in our international situation, and we must seek new ways of solving our international problems.
“As soon as the Soviet government was formed all the forces of international capital were hurled against it. These forces are far stronger than those of the Soviet government, so that waverers might have doubted whether the Soviet government could be victorious. Yet it has been victorious. And it is worth reflecting on the reasons for the Soviet government’s victory in order to know what must be done to be victorious in the future.”
Comrade Lenin shows how great has been the victory over the forces of capital and how complete the rout of Kolchak, which has compelled the Allies to remove the blockade and to abandon their plan to strangle Russia.
“This victory over a far stronger enemy has shown that the Bolsheviks were right, and not those who asserted that in taking up arms against the world bourgeoisie we were embarking on a hopeless cause. Although the removal of the blockade has eased our position somewhat, the bourgeoisie of the West will probably attempt to fight us again. Even though they have now removed the blockade, they are inciting the Polish whiteguards against us. We must, therefore, be once more on our guard, prepare for new attacks, draw the lessons from the two years of struggle and employ the methods by which we have been victorious hitherto.
“The Mensheviks have often said that the proletarians of the West are not supporting us, are allowing us to be strangled as they allowed Hungary to be strangled.[1] That would seem to be true. But why did the Entente troops quit the North and Odessa? Because the more deeply their soldiers, who were themselves workers, penetrated into Soviet Russia, the more emphatically they refused to fight against us. That means that one of the reasons for our victory was this: we can be fought only by a big force, but a big army can be recruited only from among the workers and peasants, and the workers of the West do not want to fight us. We were therefore victorious not because we were the stronger, but because the working folk of the Entente countries proved to be closer to us than to their own governments.
“The second reason for our victory was the failure of the ‘Campaign of the Fourteen States’.[2] This shows that the small states cannot unite to fight the Bolsheviks, because they are afraid that their own victory and the simultaneous victory of Denikin’s forces would mean the restoration of the Russian Empire which would again rob the little nations of the right to live. We are concluding peace with Estonia, which is already a virtual breach in the blockade, even if the formal removal of the blockade is just a blind.
“The big powers of the Entente cannot unite to fight the Soviet government because they are too hostile to each other. Germany is harbouring thoughts of vengeance against France for the predatory Peace of Versailles, France is inciting Poland against us, while Britain is allowing Estonia to make peace with us, as long as Estonia trades with her. Japan, who has a stronger army than ours in Siberia, cannot fight us because she fears attack by America, with whom she is at loggerheads over imperialist, colonialist interests in China. That means that a second reason for our victory was this: whereas the workers are united, the bourgeoisie, being bourgeois, cannot help getting at each other’s throats and fighting for an extra bit of profit.
“And so we have emerged victorious from the first two years of the Civil War, which were the hardest years of all, because we had been ruined by the imperialist war and were cut off from grain and coal supplies. But now we have grain and fuel in abundance. In Siberia the grain requisitioned alone amounted to twenty-one million poods. It is true that we cannot get it out immediately, but then, the transport system has broken down all over Europe, and in our country it was deliberately disrupted by the whiteguards. They blew up all the bridges on the Dnieper, except the Kiev bridge, and this explains both the delay in the military operations and the delay in the transport of grain. We have the Guryev oil and shall transport it as soon as the offshore ice on the Caspian melts. We are bearing all this in mind, and are preparing to transport the oil. We are creating labour armies to restore the railways; one of them has already started to build a railway from Alexandrov-Gai to Guryev for the transport of oil. We cannot demobilise the army because we still have enemies, such as Poland. Demobilisation is also being hampered by the transport break-down. We shall therefore use the army to restore the railways.
“The whiteguards keep saying in their sheets that the Bolsheviks are doing fine propaganda and are sparing no money for the purpose. But the people have heard all sorts of propaganda—they have heard the propaganda of the whiteguards and the propaganda of the Constituent Assembly supporters. It is absurd to think that they have followed the Bolsheviks because their propaganda was the more skilful. No, the point is that their propaganda was truthful.
“The very deeds of Denikin and Kolchak were propaganda against them and in favour of the Soviet system. That is why we won. We overthrew the tsar easily in a few hours. We overthrew the landowners and capitalists in a few weeks. But that was only half the job. We have to learn to work in a new way. Formerly it was the exploiter who organised labour and hunger that united labour; now labour must be united by the workers and peasants realising that they must work in order to escape from this dire situation.
“But this is not yet implanted in everyone’s mind, and we are starting a new and bloodless fight to bring it home. All previous revolutions ended to the advantage of a handful of capitalists and exploiters. That was because the insurrectionary working people had no sense of solidarity, each thought only of himself, they all fought one another, and it was the swindlers and profiteers who came out on top.
“You have a peasant who has grain, and side by side with him there is a hungry man, and the peasant prefers to sell grain to the hungry man for a thousand rubles rather than loan it to the workers’ government. Somebody here even says ‘Hear, hear!’ Well, both Denikin and Koichak tried freedom of trade, but the best, politically-conscious workers and peasants saw what this meant in practice and turned their backs on them.
“In the old days they used to say, ‘Each for himself, and God for all.’ And how much misery resulted from it.
“We say, Each for all, and we’ll somehow manage without God.’ And we shall strive for a fraternal alliance between the workers and the peasants who loan their grain to the state—it has to be a loan, because at present we are unable to give anything in return; bits of coloured paper are not money. Hitherto we have had to fight just to prevent the enemy from strangling us; but now, when an enemy much stronger than us has been defeated, our hands are free, and we must set about the job of building a new life and, in the first place, must restore the railways.
“In the South we have repair shops captured by the Red Army in places where grain is close, so let these repair shops work at full speed, in three shifts, and not in the way starving people work.
“We must concentrate the whole force of our Communist propaganda, with the help of which we defeated the foreign enemy, on the restoration of the railways.
“We once had a ‘splendid’ foreign trade and used to export 700,000,000 poods of grain annually. Russian and foreign millionaires made fortunes on this business, while the Russian workers and peasants starved. Now we must convince everybody that the only salvation is, ‘Everyone for all!’ We must, whatever the cost, abolish freedom of trade and profiteering, which mean bread for a small handful and starvation for the rest. We must convince the peasants—and they will believe us, because Denikin demonstrated to them the ‘blessings’ of freedom of profiteering, they will understand that the only salvation is for them to give grain as a loan to the worker and artisan, and that these will repay the loan not in bits of coloured paper but in textiles and other goods.
“We have started a great war, a war which we shall not end soon. This is a bloodless war waged by the armies of labour on starvation, cold and typhus, a war for an enlightened, bright, well-fed and healthy Russia. But we shall end this war with a victory as decisive as the one with which we ended the struggle against the whiteguardn ....”
In reply to a question about the terms of the peace with Estonia, Comrade Lenin said that we had made many concessions, the chief of which was the cession of disputed territory inhabited by a mixed population—Russians and Estonians. But we did not want to shed the blood of workers and Red Army soldiers for the sake of a piece of land, all the more that this concession was not being made for ever. Estonia was passing through a Kereneky period; the workers were beginning to realise the vileness of their Constituent Assembly leaders, who had plundered the trade unions and had murdered twenty Communists. They would soon overthrow this government and set up a Soviet Estonia, he said, which would conclude a new peace with us.

Endnotes
[1] This refers to the armed intervention of the Entente imperialists in the Hungarian Soviet Republic in 1919. The republic was formed on March 21, 1919 and in August 1919 was crushed by the united efforts of the imperialist intervention and internal counter-revolution.
[2] This refers to the negotiations between Britain and France and the small bourgeois states, neighbours of the Soviet Republic, concerning a joint and simultaneous attack on Soviet Russia. According to Churchill "fourteen states" were to take part in the campaign (see Note 11). The initiators of the campaign planned to capture Petrograd and Moscow in December 1919. But the campaign failed, although, as Lenin pointed out, “all kinds of pressure-financial, food, military-have been applied to force Estonia, Finland, and no doubt Latvia, Lithuania and Poland as well, to force that whole group of states to make war on us” (see p. 175 of this volume).
The bourgeois governfnents of the Baltic states avoided active  participation in hostilities against Soviet Russia, because the Soviet republic repeatedly proposed peace and did not violate the sovereignty and independence of the small states which formerly belonged to the Russian Empire, whereas Kolchak and Denikin proclaimed the slogan of “a united and indivisible” Russia. In addition, the participation of the Baltic states in the anti-Soviet campaign was hindered by the protests of the people who came out for the cessation of the war against Soviet Russia and for the conclusion of a peace treaty. In autumn 1919 the British Government, the initiator and inspirer of the campaign, had to withdraw its troops from Archangel under the pressure of the British workers, and on January 16, 1920, the Allied Council resolved to lift the economic blockade and resume trade and commercial relations with the “population of Soviet Russia”. 

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 







==========

## Draft Decisions and Directives On Co-Operatives











Draft Decisions And Directives On Co-Operatives



V. I. Lenin
Draft Decisions And Directives On Co-Operatives[94][1]


Written: 26 January, 1920 
 
First Published: First published in the Fourth (Russian) Edition of the Collected Works; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 307-308
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Tomorrow at the Council of People’s Commissars table a draft decree, not on a merger for the co-operatives but on the completion of the unification of all types of co-operative, rewriting 0. J. Schmidt’s proposal so that a most cautious attitude is displayed to local producers’ co-operatives, and the Council of Co-operative Congresses is abolished in the shortest period.
Directives:
(α) More attention to be paid to the needs of the working people and not only of the affluent and kulak section. Change the formula of the preamble in this spirit.
(β) More extensive aid for producers’ co-operatives with local initiative specially developed, and improved methods of farming and industry encouraged.
(γ) Concrete steps by the new Central Co-operative Society for the unification of producers’ co-operatives to be carried out with the approval of the Council of People’s Commissars.
(a) Instruct Tsyurupa and Lezhava to table a draft decision at the Council of People’s Commissars (without deciding in advance whether it is to be published) formulating more precise, systematic and concrete rules for the participation of co-operatives in the procurement of various foodstuffs, and for the ways and forms, terms and methods by which this participation is to be effected.
(b) Instruct the Central Statistical Board, in agreement with the Central Union of Consumers’ Societies, the People’s Food Commissariat and the Supreme Economic Council, to draw up by ... a programme of sample surveys of the methods and results of food procurement in the localities with and without the participation of the co-operatives
The programme to be tabled at the Council of People’s Commissars for approval and for the actual appointment of the survey.
Think about whether a questionnaire can be used, and if it can, submit a brief draft of it to the Council of People’s Commissars.
Purpose of the survey: the detailed analysis of facts that may be few but are typical and properly verified of how products were gathered, which products and in what quantities, how they were delivered, guarded and transported, over what distance, etc. Number of cases of coercion, and what sort of coercion. Supply of goods in exchange, what sort, and what quantities. The percentage of compulsory deliveries and surpluses obtained and in what period. The participation of various groups of peasants in the delivery of grain (and in receiving goods, if they were available).

Endnotes
[1]  These documents were written by Lenin during the conference on co-operatives held on January 26, 1920. They formed the basis of the decree of the Council of People’s Commissars of January 27, 1920 on “The Unification of All Types of Co-operative Organisations”.
The decree envisaged the fusion of the credit and savings co-operatives, their district, gubernia and regional societies, with consumers’ co-operatives and their societies. The All-Russia Central Board of Agricultural, Trades and Other Co-operative Societies merged with the Central Union of Consumers’ Societies (Tsentrosoyuz) as its affiliated sections. The Chief Committee for Co-operatives set up at the People’s Commissariat of Food was to supervise all activities. On the same day, January 27, 1920, the Council of People’s Commissars issued a decree on “The Abolition of Councils of Cooperative Congresses” in view of the merger of all-Russia co-operative centres with the Tsentrosoyuz and the amalgamation of the credit and consumers’ co-operatives; the functions and property of the all-Russia and gnberaia councils of co-operative congresses were transferred to the Tsentrosoyuz and its branches.
 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive







==========

## Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils





     
Speech Delivered at  the Third All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils January 27, 1920 Newspaper Report



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at
 The Third All-Russia Congress of
Economic Councils[1]
January 27, 1920
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 27 January, 1920 
 
First Published: Pravda No 19, January 29, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 309-313
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrade Lenin said that he would only touch lightly on those questions which he had had lately to deal with most. One of them was the organisation of administration the question of corporate management or one-man management.98 In the controversies on this subject the question had been discussed on the basis of abstract reasoning in which the superiority of corporate management over individual management was argued. But this led very far away from the practical tasks of the moment. Such arguments vent back to an early stage in the development of the Soviet system, a stage that had already passed. It was time to put the matter on a more business-like footing.
“Corporate management,” continued Lenin, “as the chief type of organisation of Soviet administration, is something embryonic, something needed in the early stages, when you have to start from scratch. But when more or less stable forms have been established, the transition to practical work involves individual management, for that system best ensures the most effective utilisation of human abilities, and a real, not verbal, verification of work done.
“The experience of the Soviet government in army organisation must not he regarded as something isolated. War embraces all forms of organisation in all spheres. The development of our army led to successful results only because it was carried on in the spirit of general Soviet organisation, on the basis of class relations that affect all development. We find here the same thin layer of the leading class, the proletariat, and the peasantry forming the mass. The nature of this relationship may not have been so fully apparent in other spheres, but it was thoroughly tested in the army, which stands face to face with the enemy and pays dearly for every mistake. This experience is worth thinking about. Developing systematically, it passed from a corporate form that was casual and vague to a corporate form elevated to the status of a system of organisation and permeating all the institutions of the army; and now, as a general tendency, it has arrived at the principle of one-man responsibility as the only correct method of work. In any sphere of Soviet work you will find a small number of politically-conscious proletarians, a mass of less developed proletarians and, as the substratum, a huge mass of peasants, all of whose habits tend towards private enterprise and, consequently, towards freedom of trade and profiteering, which the Mensheviks, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and non-party people call freedom, but which we call the heritage of capitalism. These are the conditions under which we have to act, and they call for relevant methods. And taking the experience of the army, we find in the organisation of its administration a systematic development from the original forms, from the corporate principle to the individual principle, which is now being applied there in at least a half of all cases.
“At best, corporate management involves a tremendous waste of forces and is not suited to the rapid and accurate work demanded by the conditions of centralised large-scale industry. If you take the advocates of corporate management, you will find that their resolutions formulate, in an extremely abstract way, the concept that every member of a collegium must be held individually responsible for the fulfilment of its tasks. That for us is now elementary. But those of you who have had practical experience know that only in one case out of a hundred is this actually adhered to. In the vast majority of cases it remains on paper. No member of a collegium is assigned precise duties and held personally responsible for the performance of those duties. Generally, there is no verification of work done. Let us assume that the Central Committee of a trade union nominates Vasily Vasilyevich Vasilyev for some office, and you ask to see a list of assignments performed by him and verified by efficient people—you will not get anything of the kind. We are all of us only just beginning to adopt really efficient methods.
“Our fault is that we imagine we can do everything ourselves. Our most acute shortcoming is a lack of executives, yet we do not know how to draw them from the rank-and-file workers and peasants, among whom there is an abundance of talented administrators and organisers. It would be much better if we abandoned general, and in most cases absolutely sterile, controversy for business-like methods, and that as soon as possible. We would then really be carrying out the duties of organisers of the advanced class, and would pick out hundreds and thousands of new talented organisers. We must promote them, test them, assign them tasks, tasks of greater and greater complexity. I hope that after the Congress of the Economic Councils, after having reviewed the work done, we shall take this path and increase and multiply the number of organisers, so as to reinforce and enlarge that exceedingly thin layer which has been worn to shreds during the past two years. For in order to accomplish the task we are setting ourselves, that of saving Russia from poverty, hunger and cold, we need ten times more organisers, who would be answerable to tens of millions of people.
“The second of the questions which interest us most is that of the labour armies.
“The task confronting us here concerns the transition from one stage of activity to another. The stage that was wholly taken up by war is not yet over but there are a null-her of signs which show that the Russian capitalists will not be able to continue the war, although there is no doubt that they will attempt to invade Russia. And we must be on our guard. Nevertheless, the war they launched against us two years ago has, by ‘and large, ended in victory for us, and we are now going over to peaceful tasks.
“The peculiar character of this transition must be understood. Here we have a country which is in a state of utter ruin, a country suffering from hunger and cold, where poverty has reached desperate extremes, and in that country the people have risen in their might, and gained confidence
in themselves when they realised that they are capable of withstanding the entire world—without exaggeration, the entire world, for the entire capitalist world has suffered defeat. And in these peculiar conditions we are proposing to form a labour army to solve urgent problems.
“We must concentrate on the main thing, namely, on collecting grain and transporting it to the centre. Every deviation from this task, the least diffusion of effort, will entail the gravest peril, the ruin of our cause. And in order to utilise our apparatus with the greatest possible dispatch, we must create a labour army. You already have the theses of the Central Committee and the reports on this subject, and I shall not go into the actual details of the question. I only want to say that at this moment of transition from civil war to the new tasks we must transfer everything to the labour front and there concentrate all our forces, with the utmost effort and with ruthless, military determination. We shall not allow any deviations now. In launching this slogan we declare that we must strain all the live forces of the workers and peasants to the utmost and demand that they give us every help in this matter. And then, by creating a labour army, by harnessing all the forces of the workers and peasants, we shall accomplish our main task. We shall succeed in procuring hundreds of millions of poods of grain. We have them already. But it will require incredible effort, devilish effort, the harnessing of all the forces of the country, added to military determination and energy, to get these hundreds of millions of poods of grain and transport them to the centre. Here, in the centre, we shall be engaged chiefly in drawing up a plan for this and shall be talking chiefly of this; as to all other questions—finance, industrial development and all questions relating to broad programmes—they should not be allowed to divert our attention at the moment. That is the chief thing facing us today—to resist the danger of being carried away by far-reaching plans and schemes. We must concentrate on the chief and fundamental thing, and not permit attention to be diverted from the main task we have set ourselves, namely, to procure grain and foodstuffs, to procure them through the state, at fixed prices, in the socialist way of the workers’ state—and not in the capitalist way, by means of profiteering—and to transport them to the centre, overcoming the chaos on the railways. It would be a crime on anybody’s part to forget this task.
“In order to place the performance of our main task on more or less correct lines, the leaders of all our government bodies, and of the economic councils in particular, must rouse the activities of tens of millions of workers and peasants. For this purpose a broad plan for the reconstruction of Russia will be drawn up. We have sufficient means for it: resources, technical potentialities, raw materials, everything required to enable us to begin this work of reconstruction everywhere, enlisting all the workers and peasants. We shall launch a persistent struggle, comrades, a struggle which will demand heavy sacrifices during this period on the labour front, but it is a struggle we must inevitably wage, because we are suffering from. hunger, cold, transport dislocation and typhus. We must combat these evils and begin everywhere to build up our state on the basis of large-scale, machine-industry methods, so as to make our country a cultured country, and, by a correct socialist struggle, get out of the quagmire in which the countries of world capitalism and imperialism are at present submerged.”

Endnotes
[1] The Third All-Russia Congress of Economic Councils was held in Moscow, January 23-29, 1920. It was attended by some 500 delegates and included workers from large industrial enterprises and representatives of trade unions and gubernia economic councils. The Congress agenda was the following: the economic situation in Soviet Russia; the war industry and Red Army supplies; organisation of economic management; organisation of labour; labour conscription; transport; the fuel problem and others. On January 27 Lenin delivered a speech at a plenary session. The Congress adopted the theses of the C.C., R.C.P.(B) on “Mobilisation of the Industrial Proletariat, Labour Conscription, Militarisation of the Economy and Utilisation of Army Units for the Needs of the Economy”. In its decisions the Congress stressed the need to maintain the centralised management of the country's economy. Simultaneously local economic councils were granted greater independence in eco nomic activities. The Third Congress of Economic Councils drew up Tan for the further rehabilitation and development of the economy of the Soviet Republic. 

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 







==========

## To Members of the Council of Defence 











To Members Of The Council Of Defence February 1, 1920



V. I. Lenin
To Members Of
The Council Of Defence


Written: 1 February, 1920
First Published: First published in 1924; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 314
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


February 1, 1920
The situation on the railways is catastrophic in the
    extreme. The delivery of grain has ceased. Truly urgent
    measures are needed to save the country. In the course of two
    months (February and March) the following measures must be
    effected (and other relevant measures of a similar nature must be
    sought):
I. The personal bread ration to be reduced for those
    not working on the railways and increased for those
    working on them.
Let more thousands perish but the country will be saved.
II. Three-fourths of the leading executives of all departments,
    except the Commissariats of Food and the Army, to be taken for the
    railways and for repair work for these two months. The work of
    other commissariats to be discontinued (or reduced to one-tenth)
    correspondingly for these two months.
III. Introduce martial law over an area stretching to
    30-50 versts on either side of the railway line to
    mobilise labour to clear the line, and transfer to the
    volosts within that area three-fourths of all
    high-ranking functionaries of the volost and uyezd executive
    committees of the gubernia concerned.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Report on the Work of the All-Russia
  Central Executive Committee and the Council of People’s
  Commissars Delivered at the First Session of the All-Russia
  Central Executive Committee, Seventh Convocation











Report On The Work Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee And The Council Of People’s Commissars Delivered At The First Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, Seventh Convocation



V. I. Lenin
Report On The Work Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee And The Council Of People’s Commissars Delivered At The First Session Of The All-Russia Central Executive Committee, Seventh Convocation[1]
February 2, 1920


Written: 2 February, 1920
First Published: Brief reports published on February 3, 1920 in Pravda No. 23 and in Izvestia No. 23; First published in full in the Fourth (Russian) Editon of the Collected Works; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 315-336
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, my report on the activities of the
    Council of People’s Commissars and the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee, whose functions in periods between meetings
    have been carried out by the Presidium of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee, falls naturally into two main
    subdivisions—the first on foreign policy, the Soviet
    Republic’s international position, and the second on
    internal development and our main economic tasks. Allow *me to
    present to you in that order the main facts of our work during the
    period under review, i.e., during the past two months.
As far as the Soviet Republic’s international position is
    concerned, it has been determined in the main by the successes of
    the Red Army. As you know, the last remnants of Kolchak’s
    army in the Far East have been almost wiped out, while the rivalry
    and enmity between Japan and America, nominally allies, are
    becoming more and more obvious and prevent them from fully
    developing their onslaught against the Soviet. Republic. After the
    annihilation of Yudenich’s troops and after the capture, in
    the South, of Novocherkassk and Rostov-on-Don in early January,
    their main forces suffered so decisive a blow that the Soviet
    Republic’s military position radically changed, and although
    the war was nOt over, every country saw clearly that its former
    hopes of crushing the military forces of the Soviet Republic had
    collapsed.
Acknowledgement of this radical change in the Soviet
    Republic’s international position was shown by the wireless
    message to us (not delivered officially) of the decision of the
    Allied Council adopted on January 16 to lift the blockade against
    the Soviet Republic. The main section of the decision
    taken by the Council says... (reads).[2]
There is no need for me to criticise the diplomacy contained in
    this formulation; it i so striking that it is not worth wasting
    time saying that the attitude of the Allies to Russia remains
    unchanged. If that is how the Allies understand their
    policy—that the lifting of the blockade does not change
    it—then it shows how unsound their policy is. The importance
    of this decision for us, however, is in its economic, not its
    political, aspect. Lifting the blockade is a fact of major
    international significance showing that a new stage in the
    socialist revolution has begun. For the blockade was in fact the
    principal, really strong weapon with which the imperialists of the
    world wanted to strangle Soviet Russia.
At the last Congress of Soviets I had occasion to state and
    expand the idea that the struggle against Soviet Russia had
    resulted, not only in the workers and peasants of France, Britain
    and other advanced countries forcing the imperialists to renounce
    the struggle, but in the mass of the petty. bourgeoisie within
    these countries becoming opponents of the blockade. And of course,
    this opposition by the middle sections of the population in
    countries like Britain and France was bound to influence
    international imperialist policy. Knowing their brand of
    diplomacy, we cannot expect them to act in a straightforward
    manner, without any reservations, without wanting to restore the
    past, or by some cunning trick or other return to their previous
    policy, which they cannot pursue openly at the moment. It must be
    said, however, that on the whole we have gained tremendous
    victories, that we have even been able to deprive the Allies of a
    weapon which only they possessed—the navy, despite the fact
    that waverers tried to scare us by saying the navy was
    invincible. Nevertheless, the development of political relations
    showed that even this invincible navy was in no fit state to fight
    us. We, who were unable to put up any naval resistance, forced the
    imperialist powers to abandon this weapon.
Of course, this change in policy on the international scene
    does not have an immediate effect, but the fact remains that we
    have now entered the sphere of world-wide international relations,
    and this enables us to get support from the more advanced
    countries. It is true that economically and financially these
    countries are in a sorry plight, they are all going downhill, and
    we cannot expect much from them; but with the opportunity to
    develop our own industry, we can count on receiving machinery for
    production, machinery for the restoration of our industry. And
    above all, that which had cut us off completely, by means of the
    blockade, from the advanced countries, has been broken down.
After the Allied Council had been forced to abandon this weapon
    our victories in the field of international politics continued,
    the greatest of them being that we succeeded in concluding peace
    with Estonia. We received a communication from Joffe and Gukovsky
    today saying: “Today, February 2, at 2 a.m. Moscow time,
    peace was concluded between Russia and Estonia. The Estonian
    Minister for Foreign Affairs, Birk, arrived from Revel to sign the
    document.”
Comrades, the text of this peace document which was discussed
    at great length and is of tremendous importance has been sent by
    messenger who should arrive tomorrow morning, but we have now
    received the exact text by telegraph, and it will be distributed
    tomorrow. It will be discussed and ratified. This document is of
    the highest importance to us. The peace treaty between Russia and
    Estonia is of epoch-making significance. We have succeeded in
    concluding a peace treaty with a government which is also becoming
    democratic and whose relations with us will now be stable, but
    which up to now has been supported by the whole imperialist
    world. Therefore we must regard this as an act of tremendous
    historical importance.
We know that people who stand between imperialism and democracy
    usually go over to one side or the other. So you see, we have
    undoubtedly gained a victory, because peace has been concluded,
    and this government must now proceed against our enemy. The
    theoretical significance of this fact is that in the imperialist
    epoch the whole world is split into a vast number of big and small
    states, the small states being absolutely helpless, an
    insignificant group compared to the rich powers which completely
    dominate a number of small, weak states. Imperialism is the epoch
    in which the division of the whole world takes place, when the
    whole of the world’s population is divided into a minority
    of exploiting, oppressor countries, and a majority of countries
    with small, weak populations that exist in a state of colonial
    dependence on the minority.
When we won peace with Estonia we proved that we were able to
    go forward as a proletarian and communist state. How have we done
    this? We have shown all the belligerent Entente powers who are
    opposed to peace that the sympathy we are able to evoke among our
    opponents and bourgeois governments, the sympathy of a small
    country, is more powerful than all that military oppression, all
    that financial aid and all those economic ties which link that
    small country to the powerful world states. The Entente has seen
    that it is not only when we use force that we are able to win; we
    are in a position to refute the lie and slander spread against us
    by the bourgeois governments of the world when they say the
    Bolsheviks retain power by force alone. What was it that enabled
    us to prevail over the combined forces of world imperialism in
    regard to Estonia, a country which had always suffered violence at
    the hands of the Russia of the tsars and landowners? It was our
    proving our ability to renounce, in all sincerity, the use of
    force at the appropriate moment, in order to change to a peace
    policy, and so win the sympathy of the bourgeois government of a
    small country, regardless of all the support given it by
    international capital. This is a fact of historical
    significance. Estonia is a small country, a small republic, but
    she is oppressed economically and militarily in a thousand and one
    ways by world imperialist capital, so much so that her entire
    population comes under this oppression. And this peace now proves
    that we can, in spite of our exhaustion, weakness and disarray,
    gain the upper hand over the whiteguard army with its imperialist
    backing. The powerful Entente knows how to reply to force with
    even more triumpliant force, but this peace proves that we do not
    have to resort to force to win the sympathy and support of the
    bourgeoisie.
A most difficult international problem has arisen here. The
    rate of capitalist development in different countries varies; this
    development takes place under different conditions, in various
    ways and by various means. A socialist republic in one country
    exists alongside all the capitalist countries of the world and
    causes their bourgeoisie to waver. From this they concluded that
    our position was a hopeless one; we had defeated the whiteguards
    by force, but what, they asked, were we going to do about the rest
    of the world? We shall defeat that too. The peace with Estonia
    proves that this is no empty phrase. The entire pressure of
    international capital was overcome in that area where our
    rejection of the use of force was recognised to be
    sincere. “Don’t make peace with the Bolsheviks,
    otherwise we shall conquer you by starvation; we shall give you
    neither financial nor economic aid,” said world capital, And
    Estonia proved to be one of the small, formally independent
    countries which said to herself, “We rely more on the fact
    that the Bolsheviks are able to live in peace with other, weaker
    nations, even with a bourgeois government, than we do on the whole
    powerful democratic countries of the Entente.”
Democracy is most clearly manifested in the fundamental
    question of war and peace. All the powers are preparing a fresh
    imperialist war, and this is seen daily by the workers of the
    world. Any day now America and Japan will hurl themselves at each
    other; Britain grabbed so many colonies after her victory over
    Germany that the other imperialist powers will never resign
    themselves to this. A new fanatical war is being prepared, and the
    people are aware of this. And just at this moment Russia, with her
    huge forces, who is accused of intending to fling those forces
    against a small state as soon as she has finished with Yudenich,
    Kolchak and Denikin—Russia has concluded a democratic peace
    with Estonia. Furthermore, the terms of the peace treaty provide
    for a number of territorial concessions on our part which do not
    completely correspond to the strict observance of the principle of
    self-determination of nations, and prove in practice that the
    question of frontiers is of secondary importance to us; the
    question of peaceful relations, however, the question of our
    ability to await the development of the conditions of life of each
    nation, is not only an important question of principle, it is also
    a matter in which we have succeeded in winning the confidence of
    nations hostile to us. It is no accident that we have achieved
    this in relation to Estonia; it is evidence that the weak
    proletarian republic, existing in isolation and apparently
    helpless, has begun to win to its side countries dependent on the
    imperialist states—and they constitute the vast
    majority. That is why our peace with Estonia is of such great
    historical significance. No matter how the Entente strives to
    start a war—even if it succeeds in turning peace once again
    into war—the fact will remain, firmly established in
    history, that despite all the pressure of international capital we
    were able to inspire greater confidence in a small country ruled
    by the bourgeoisie than the so-called democratic, but in reality
    predatory, imperialist bourgeoisie.
We by chance came to possess some very interesting documents
    showing how our policy compared with that of the allegedly
    democratic, but in actual fact predatory, powers of the whole
    world, which please permit me to read to you. These documents were
    furnished by a whiteguard officer or official named Oleinikov who
    was commissioned by one whiteguard government to hand over some
    highly important documents to another. But he handed them over to
    its instead.[3](Applause.) It proved possible
    to send these documents to Russia, and I shall read them to you,
    although it will take some time to do so. Nevertheless, they are
    very interesting for they very clearly reveal the hidden springs
    of policy. The first document is a telegram to Minister Gulkevich
    from Sazonov:
Paris, October 14, 1919, No. 668.
    
S. D. Saonov conveys his respects to Konstantin Nikolayevich,
    and has the honour to enclose for his information copies of a
    telegram from B. A. Bakhmetev, No. 1050, and a telegram from
    I. I. Sukin, No. 23, on the situation in the Baltic Provinces.
Then comes a more interesting document—a telegram from
    Washington dated October 12:
Received October 12, 1919. File No. 3346.

    

      Bakhmetev to the Minister.


    

      Washington, October 11, 1919, No. 1050.

    

      Further to my telegram No. 1045.

    

      (In code) The State Department acquainted me verbally with the
      instructions given to Gade. He is appointed the Commissar of the
      American Government in the Baltic Provinces of Russia. He is not
      accredited to any Russian Government. His mission is to observe
      and inform. His behaviour must not lead the local population to
      expect that the American Government could agree to support
      separatist trends going beyond autonomy. On the contrary, the
      American Government trusts that the population of the Baltic
      Provinces will help their Russian brothers in their work of
      general state importance. The instructions are based on the
      interpretation of the agreement of the Allied governments with
      the Supreme Ruler as outlined in my memorandum of June 17 to the
      government. Gade has been given extracts from the recent
      speeches of the President in which he fulminates against
      Bolshevism.
So, the American Government intimates that its representative
      can issue any kind of instructions but may not support
      independence, i.e., may not guarantee the independence of these
      states. This is what directly or indirectly came to light, and
      Estonia could not be kept in ignorance of the fact that she was
      being deceived by the Great Powers. Of course, everyone could have
      guessed this, but now we have the documents and they will be
      published:
Received October 12, 1919. File No, 3347

    

      Sukin to the Minister.

    

      Omsk, October 9, 1919, No. 28.

    

      (In code) Knox has given the Supreme Ruler the message of the
      British War Office in which the latter warns of the inclination
      of the Baltic states to conclude a peace with the Bolsheviks who
      guarantee them immediate recognition of their independence. At
      the same time the British War Office raises the question of the
      advisability of paralysing this pledge by satisfying, in its
      turn, the wishes of the states indicated. We replied to Knox by
      referring to the principles outlined in the Note of the Supreme
      Ruler to the Powers on June 4, and, in addition, we pointed out
      that the conclusion of a peace between the Baltic states and the
      Bolsheviks would be undoubtedly fraught with danger since this
      would permit the release of part of the Soviet forces and would
      clear the way to the infiltration of Bolshevism in the West. The
      mere fact that they are ready to talk peace is in our opinion
      evidence of the utter demoralisation of the parties of these
      self-governing entities which cannot protect themselves from the
      penetration of aggressive Bolshevism.

    

      Expressing the
      conviction that the Powers could not approve of the further
      spread of Bolshevism, we pointed to the necessity of withdrawing
      all aid from the Baltic states since this would be a real means
      of exerting influence by the Powers, and is more advisable than
      competition in promises with the Bolsheviks, who now have
      nothing to lose.

    

      In transmitting the above, I would request
      you to make similar representations in Paris and London; we are
      making a special approach to Bakhmetev.
Received October 9, 1910. File No. 3286,

    

      Sablin to the Minister.

    

      London, October 7, 1919, No. 677.

    

      (In code) In a letter to Guchkov, the Director of Military
      Operations of the War Office, to whom Guchkov made an offer of
      our shipping in order to facilitate the delivery of supplies to
      Yudenich by the British, states that in the opinion of the War
      Office Yudenic.h has all that he requires at the moment, and
      that Britain is experiencing some difficulty in providing
      further supplies. He adds, however, that as we have shipping, we
      could arrange supplies for Yudenich on a commercial basis,
      providing we obtain credits. At the same time General Radcliffe
      admits that Yudenich’s army must be properly equipped
      since it is “the only force among the Baltic states able
      to engage in active operations against the
      Bolsheviks”.
Minister to Bakhmetev in Washington.

    

      Paris, September 30, 1919, No. 2442.

    

      (In code) From a strictly confidential Swedish source I learn
      that the American envoy in Stockholm. Morris, is talking about
      growing sympathy in America towards the Bolsheviks and of
      intentions to cease aid to Kolchak in order to enter into
      contacts with Moscow in the interests of American trade. Such
      statements on the part of an official representative make a
      strange impression.
Received October 5, 1919. File No. 3244

    

      Bakhmetev to the Minister.

    

      Washington, October 4, 1919, No. 1021.

    

      Further to your telegram No. 2442.

    

      (In code) The State Department informed me in confidence that it
      is true that the envoy in Stockholm, Morris, and particularly
      Hapgood in Copenhagen, are well known for their Left sympathies,
      but that they have no influence or authority here, and that the
      government is obliged to admonish them from time to time,
      categorically pointing out that American policy is one of
      undeviating support of our government in the struggle against
      the Bolsheviks.
Here are all the documents which we shall publish and which
    clearly show how the battle went on around Estonia, how the
    Entente, Britain and France, together with Kolchak and America,
    all brought pressure to hear on Estonia with the one aim of
    preventing the signing of a peace treaty with the Bolsheviks, and
    how the Bolsheviks, pledging themselves to territorial concessions
    and guaranteeing independence, won this trial of strength. I state
    that this victory is of gigantic historical significance, because
    it has been gained without the use of force. This victory over
    world imperialism is a victory that is bringing the Bolsheviks the
    sympathy of the whole world. This victory by no means denotes that
    universal peace will be concluded immediately; but it does show
    that we represent the peace interests of the majority of the
    world’s population against the imperialist war-mongers. Such
    an assessment of the situation has induced bourgeois Estonia, an
    opponent of communism, to conclude peace with us. Since we, a
    proletarian state, a Soviet republic, are concluding a peace
    treaty, since we are acting in a spirit of peace towards bourgeois
    governments oppressed by the great magnates of imperialism, we
    must be able to decide from this how our international policy is
    to be shaped.
The main task we set ourselves is to defeat the exploiters and
    to win to our side the waverers—this is a task of historic
    significance. Among the waverers are a whole number of bourgeois
    states which, as bourgeois states, detest us, but which, on the
    other hand, as oppressed states, prefer peace with us. This
    explains the peace with Estonia. This peace is, of course, only a
    first step, and its influence will only be felt in the future, but
    that it will be felt is a fact. Up to now we have negotiated with
    Latvia only through the Red Cross,[4] and the same is true
    of our negotiations with the Polish Government. I repeat—the
    peace with Estonia is bound to influence events because the basis
    is identical; the same attempts are being made to goad Latvia and
    Poland into making war on Russia as were made in the case of
    Estonia. Perhaps these attempts will prove successful, and since
    war with Poland is possible, we must be vigilant, but we are
    certain—this has been demonstrated by our main
    achievements—that we can conclude peace and make concessions
    which permit the development of any form of democracy. This is now
    especially important because the Polish question is particularly
    acute. We have received a number of communications indicating that
    apart from bourgeois, conservative, landowning Poland, apart from
    the pressure being exerted by all capitalist parties in Poland,
    all the Entente powers are doing their utmost to incite Poland to
    make war against us.
As you know, the Council of People’s Commissars has
    issued an appeal to the working people of Poland.[5] We are
    going to ask you to endorse this appeal as a means of fighting
    that campaign of calumny in which Polish landowning circles are
    engaged. We shall submit an additional text of an appeal to the
    working people of Poland. This appeal will be a blow to the
    imperialist powers, who are doing their utmost to incite Poland
    against us; for us the interests of the majority of the people
    take first place.
I shall now acquaint you with a telegram intercepted by us
    yesterday, which illustrates the attempts of American capital to
    present us in a certain light and thereby drag us into a war with
    Poland. The telegram says (reads). I have said and heard
    nothing of the sort, but they are able to lie because it is not
    for nothing that they spend their money on spreading lying rumours
    that have a definite aim. Their bourgeois government guarantees
    them this. (Continues reading the telegram.) This
    telegram was sent from Europe to America and was paid for out of
    capitalist funds; it serves as a shameless means of provoking a
    war with Poland. American capital is doing its utmost to bring
    pressure to bear on Poland and does this unashamedly, making it
    appear that the Bolsheviks want to finish with Kolchak and Denikin
    in order to throw all their “iron troops” against
    Poland.
It is important that we should here and now endorse the
    decision of the Council of People’s Commissars, and then we
    must do what we did previously in relation to other states, and
    also what we did in regard to the troops of Kolchak and
    Denikin. We must immediately appeal to the Polish people and
    explain the real state of affairs. We know full well that this
    method of ours has a most positive effect in tending to disrupt
    the ranks of our enemy. And in the end, this method will lead on
    to the path we need, the path on to which it has led the working
    population of all countries. This policy must make a definite
    beginning—no matter how difficult this may prove—and
    once a beginning is made, we shall carry it through to
    completion.
I must mention that we have been pursuing the same policy in
    respect of all other countries. We invited Georgia and Azerbaijan
    to conclude an agreement against Denikin. They refused, pleading
    non-interference in the affairs of other countries. We shall see
    how the workers and peasants of Georgia and Azerbaijan regard
    this.
This policy has been applied even more cautiously in respect of
    the Western nations than in dealing with the nations of Russia. It
    involved such countries as Latvia, Estonia, Poland and, on the
    other hand, a number of Eastern countries whose developmental
    level is the same as that of most of those colonial countries
    which constitute the majority of the world’s
    population. They are kept down by Britain, who continues to hold
    colonial slaves under her sway. Our policy in relation to
    West-European countries has been very cautious—it will take
    some time for them to get over their own Kerensky period—but
    our policy in the East must be even more cautious and patient, for
    here we are dealing with countries that are much more backward,
    are under the oppressive influence of religious fanaticism, are
    imbued with greater distrust of the Russian people, and for
    decades and centuries were oppressed by the tsarist
    government’s capitalist and imperialist policy, by the
    policy conducted towards these nations by Russia as the dominant
    nation.
We have granted autonomy to the Bashkir Republic.[6]

    We must found an autonomous Tatar Republic.[7] We shall
    continue the same policy in relation to all the Eastern peoples,
    and say to ourselves that we, who are faced by a huge front of
    imperialist powers, we, who are fighting imperialism, represent an
    alliance that requires close military unity, and any attempt to
    violate this unity we regard as absolutely impermissible, as a
    betrayal of the struggle against international
    imperialism. However, in implementing this policy we must be even
    more cautious. For if the European countries have to go through a
    Kerensky period, in the countries that are at a lower
    developmental level there are even greater elements of distrust,
    and it will require more time to influence them. We support the
    independence and sovereignty of these countries. We appeal to
    their working people. We say: unity of the military forces is
    imperative; any deviation from this unity is impermissible.
We are confident that, by systematically pursuing our policy of
    close alliance, we shall achieve greater success than before in
    our relations with the peoples of the East. And our success is
    already great. The Soviet Republic enjoys tremendous popularity
    among all the Eastern peoples for the same reason that made it
    possible for us to conclude a peace treaty with a small Western
    state, because they see in us an unswerving fighter against
    imperialism, because ours is the only republic which is waging a
    war against imperialism and is capable of utilising every
    situation without the use of force, and which is also able to gain
    a victory by renouncing the use of force.
Needless to say, a far more perfected variety of this policy is
    being implemented in relation to the Ukrainian Republic. Here the
    problem has been simplified by the prior conclusion of an
    agreement between the All-Russia Central Executive Committee and
    the Central Executive Committee of the Ukrainian Soviet
    Republic.[8] On the basis of this agreement, which
    implies a close federation of both republics in the struggle
    against the imperialist countries, we are building an ever closer
    alliance. As a result of their bitter experience of
    Denikin’s rule, the mass of Ukrainian peasants and workers
    are becoming convinced that only the closest alliance between the
    Ukraine and the Russian Republic will be really invincible in the
    face of international imperialism, and that at the time of
    struggle against imperialism there is nothing to be gained by the
    separation of the Ukrainian state, since imperialism will take
    advantage of every division to crush Soviet power. Such a division
    is criminal. Our policy is taking deep root in the Ukraine, and we
    are confident that the forthcoming All-Ukraine Congress of Soviets
    of Workers and Peasants will officially endorse this policy. These
    are the few remarks to which I must limit myself on the question
    of the international situation. I shall ask this session to
    endorse all the practical proposals I have to make (I have
    enumerated them) on behalf of the Council of People’s
    Commissars and the All-Russia Central Executive Committee.
In passing on to the work of internal development I must first
    deal with certain measures taken by our government, and then
    proceed to the most important matter of all—the change-over
    to a new course, the transition from military tasks to those of
    state organisation.
In regard to our internal policy for the two months under
    review, among the main measures which more or less stand out from
    a number of current tasks, the following decision requiring the
    endorsement of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee is of
    particular importance. This is the decision to abolish the death
    penalty. As you know, immediately after the main victory over
    Denikin, after the capture of Rostov, Comrade Dzerzhinsky, the
    People’s Commissar for Internal Affairs, who is in charge of
    the Cheka, submitted a proposal to the Council of People’s
    Commissars, and had it endorsed in his own department, that the
    passing of all death sentences by the Cheka be abolished. When
    bourgeois democracy in Europe does all in its power to spread the
    lie that Soviet Russia is predominantly terrorist, when this lie
    is spread about us by bourgeois democracy and by the socialists of
    the Second International, when Kautsky writes a special book
    entitled Terrorism and Communism in which he declares
    that communist power is based on terrorism, then you can well
    imagine the kind of lies spread on this subject. In order to
    refute this lie we have decided on the step taken by Comrade
    Dzerzhuiisky, endorsed by the Council of People’s
    Commissars, and which now needs the approval of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee.
We were forced to use terror in response to the terror employed
    by the Entente, when the mighty powers of the world flung their
    hordes against us, stopping at nothing. We could not have lasted
    two days had we not replied to these attempts of officers and
    whiteguards in a merciless fashion. This meant the use of terror,
    but this was forced on us by the terrorist methods of the
    Entente. But as soon as we had gained, a decisive victory, even
    before the end of the war, immediately after the capture of
    Rostov, we renounced capital punishment, and have therefore proved
    that we intend to carry out our own programme as we had
    promied. We say that the use of violence arises from the need to
    crush the exploiters, the landowners and capitalists.
      When this is accomplished we shall renounce all extraordinary
    measures. We have proved this in practice. And I think, I hope,
    and I am confident that the All-Russia Central Executive Committee
    will unanimously endorse this measure of the Council of
    People’s Commissars and will implement it in such a way that
    it will be impossible to apply the death penalty in
    Russia. Needless to say, any attempt by the Entente to resume
    methods of war will force us to reintroduce the former terror; we
    know that we are living in a time of the law of the jungle, when
    kind words are of no avail. This is what we had in mind, and as
    soon as the decisive struggle was over, we immediately began to
    abolish measures which all other powers apply without any time
    limit having been set.
Further, I should like to refer to the discussion on
    Workers’ Inspection. There is to be a special report on this
    subject, and it would be wrong of me to dwell too long on it. The
    most important problem confronting us here is that of drawing the
    mass of people into administrative work. This is a more acute
    problem than the task of large-scale development. You will be
    presented with detailed plans, and when you have discussed and
    amended them, you will understand that this development must
    continue with far greater participation by the mass of the
    workers. This is our main task, with which it is extremely
    difficult to get to grips in the existing chaos, but nevertheless
    we are approaching it steadily.
There is another question before us—the question of the
    co-operatives. We have set ourselves the task of uniting the whole
    population in co-operatives that differ from those previously
    existing and which at best embraced only the upper sections of the
    population.
Socialism would be impossible if it did not make use of the
    technical knowledge, culture and the apparatus created by
    bourgeois, capitalist civilisation. Part of this apparatus is the
    co-operative movement whose growth is all the greater the higher
    the level of capitalist development in a country. We have set our
    co-operative movement the task of embracing the whole country. Up
    to now the co-operative movement involved only top sections and
    benefited those able to pay their dues. The working people,
    however, were
    unable to make use of its services. We have resolutely broken
    with this type of co-operative, but not so that the cooperative
    movement as such is completely wiped out, for in March and April
    1918 we set the co-operatives the task of drawing in the whole
    population. If there are any co-operators who value the ideas of
    the founders of the co-operative movement (the old aims of
    co-operation were to satisfy the needs of the working people),
    they will sympathise with this aim. We are certain that we have
    the sympathy of the majority of the members of the co-operative
    organisations, although we are by no means under the illusion that
    we have won to our side the majority of the leaders, who subscribe
    to bourgeois and petty-bourgeois views, who see co-operation
    merely as another form of capitalist economy and as the notorious
    freedom of trade which means fortunes for the few and ruin for the
    majority. Instead of this, we announced the country-wide task of
    the co-operatives to really begin catering for the working people
    so that they embrace the whole population. This could not be
    accomplished at once. We have set ourselves this aim and have
    worked systematically, and will go on working, to achieve it, so
    that ultimately all the population will be united in cooperatives;
    and we can say with certainty that the whole of the Soviet
    Republic, perhaps in a few weeks, or in a few months, will become
    one great co-operative of working people. After this the
    development of independent activity by the working people, their
    participation in state development will proceed along even broader
    lines.
In accomplishing this, we have decided that all types, not only
    consumers’, but producers’, credit, and other
    cooperatives should, by appropriate stages and with due care, be
    amalgamated into a Central Union of Consumers’ Societies. We
    are confident that our steps in this direction will meet with the
    approval of the Central Executive Committee and functionaries in
    the localities who, after the formal amalgamation of the
    co-operatives, will, by their work of economic development, into
    which they will draw the majority of the workers and peasants,
    achieve what we regard as one of the major tasks—that of
    making the co-operative movement another prime factor in the
    struggle against red tape, this legacy from the old capitalist
    state, a struggle
      which our programme also declares to be of the highest
    importance. We shall carry on this struggle in all offices and
    departments by every means and, incidentally, through the
    amalgamation of the co-operatives and by shifting the appeal from
    the bourgeois top people in the co-operatives to the genuine
    working people, who must all undertake independent work in
    co-operative organisation.
From among the problems of internal development I now wish to
    refer to what has been done in the sphere of agriculture. In order
    to place land tenure on a proper basis, the People’s
    Commissar for Agriculture in July 1919 issued a circular on
    measures against the frequent redistribution of allotted
    land. This circular was published on July 1 in Izvestia
    and was included in the Collection 0/ Statutes and
    Decrees of the Workers’ and Peasants’ Government.
    This circular is important because it meets the many suggestions
    and demands of the peasants who pointed out that the frequent
    reallotment of the land in conditions of small-scale farming
    prevented better labour discipline and the higher productivity of
    labour. This view is shared by the Council of People’s
    Commissars which has instructed the Commissariat of Agriculture to
    work out a draft decree on reallotment procedures. This draft will
    be considered shortly. Similarly, the People’s Commissariat
    of Agriculture has set itself the task of implementing a number of
    urgent measures to restore livestock and farm equipment. In this
    connection the systematic efforts of local officials themselves
    are extremely important, and we hope that the members of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee will bring the appropriate
    pressure to bear on the authorities and render assistance, so that
    these measures of the People’s Commissariat of Agriculture
    can be put into effect in the shortest space of time.
I shall now turn to the last, and in reality, the most
    important problem of our development—the problem of the
    labour armies and the labour mobilisation of the population. The
    most difficult task in the sharp turns and changes of social life
    is that of taking due account of the peculiar features of each
    transition. How socialists should fight within a capitalist
    society is not a difficult problem and has long since been
    settled. Nor is it difficult to visualise advanced socialist
    society. This problem has also been settled. But the most
    difficult task of all is how, in practice, to effect the
    transition from the old, customary, familiar capitalism to the new
    socialism, as yet unborn and without any firm foundations. At best
    this transition will take many years, in the course of which our
    policy will be divided into a number of even smaller stages. And
    the whole difficulty of the task which falls to our lot, the whole
    difficulty of politics and the art of politics, lies in the
    ability to take into account the specific tasks of each of these
    transitions.
We have only just solved—though not yet fully—the
    problem of the war in its principal and basic features. Our main
    task was to repel at all costs the attack of the
    whiteguards. Everything for the war effort, we said, and this was
    the correct policy. We are fully aware that it caused unparalleled
    hardships in the rear such as cold, famine and devastation. But
    the very fact that the Red Army which, incidentally, is
    appreciated in the way shown by the examples I have read out to
    you—has resolved this problem in a most backward country
    proves that new forces do exist in the country. Otherwise the
    creation of this model army, and its victory over far better
    equipped armies, would have been inconceivable. But now we have
    geared the entire state apparatus to this task and have succeeded
    in surmounting the specific features of the problem—the
    subordination of everything to the war effort—the situation
    demands a swift and sharp change in policy. We have not yet
    finished the war. We must maintain our military readiness intact,
    we must destroy Denikin’s troops, we must show the
    landowners and capitalists of every country that if they want to
    deal with Russia by war, they will meet the same fate as Kolchak
    and Denikin. We must not take a single step, therefore, which
    would weaken our military strength. At the same time, however, we
    must switch the whole country on to a different course,
    reconstruct its whole mechanism. We can no longer gear everything
    to the war effort, and we have no need to, because in the main the
    problem of the war has been solved.
The task of the transition from war to peaceful development
    arises in such peculiar conditions that we cannot disband the
    army, since we have to allow, say, for the possibility of an
    attack by that selfsame Poland or any of the powers which the
    Entente continues to incite against us. This specific feature of
    the problem of not being able to reduce our military forces, yet
    at the same time having to switch the whole of the Soviet state
    machine which is geared to war on to the new course of peaceful
    economic development, demands exceptional attention. It is the
    type of problem that general formulas, the general provisions of a
    programme, general communist principles cannot cope with, but
    which requires that the specific features of the transition from
    capitalism to communism be taken into consideration, the
    transition from the position of a country whose whole attention
    has been concentrated on the war, to the position of a country
    which has won a decisive military victory and must go on to solve
    economic questions by military methods, because the situation, as
    you all realise, is extremely grave. The end of the winter will
    bring, has already brought, the working people unbelievable
    hardships—cold, famine, devastation. We must overcome this
    at all costs. We know that we can do this. It has been proved by
    the enthusiasm of the Red Army.
If, up to the present, we were able to battle on, surrounded on
    all sides and cut off from the richest areas of grain and coal,
    now that we possess a]! this, now that it is possible to solve the
    problems of economic development jointly with the Ukraine, we can
    solve the main problem—to acquire large quantities of grain
    and foodstuffs, deliver them to the industrial centres so that
    industrial development can begin. We must concentrate all our
    efforts on this task. It is inadmissible to allow ourselves to be
    diverted from it to any other practical task. It has to be solved
    by military methods, with absolute ruthlessness and by the
    absolute suppression of all other interests. We know that a whole
    number of perfectly legitimate demands and interests will go by
    the board, but if it were not for these sacrifices, we should not
    have won the war. The situation now demands that we make a sharp
    and, swift turn towards the creation of a basis for peaceful
    economic development. This basis must be the acquisition of great
    stocks of food and their transportation to the central region; it
    is the task of the railways to deliver raw materials and
    provisions. From August 1917 to August 1918 we collected 30
    million poods of grain, in the second year 110 million,
    and now in five months 90 million have been collected by our
    Commissariat of Food, collected by socialist, not capitalist
    methods, by compulsory delivery of grain by the peasants at fixed
    prices, and not by selling on the free market—and this means
    that we have found the way. We are certain that it is the correct
    way and that it will enable us to achieve results which will
    ensure tremendous economic development.
All our forces must be dedicated to this task, all our military
    forces, which came to the fore in war-time organisation, must be
    switched on to this new path. This is the specific situation, the
    specific transition, which engendered the idea of labour armies
    and led to the law on the creation of the first labour army in the
    Urals and of the Ukrainian labour army. It was followed by the law
    on the utilisation of the army reserves for civilian labour and
    the decree issued by the Soviet government on the Committees for
    Labour Conscription.[9] All these laws will be outlined to you
    by a member of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee in a
    fully detailed report. I naturally cannot trespass on this ground
    because the special report will throw sufficient light upon it. I
    only emphasise its significance in relation to our general policy,
    the significance of this transition which confronts us with its
    specific tasks, for which we must redouble our efforts like
    soldiers, to organise them so that we can lay in large stocks of
    food and deliver them to the industrial centres. To achieve this
    we must at all costs create labour armies, organise ourselves like
    an army, reduce, even close down a whole number of institutions so
    that in the next few months, no matter what happens, we can
    overcome transport dislocation, and emerge from this desperate
    situation of cold, famine and impoverishment brought by the end of
    winter. We must and can get out of this situation. When the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee endorses all the measures
    connected with labour conscription and the labour armies, when it
    has succeeded in instilling these ideas in the broad mass of the
    population and demands that they be put into practice by local
    officials—we are absolutely convinced that then we shall be
    able to cope with this most difficult of tasks, while not in the
    least degree weakening our military readiness.
We must at all costs, without weakening our military readiness,
    switch the Soviet Republic on to the new course of economic
    development. This task must be accomplished in the next few weeks,
    possibly months. Every Soviet or Party organisation must do
    everything in its power to end the transport dislocation and
    increase the grain stocks.
Then, and only then, shall we have a basis, a sound basis for
    industrial development on a wide scale, for the electrification of
    Russia. In order to prove to the population, and in particular to
    the peasants, that our extensive plans in this field are not
    fantasies, but are borne out by and based on technology and
    science, I think we should adopt a resolution—1 hope the
    Central Executive Committee will endorse it—recommending
    that the Supreme Economic Council and the Commissariat of
    Agriculture jointly draft a plan for the electrification of
    Russia.
Thanks to the aid of the State Publishing House and the energy
    of the workers at the former Kushnerev Printing Works, now the
    17th State Printing Works, I succeeded in getting
    Krzhizhanovsky’s pamphlet The Main Tasks of the
    Electrification of Russia published at very short notice, and
    tomorrow it will be distributed to all members of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee. This pamphlet of Comrade
    Krzhizhanovsky’s, who works in the ElectroTechnical
    Sub-Department of the Supreme Economic Council, summarises what
    has already been achieved and raises questions, the popularisation
    of which, not the practical application, is now one of the most
    important tasks.
I hope that the Central Executive Committee will adopt this
    resolution which, in the name of the Central Executive Committee,
    instructs the Supreme Economic Council and the People’s
    Commissariat of Agriculture to work out in the course of the next
    few months—our practical tasks during this period will be
    different—with the aid of scientists and engineers a broad
    and complete plan for the electrification of Russia. The author of
    this pamphlet is absolutely correct in choosing as its motto the
    saying: “The age of steam is the age of the bourgeoisie, the
    age of electricity is the age of socialism.” We must have a
    new technical foundation for the new economic development. This
    new technical foundation is electricity, and everything will have
    to be built on this foundation, but it will take many long
    years. We shall not be afraid of working ten or twenty years, but
    we must prove to the peasants that in place of the old separation
    of industry from agriculture, this very deep contradiction on
    which capitalism thrived and which sowed dissension between the
    industrial and agricultural workers, we set ourselves the task of
    returning to the peasant the loan we received from him in the form
    of grain, for we know that paper money, of course, is not the
    equivalent of bread. We must repay this loan by organising
    industry and supplying the peasants with its products. We must
    show the peasants that the organisation of industry on the basis
    of modern, advanced technology, on electrification which will
    provide a link between town and country, will put an end to the
    division between town and country, will make it possible to raise
    the level of culture in the countryside and to overcome, even in
    the most remote corners of the land, backwardness, ignorance,
    poverty, disease and barbarism. We shall tackle the problem as
    soon as we have dealt with our current, basic task, and we shall
    not allow ourselves to be deflected for a single moment from the
    fundamental practical task.
In the next few months all our energies must be concentrated on
    food deliveries and the extension of our resources of food
    supplies. There must not be the slightest departure from this. At
    the same time let the scientists and technicians produce a
    long-term plan for the electrification of all-Russia.[10] Let the
    links which we have established with the outside world, with
    capitalist Europe, that gateway which we made for ourselves by
    concluding peace with Estonia, serve to provide us immediately
    with essential technical aid. When, in the next few months, we
    have solved the basic problems of transport and food supplies,
    when we have solved the problem of labour conscription, on which
    problems we shall wholly concentrate all our energies, not
    allowing ourselves to be deflected from this by anything else for
    a few months—when we have accomplished this we shall prove
    that we can go on with developmental tasks that will last many
    years and put the whole of Russia on to an advanced technological
    footing, abolishing the division between town and country, and
    making it possible to conquer completely and decisively the
    backwardness of the countryside, its scattered economy and its
    ignorance, from which stem all the stagnation, all the
    backwardness, all the oppression that have existed up to now. And
    in this matter, that of the peaceful struggle on the bloodless
    front of the reorganisation of industry, we shall, if we employ
    all our military skill and all our energy, and concentrate all our
    forces on the fulfilment of this task, achieve success that will
    be even more decisive, even more glorious, than those we have won
    in the military field. (Applause.)


Endnotes
[1]
    The first session of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee, Seventh Convocation, was held in Moscow, February
    2-7, 1920. The agenda of the session was the following: report of
    the Presidium of the All-Russia C.E.C.; international situation;
    economic policy in connection with the organisation of labour and
    supplies; labour mobilisation and utilisation of the Army;
    transport; food problem; Workers’ and Peasants’
    Inspection; peace negotiations with Estonia, and other
    questions. On February 2, Lenin delivered a report on the work of
    the All-Russia C.E.C. and the Council of People’s
    Commissars. The session endorsed the Rules for Workers’ and
    Peasants’ Inspection, according to which the People’s
    Commissariat of State Control was to be reorganised into
    workers’ and peasants’ inspection with the enrolment
    of broad masses of workers and peasants into this work. The
    session passed a resolution on “Transport” which
    stated that the restoration of transport and improvement of its
    work were the primary task of the Soviet government.
Another resolution underscored the tremendous
    importance of the
electrification of the economy. The session endorsed the appeal to the Polish people and resolved to ratify the peace treaty with Estonia.  
[2]
    Lenin read the report published in the central newspapers of
    January 18, 1920, that the governments of the Entente countries
    intended to lift the blockade and sanction trade with Soviet
    Russia. The decision passed by the Allied Council on January 16,
    1920 stressed however that these measures did not mean any change
    in the policy of the Allied governments towards the Soviet
    Government. 
[3]Oleinikov, the whiteguard officer
    mentioned, was carrying documents from S. D. Sazonov in Paris,
    through Sweden to Yudenich. He came over to the side of the
    revolution and handed the documents over to the Soviet
    authorities. The persons mentioned in the documents were: Sazonov,
    Foreign Minister in the tsarist government and Kolchak’s
    government and the representative of Kolchak and Denikin in Paris;
    Gulkevich, Kolchak’s envoy in Sweden; Bakhmetev,
    Kolchak’s ambassador in Washington; Sukin, head of the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs of Kolchak’s government in Omsk;
    Sablin, Kolchak’s chargÃ© d’affaires in London; Knox,
    an English general, the British representative to Kolchak’s
    government.
[4]
    Lenin refers to the Red Cross negotiations on an exchange of
prisoners, the return of refugees, and so on. 
[5]
    Lenin refers to the Declaration of the Council of People’s
    Commissars of the R.S.F.S.R. addressed to the Government of Poland
    and the Polish people on January 28, 1920.
The Poland of the bourgeoisie and landowners
    depended entirely  on the imperialists of the Entente. At the
    instigation of the  British  and French governments she made
    preparations for a criminal war  against the young Soviet
    Republic. The Soviet Declaration stated  that the policy of the
    R.S.F.S.R. in respect of Poland proceeded  from the principle of
    the right of nations to self-determination  and unreserved
    recognition of the independence and sovereignty  of the Republic
    of Poland. The Soviet Government confirmed that  it had no
    aggressive designs against Poland. On February 2, 1920,  a meeting
    of the First Session of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee, Seventh Convocation, endorsed an appeal to the  Polish
    people. This appeal exposed the lies spread by the imperialist
    powers that Soviet Russia intended annexing parts of Poland, and
    stressed the Soviet Government’s unwavering effort to
    achieve  peace and establish friendly, good-neighbourly relations
    with independent Poland. 
[6]The Bashicir Autonomous Soviet
    Republic was formed by an agreement between the central
    Soviet authorities and the Bashkir Government. The agreement
    confirmed the formation of the Bashkir Autonomous Soviet Republic
    in conformity with the Soviet Constitution and defined its
    boundaries and administrative division.The agreement was published
    in Izvestia No. 63, March 23, 1919. 
[7]The Tatar Autonomous Soviet Republic
    was formed on May 27, 1920; the decree of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee
and the Council of People’s Commissars on the formation of the
republic was signed by Lenin and Kalinin.  p. 325
[8]See Note 53.
[9]Lenin refers to a number of government decrees
    aimed at combating the economic disruption and at rehabilitating
    the national economy. The decision to use the Third Army, renamed
    the First Revolutionary Army of Labour, on the labour front in the
    Urals was adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars on
    January 15, 1920. The Statute of the Ukrainian Soviet Army of
    Labour was adopted by the Council of People’s Commissars of
    the R.S.F.S.R. in agreement with the All-Ukraine Revolutionary
    Committee on January 21. The decision to make use of the reserve
    army forces of the Republic to improve the railway transport in
    the area served by the Moscow-Kazan Railway was passed by the
    Council of Defence on January 23. The decree on labour
    conscription and the Statute of the Committees for Labour
    Conscription were adopted by the Council of People’s
    Commissars on January 29, 1920.
[10]
    The plan for the electrifidation of all Russia was the
    first scientifically based, long-term state plan for the
    rehabilitation and development of the economy of the Soviet
    Republic. It was elaborated by the State Commission for the
    Electrification of Russia (GOELRO) in 1920 on Lenin’s
    instructions. The plan was calculated for 10 to 15 years and
    provided for the building of 20 thermal power stations (Kizel,
    Kashira, Shterovka and others) and 10 hydropower stations (on the
    l)nieper, Svir, Volkhov and other rivers); total planned capacity
    was 1.5 million kw. The total yearly output of electric power was
    to be 8,800 million kwh; in 1913 Russia produced 1,900 million
    kwh. The plan envisaged rational, proportionate deployment of
    industry throughout the country. It envisaged an increase of
    80-100 per cent in industrial output over the 1913 level, and a
    huge increase over the 1920 level. The GOELRO plan was in the main
    completed by 1931. The output of electric power in the
    U.S.S,R. reached 10,700 million kwh, which was twenty times more
    than in 1921.

 Collected Works
    Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Draft (Or theses) of the R.C.P.’s Reply to the Letter of the Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany











Draft (Or Theses) Of The R.C.P.’s Reply To The Letter Of The Independent Social-Democratic Party of Germany



V. I. Lenin
Draft (or Theses) of the R.C.P.’s
 Reply to the Letter of the Independent
Social-Democratic Party of Germany[1]


Written: March, 1920
First Published: BPublished according to
the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 337-344
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Having at last received an official proposal from
    the Independents (German) to conduct negotiations we, as a party,
    must now answer them with complete frankness, without the
    diplomacy that is, to a certain extent, oblig-atory for the
    Communist International.
The answer must be such as will explain the issue to the masses
    of workers who sympathise with the dictatorship of the proletariat
    and the Soviet system—workers that not only in Germany, but
    also in France and Britain and a number of other countries, are
    being deceived (deliberately and unwittingly, i.e., by
    force of self-deception) by leaders who in words alone subscribe
    to the slogans that are popular among the workers (dictatorship of
    the proletariat and So-viet power) but are actually conducting
    their work, propa-ganda, agitation, etc., in the old way, not in
    the spirit of these slogans but in a spirit that contradicts these
    slogans.
The following is a rough draft of the theses for this answer
    (from the R.C.P. to the German Independent Social-Demo-cratic
    Party):
(the sequence of the points must also be changed)
1. The dictatorship of the proletariat implies the ability,
    readiness and determination to attract to our side (to the side of
    the revolutionary vanguard of the proletariat) the entire mass of
    working and exploited people by means of revolutionary measures,
    by expropriating the exploiters.
There is nothing of this in the day-to-day agitation of the
    German Independents (in Freiheit,[2] for
    instance). Nor do the Longuetists have anything of it.
2. In particular, such agitation is especially necessary for
    rural proletarians and semi-proletarians and also for small
    peasants (peasants who do not employ hired labour even at the
    height of the harvest, etc., peasants who sell lit-tle or no
    grain). These sections of the population must have explained to
    them daily, popularly, with extreme simplic-ity and concreteness
    that when the proletariat has seized state power, it will
    give them an immediate improvement in their conditions by
    expropriating the landowners. It will deliver them from
    the yoke of the big landowners, will hand over big estates to them
    in their entirety, will free them from debt, etc., etc. The same
    applies to the urban non-proletarian, or not fully proletarian,
    mass of working people.
The German Independents (like the Longuetists) do not carry on
    such agitation.
3. The Soviet system is the destruction of that bourgeois
    falsehood known as “freedom of the
    press”--—i.e., freedom to bribe the press, freedom for
    the rich, the capitalists, to buy up newspapers, freedom for the
    capitalists to buy up hundreds of newspapers and in this way
    fabricate the so-called public opinion.
The German Independents (when speaking of them it is always to
    be understood that the Longuetists, the British Independents,
    etc., etc., are included) do not admit this truth, do not spread
    it, do not agitate daily for the abolition by revolutionary means
    of the enslavement by capital of the press which bourgeois
    democrats falsely call freedom of the press.
The Independents do not carry on any such agitation and
    recognise Soviet power by way of lip-service alone
    (Lippen-bekenntniss); in actual fact they are fully
    weighed down by the prejudices of bourgeois democracy.
They cannot explain the main, thing, the expropriation
    of the printing works and warehouses and the supplies of paper,
    because they do not understand it.
4. The same applies to freedom of assembly (which is a
    falsehood as long as the rich own the best buildings and buy up
    public buildings), to “arming of the people”,
    to freedom of conscience (=freedom for capital to bay or
    bribe whole church organisations for the purpose of doping the
    masses with the opium of religion), and to all other
    bour-geois-democratic liberties.
5. The dictatorship of the proletariat means the over-throw of
    the bourgeoisie by a single class, the proletariat, and
    by its revolutionary vanguard at that. To demand that this
    vanguard should first ensure the support of the
    majori-ty of the people through elections to bourgeois
    parliament, bourgeois constituent assemblies, etc., i.e., by
    elections held while wage-slavery stilt exists, while the
    exploiters exist and exercise their oppression, and while the
    means of production are privately owned—to demand this or to
    assume it is actually abandoning the standpoint of the
    dic-tatorship of the proletariat and going over to the standpoint
    of bourgeois democracy.
That is how the German Independents and the French Longuetists
    act. These parties’ repetition of the petty-bour-geois
    democrats’ phrases about the majority of the
    “people” (deceived by the bourgeoisie and crushed by
    capital) places them objectively on the side of the bourgeoisie
    against the proletariat.
6. The dictatorship of the proletariat implies and sig-nifies a
    clear concept of the truth that the proletariat, because of its
    objective economic position in every capital-ist society,
    correctly expresses the interests of the entire
    mass of working and exploited people, all semi-proletarians
    (i.e., those who live partly by the sale of their labour-power),
    all small peasants and similar categories.
These sections do not follow the bourgeois and petty-bourgeois
    parties (including the “socialist” parties of the
    Second International) by the free expression of their will (as
    petty-bourgeois democrats assume) but because they are directly
    deceived by the bourgeoisie, because of pressure by capital and
    because of the self-deception of the petty-bourgeois leaders.
The proletariat will attract these sections of the popula-tion
    (semi-proletarians and small peasants) to its side, and can
    attract them to its side, only after it has achieved a
    victory, only after it has won state power, that is, after the
    proletariat has overthrown the bourgeoisie, and emancipated all
    working people from the yoke of capital and shown them in
    practice the benefits (the benefits of freedom from the
    exploiters) accruing from proletarian state power.
This is the concept that constitutes the basis and essence of
    the idea of the dictatorship of the proletariat; the German
    Independents and French Longuetists do not understand it, do not
    spread it among the masses and do not propagan-dise it daily.
7. The dictatorship of the proletariat implies a recog-nition
    of the necessity to suppress the resistance of the ex-ploiters by
    force, and the readiness, ability and determina-tion to do it. The
    bourgeoisie, even the most republican and democratic bourgeoisie
    (for instance, in Germany, Switz-erland and the U.S.A.), have
    regular recourse to pogroms, lynching, assassination, armed
    violence and terror against Communists and actually against all
    revolutionary steps taken by the proletariat; to reject force or
    terror under such circumstances is tantamount to turning into a
    snivelling petty bourgeois, to spreading reactionary
    petty-bourgeois illusions about social peace and, to put it
    concretely, is tantamount to fear of the belligerent army
    officer.
The most criminal and most reactionary imperialist war of
    1914-18 trained many tens of thousands of reactionary officers and
    pushed them into the forefront of politics in all countries, even
    the most democratic republics; these offic-ers prepare and effect
    acts of terror for the benefit of the bourgeoisie, for the benefit
    of capital against the proletariat.
The attitude to terror displayed by the German Independ-ents
    and the French Longuetists in their parliamentary speeches, in
    newspaper articles and in all their propaganda and agitation is
    nothing less than the complete rejection of the real dictatorship
    of the proletariat, is an actual change-over to the position of
    the petty-bourgeois democrat and is corrupting the
    revolutionary consciousness of the workers.
8. The same is true of civil war. Following the imperial-ist
    war, when we are confronted with reactionary generals and officers
    who employ terror against the proletariat, when we are confronted
    with the fact that the present policy of all bourgeois states is
    the preparation of fresh imperialist
    wars—wars are not only being deliberately prepared but are
    objectively inevitable as a result of all their politics-under
    these conditions, in such circumstances to bemoan a civil war
    against the exploiters, to condemn it and to fear it is tantamount
    to becoming a reactionary.
It means fearing the victory of the workers that may possibly
    cost tons of thousands of lives and allowing for certain another
    imperialist bloodbath that yesterday cost millions of lives and
    will tomorrow cost millions more.

    

      It means giving real encouragement to the reactionary
      and rapacious tendencies, schemes and preparations of the
      bourgeois generals and officers.
Such is the reactionary nature of the sugary, petty-bour-geois,
    sentimental position of the German Independents and the French
    Longuetists in the question of the civil war. They close their
    eyes to the intrigues of the White Guard and to its training and
    formation by the bourgeoisie and hypo-critically, pharisaically
    (or cowardly) turn their backs on work to create a Red Guard, a
    proletarian Red Army that is capable of crushing the resistance of
    the exploiters.
9. The dictatorship of the proletariat and Soviet power imply a
    clear notion of the need to break, to smash to
    smith-ereens the bourgeois (even if it is republican-democratic)
    state machinery, the courts, the bureaucracy, both civil and
    military, etc.
The German Independents and the French Longuetists do not
    display any consciousness of this truth, nor do they carry on
    day-to-day agitation on behalf of it. Worse even-they conduct
    all their agitation in the contrary spirit.
10. Every revolution (as distinguished from a reform) by its
    very nature implies a crisis, and a very deep crisis at that, both
    political and economic. This is irrespective of the crisis brought
    about by the war.
It is the task of the revolutionary party of the proletar-iat
    to explain to the workers and peasants that they must have the
    courage to meet this crisis boldly and rind in revo-lutionary
    measures a source of strength with which to over-come the
    crisis. Only by surmounting the greatest crises with revolutionary
    enthusiasm, with revolutionary energy, with revolutionary
    preparedness to make the greatest sac-rifices, can the proletariat
    defeat the exploiters and liberate mankind entirely from wars, the
    oppression of cap-ital and wage-slavery.
There is no other way, because the reformist attitude to
    capitalism yesterday engendered the imperialist bloodbath (and
    will certainly do the same tomorrow) involving millions of people
    and endless crises.
This is the main idea without which the dictatorship of the
    proletariat is an empty phrase; the Independents and the
    Longuetists do not understand it and do not include it in their
    agitation and propaganda, do not explain it to the masses.
11. The Independents and the Longuetists do not develop and do
    not make more profound the consciousness of the masses that the
    reformism that factually dominated in the Second International
    (1889-1914) and destroyed it was de-cadent and ruinous; on the
    contrary they dull that conscious-ness, they hide the disease and
    do not reveal it, do not expose it.
12. On leaving the Second International and condemning it
    verbally (in Crispien’s pamphlet, for instance) the
    Inde-pendents actually held out a hand to Friedrich Adler, a
    mem-ber of the Austrian party of the Noskes and Scheidemanns.
The Independents tolerate among their number writers who
    completely reject the basic concepts of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat.
This divergence of word and deed is typical of the entire
    policy of the leaders of the Independent Party in Germany
    and of the Longuetists in France. It is precisely the leaders who
    share the prejudices of the petty-bourgeois democrats and of the
    upper stratum of the proletariat that has been corrupted by
    reformism, contrary to the revolutionary sympathies of the
    masses of workers who gravitate towards the Soviet
    system.
13. The Independents and the Longuetists do not under-stand and
    do not explain to the masses that the imperialist superprofits of
    the advanced countries enabled them (and still enable them) to
    bribe the top stratum of the proletariat, to throw them
    some crumbs from the superprofits (obtained from the colonies and
    from the financial exploitation of weak countries), to create a
    privileged section of skilled workers, etc.
Without the exposure of this evil, without a struggle against
    both the trade union bureaucracy and all manifesta-tions of
    petty-bourgeois guildism, against the working-class aristocracy,
    the privileges of the upper stratum of workers, without the
    ruthless removal from the revolutionary party of those imbued with
    this spirit, without an appeal to the lower strata, to ever wider
    sections of the masses, to the real majority of the
    exploited—without all this there can be no question of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat.
14. This unwillingness or inability to break with the top
    stratum of workers who are infected with imperialism, is also
    found among the independents and the Longuetists in their not
    conducting agitation for the direct, unqualified support for all
    insurrections and revolutionary movements of colonial
    peoples.
Under such circumstances the condemnation of colonial policy
    and of imperialism is either sheer hypocrisy or the empty sighing
    of a stupid philistine.
15. The Independents and Longuetists do not carry on agitation
    among the troops (that they join the forces for the
    purpose of preparing their going over to the side of the
    workers against the bourgeoisie). They do not create
    organ-isations for this work.
They do not respond to the violence of the bourgeoisie, to
    their endless contraventions of “legality”
    (both during the imperialist war and after it) using for
    this the regular propaganda of illegal organisations and
    creating such organisations.
Unless there is a combination of legal and illegal work, of
    legal and illegal organisations, there can be no question of a
    truly revolutionary party of the proletariat in Germany, in
    Switzerland, in Britain, in France or in the U.S.A.
16. By and large, all propaganda and agitation, all
    organisational work of the Independents and the Longuetists is
    more petty-bourgeois-democratic than
    revolutionary-proletarian—it is pacifist and not
    social-revolutionary.
In view of this the “recognition” of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat and of Soviet power remains purely
    verbal.
 Summary. In the prevailing situation the R.C.P. deems the only
    correct solution to be not to unite with the Inde-pendents and the
    Longuetists in one International, but to bide our time
    until the revolutionary masses of the French and German workers
    correct the weakness, errors, preju-dices and
    inconsistencies of such parties as the Independents and the
    Longuetists.
In the opinion of the R.C.P. there is no place for such parties
    in the Communist International.
The R.C.P., however, does not reject conferences with
    all parties that desire to confer with it and know its
    opinion.

Endnotes
[1]
    The theses were written by Lenin in reply to the proposal of the
    to start negotiations on the terms of their joining the Communist
    International. On January 20, 1920, Lenin’s theses were
    discussed at a meeting of the Political Bureau of the C.C.,
    R.C.P.(B.) which decided to accept them as a basis and set up a
    commission with Lenin as a member for the final editing of the
    reply and its presentation in the form of a letter.
[2]
    Freedom  a daily paper, organ of the ,
    published in Berlin from November 15, 1918 to September 30,
    1922.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## Speech at a Meeting of the
  Railwaymen of Moscow Junction. February 5, 1920











Speech at a Meeting of The Railwaymen of Moscow Junction The Railwaymen of Moscow Junction February 5, 1920; Brief Newspaper Report



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Meeting of
The Railwaymen of Moscow Junction[1]
February 5, 1920
Brief Newspaper Report


Written: 5 February, 1920
First Published: Petrogradskaya Pravda  No. 28; February 7, 1920; Published according to the Petrogradskaya Pravda text 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 345-346
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


V. I. Lenin, greeted with stormy applause, delivered a long
    speech.
“The most outstanding fact in the world situation,”
    said Comrade Lenin, “is the peace with Estonia. This peace
    is a window into Europe. It opens up before us the possi-bility of
    beginning an exchange of goods with the West. Our enemies
    maintained that the revolution in the West is far away and that we
    would not be able to hold out without it. We have not only held
    out, however, we have won a vic-tory.
“We won without obtaining a single cartridge from
    any-where, we won only because the workers and Red Army sol-diers
    know what they are fighting for.

    

      “If the small nations that
      are playthings in the hands of the Entente begin to wish for peace
      with Soviet Russia, this is to be explained by our having shown in
      practice how the imperialists have deceived them and how gladly
      the Russian proletariat extends to them the hand of peace. Poland
      will follow Estonia. Information has been received that Soviet
      Russia’s peace proposals will be discussed in Poland. This
      bloodless victory is of tremendous importance.”
Lenin went over to the internal situation and showed that it
    boiled down to a struggle against chaos on the rail-ways. Railway
    transport was hanging by a hair. If the trains stopped running
    that would mean the end of the proletar-ian centres. Heroic
    efforts on the part of the masses of  workers would be needed to
    maintain transport and facilitate the struggle against hunger and
    cold. Unparalleled heroism proved possible during the Civil War
    which claimed so many victims, and that heroism and those
    sacrifices that decided the war in our favour were still essential
    now that the war had shifted to another front, the industrial
    front. Victory was now essential on this bloodless front.
“It must be understood that sacrifices are also needed
    here,” continued the speaker. “Sacrifices must be made
    to restore the country’s economy. ’Victory or
    Death’ must be-come the slogan on the industrial front. It
    is necessary for workers to be conscious of the need for the
    tensest struggle for victory on this front. There is a hard
    struggle ahead and it will have to be carried on by tired and
    hungry workers; If, however, they realise that the fate of the
    working class depends on the outcome of this struggle, they will
    win out.”
The question of transport was being discussed by the Council of
    Defence, but the workers themselves would have to muster for the
    struggle against the transport chaos and the profiteering that
    intensified the chaos. Those who did not give their grain
    surpluses to the state were turning the railways into an
    instrument for profiteering, they were enemies, and
    politically-conscious workers should muster for the struggle
    against them.
“We led the Red Army to victory by strict, iron
    disci-pline as well as agitation. What has been organised in the
    Red Army must also be created on all the fronts of labour The
    entire experience of the creation of the Red Army must be
    transferred to the army of railway workers so that it can rise to
    the same heights as the Red Army. Without sacrifice, without iron
    discipline, without the employment of special-ists the Red Army
    would not have been victorious, and with-out them the railway army
    will not be victorious.” (Ap-plause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    The meeting was held in Moscow, February 5-6, 1920. It was
    attended by more than 1,000 people. The agenda was the following:
    the international situation; the fight against economic
    dislocation; labour conscription; transport; social security;
    tasks of the B.C.P. in the proletarian revolution; public health
    services; food problem.
The Conference was held at a time when
    transport was the main
 sector of the labour front. The supply of raw material and fuel to factories and food for the population depended on the work of the railways. In a very short time thousands of locomotives and trucks and  many railway lines and bridges had to be repaired. The Party mobilised Communists and assigned them to work on the railways; Lenin delivered the opening speech at this Conference. The resolution adopted by the Conference proposed to concentrate the entire attention of the country and the efforts of the working class on the internal development of Soviet Russia and particularly on the industrial and economic front. The Conference called upon all railwaymen to form “the Red Labour Transport Army with strict labour discipline”.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## Report À La Guerre Comme À La Guerre!











À La Guerre Comme À La Guerre!



V. I. Lenin
À La Guerre Comme À La Guerre! 


Written: February 7, 1920
First Published: Pravda No. 28, February 8, 1920; Published according to
the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 347-348
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


The landowners and capitalists, who have been
    over-thrown by the workers and peasants of Russia, have forced two
    years of civil war upon us with the help of the capital-ists of
    the whole world.
We are ending this war victoriously.
We have already gained the first peace, which has demon-strated
    the superiority of our foreign policy over the pol-icy of the
    united capitalists of all countries. These cap-italists did their
    utmost to prevent peace between Estonia and us. We have beaten
    them. We have concluded peace with Estonia—the first peace;
    it will be followed by others, opening up for us the possibility
    of trading with Europe and America.
The bloody war which the exploiters forced upon us we are
    ending victoriously. During these two years we have learned how to
    win; and we have won.
Now comes the turn of a bloodless war.
Let us work for victory on the front of the bloodless war
    against hunger and cold, against typhus and destruction, against
    ignorance and economic chaos!
This bloodless war has been forced upon us by the de-struction
    caused by four years of imperialist war and two years of civil
    war. In order to defeat the poverty and want, the hunger and
    hardships caused by these wars, we must keep firmly in mind, must
    thoroughly grasp and everywhere and at all costs observe the
    maxim, à la guerre comme à la guerre!
The workers and peasants were able to create a Red Army without
    the landowners and capitalists and against them, and were able to
    defeat the exploiters.
The workers and peasants will be able to create Red armies of
    peaceful labour—they will be able to win new happiness for
    themselves by restoring agriculture and in-dustry.
The first and chief step towards this is the restoration of
      the transport rystern which must be done at all costs,
      immedi-ately, with revolutionary energy, and must be carried out
      with military determination, solidarity, speed and selfless
      devotion.
Let’s get on with the job, comrades!
Let us show that in the sphere of peaceful labour we can
    display even greater marvels of heroism and victory than in the
    arena of war against the exploiters!
February 7, 1920

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## Speech Delivered at a Non-Party
  Conference InBlagusha-Lefortovo District











Speech Delivered at a  Non-Party Conference In Blagusha-Lefortovo District; February 9, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at a
 Non-Party Conference in Blagusha-Lefortovo District
February 9, 1920
Newspaper Report


Delivered: 9 February, 1920
First Published: Pravda No. 32, February 13, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 349-351
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In his speech Lenin dealt with two burning
      questions of present-day Soviet life—the international
      situation and the labour front.
“By its victories,” Lenin said, “our Red
      Army has consol-idated the position of Soviet Russia and has
      secured for us the first victory over the Entente
      imperialists. How is this victory to be explained? It is clear
      that it was not achieved by the victories at the front alone,
      but by our having won over the soldiers of the countries warring
      against us. The Allies corrupted their own armies by landing
      troops in our country and were soon forced to withdraw them. The
      sol-diers refused to fight us. The very expression’Soviet
      gov-ernment,’ that is, a government of the working people,
      brings joy to the hearts of the proletarians all over the
      world.
“By means of agitation and propaganda, we deprived the
      Entente of its own troops. We defeated the imperialists not only
      with the aid of our soldiers, but also by relying on the
      sympathy the Entente soldiers felt for us. On the other hand, we
      gave a practical demonstration to the small neighbouring states
      that our policy is a peaceful one. Britain, through its
      mouthpiece, Churchill, threatened to send fourteen states
      against us; but this campaign collapsed when concurrently with
      our victories, we kept making proposals for peace. We proposed
      peace to Estonia without insisting on any particular frontiers,
      knowing only that we did not want  to shed the blood of workers
      and peasants for the sake of any frontiers.
“The removal of the blockade is exclusively to be
      attrib-uted to the sympathy which Soviet power inspires among
      the workers of the hostile countries. In Italy, matters have
      gone so far that a congress of socialist parties has unanimously
      adopted a resolution demanding the raising of the blockade of
      Soviet Russia and the resumption of trade relations. Although
      they do not love the Bolsheviks, the bourgeois gov-ernments of
      the small countries have become convinced that the Bolsheviks
      want to live on good-neighbourly terms with them, whereas those
      on whose side General Denikin or any other general is, would
      tear up all the scraps of paper prom-ising independence to the
      small nations immediately after gaining victory. Without a
      single gun, without a single machine-gun, without firing a
      single shot, we have concluded peace; we have laid the
      foundation for the conclusion of peace with all the countries
      that are waging war on us. We have shown that all governments
      have to lay down their arms in face of the peace policy of the
      Soviet government.
“We have already cut a window opening on to Europe, and
      we shall try to make wide use of it. Attempts are being made to
      incite Poland against us. But these attempts will fail, and the
      time is not far off when we shall conclude peace with all of
      them, although they say that they will not recognise us. They
      are mortally afraid of the spread of the Bolshevik infection at
      home; but although they have surrounded themselves with a
      Chinese Wall the Bolshevik infection already exists in each of
      these countries, it lurks in their midst. This infection was
      brought by the French and British soldiers who had been to
      Soviet Russia and had breathed her air. We have thus gained two
      victories. We have smashed the whiteguard hordes on all fronts,
      and we are winning peace on a world scale, winning it not with
      guns, but by the sympathy we have been able to inspire not only
      in the workers but even in the bourgeois governments of the
      small nationalities.”
Lenin then went on to deal briefly with the labour front.
“Comrades,” he said, “spring is
      approaching; we have been through an extraordinarily difficult
      winter of cold, hunger, typhus and railway chaos. We must be
      victorious on this front too. Just as we were able to sacrifice
      everything during the war and to give our best forces—the
      advanced workers, Communists and political and military students
      died in the front ranks and thus raised the morale of the whole
      army—so now we say that we must win on the front of
      eco-nomic chaos; the Communists and the advanced workers, the
      most honest and conscientious, the finest and staunch. est, must
      be in the forefront, as they were then; every train, every
      locomotive must be won by struggle, must be fought for. That is
      my appeal to the non-party conference.
“Comrades, before concluding my speech I would like to
      say a few words about the measures decided on at the last
      session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. The
      session decided on a number of measures which will shortly be
      published in the newspapers, and which should be read and
      discussed at all meetings of workers, in clubs, factories and
      Red Army units. One of the most important decisions of the
      All-Russia Central Executive Committee, one to which in my
      opinion the most profound attention should be directed, concerns
      the fight against red tape in our institutions. One of the
      measures is the decision of the All-Russia Cen-tral Executive
      Committee to transform our state control into a workers’
      and peasants’ control, or a workers’
      inspection.”0 We shall not drive out the old
      officials—just as we did not drive the experts out of the
      army, but attached worker com-missars to them—we must
      attach groups of workers to these bourgeois experts, to look on,
      to learn and to take this work into their own hands. Workers
      must enter all the govern-ment establishments so as to supervise
      the entire government apparatus. And this should be done by the
      non-party work-ers, who should elect their representatives at
      non-party conferences of workers and peasants. They must come to
      the assistance of the Communists who are being overtaxed by the
      tremendous burden they have to bear. We must pour as many
      workers and peasants as possible into this apparatus. We shall
      tackle this job and accomplish it, and thus drive red tape out
      of our institutions. The broad non-party masses must keep a
      check on all government affairs, and must themselves learn to
      govern.”


 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## A Publicist’s Notes











A Publicist’s Notes



V. I. Lenin
A Publicist’s Notes


Written: 14 February, 1920
First Published: Published in 1920; Published according to
the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 352-362
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


1
Citizen Jean Longuet has sent me a letter consisting mainly of
    the same complaints as those contained in his ar-ticle, “How
    Are the Russians Deceived?” (Populaire,” January
    10, 1920.) Longuet has also sent me this issue of his
    newspaper together with a leaflet of the Committee for the
    Reconstruction of the International (Comité pour la
    reconstruction de I’Internationale) 112 The leaflet contains
    two draft resolutions for the forthcoming congress of the French
    Socialist Party 113 in Strasbourg. It is signed on be-half of the
    Committee for the Reconstruction of the Inter-national by 24
    persons: Amédée Dunois, Citizeness Fanny Clar, Caussy,
    Maurice Delépino, Paul Faure, Ludovic-Oscar Frossard, Eugene
    Frot, Henri Gourdeaux, Citizeness Leyciagnre, André Le
    Troquer, Paul Louis, Jean Longuet, Maurice Maurin, Barthélemy
    Mayéras, Joan Mouret, Georges Mauranges, Palicot,
    Pécher, Citizeness Marianne Rauze, Daniel Renault,
    Servantier, Sixte Quenin, Tommasi, Raoul Verfeuil.
It seems to me superfluous to reply to Jean Longuet’s
    complaints and attacks: adequate replies have been given in
    F. Loriot’s article in Vie OuvriÂre 114 of
    January 16, 1920, entitled “Gently, Longuet!”
    (”Tout doux, Longuet!”), and in Trotsky’s
    article in the Communist International 115 No. 7-8,
    entitled “Jean Longuet”. Very little remains to be
    added; perhaps only that it would be a good thing to collect
    material for a history of the failure of the strike of July 21,
    1919.116 But I cannot do this from Moscow. All I have seen is a
    quotation from Avantil 117 published in an Austrian
    Communist paper, exposing the despicable role played in this
    affair by one of the most despicable of the social-traitors (or
    anarcho-traitors?), the former syndicalist and anti-parliamentary
    windbag, Jouhaux. Why should not Longuet give somebody the job,
    which can be easily done in Paris, of collecting all the
    documents, all the comments and articles in the European Communist
    papers, and all the special interviews with the leaders and
    participants con-cerned, on the failure of the strike of July 21,
    1919? We would be delighted to publish such a work. The
    “socialist education” about which the
    “Centrists” of the whole world (the Independ-ents in
    Germany, the Longuetists in France, the I.L.P.118 in Britain,
    etc.) talk so often and so readily must be under-stood to mean the
    firm exposure of the mistakes of the leaders and the
    mistakes of the movement and not the pedantic and doctrinaire
    repetition of general socialist phrases, which everybody is tired
    of hearing and which, since 1914-18, nobody trusts.
An example of this—all the leaders and all the promi-nent
    members of the socialist parties, the trade unions and the
    workers’ co-operative societies who advocated the
    “defence of the fatherland” in the war of 1914-18,
    acted as traitors to socialism. The real work of “socialist
    education” implies the persistent exposure of their mistake,
    the syste-matic explanation that this war was, in respect of
    both sides, a war between bandits for the division of the
    spoils, and that a repetition of such a war is inevitable
    unless the prole-tariat overthrows the bourgeoisie by
    revolutionary means.
The resolutions I have referred to speak aboutsuchwork of
    education, but what is actually being done is a work of socialist
    corruption, for treason, treachery, routine, iner-tia, careerism,
    philistinism and mistakes are hushed up, whereas real education
    consists in overcoming and removing them.
II
 Neither of the resolutions of the Longuetists is of any
    use—although, incidentally, they are very useful in one
    particular sphere, that of showing what, at the present mo-ment,
    is perhaps the most dangerous evil for the working-class  movement
    in the West. The evil is this: the old leaders, observing what an
    irresistible attraction Bolshevism and Soviet government have for
    the masses, are seeking (and often finding!) a way of
    escape in the verbal recognition of the dictatorship of
    the proletariat and Soviet government, although they actually
    either remain enemies of the dicta-torship of the proletariat, or
    are unable or unwilling to understand its significance and to
    carry it into effect.
The fall of the first Soviet Republic in Hungary (the first,
    which fell, will be followed by a second, which will be
    victorious) shows clearly how vast, how immense is the danger of
    this evil. A number of articles in the Vienna Rote Fahne,
    ’ the Central Organ of the Austrian Communist Party,
    have revealed one of the chief reasons for its fall, namely, the
    treachery of the “socialists”, who went over to Bela
    Kun 120 verbally and proclaimed themselves Commu-nists, but who
    actually did not pursue a policy consonant with the dictatorship
    of the proletariat; they vacillated, played the coward, made
    advances to the bourgeoisie, and in part directly sabotaged and
    betrayed the proletarian revo-lution. Naturally, the powerful
    brigands of imperialism (i.e., the bourgeois governments of
    Britain, France, etc.) that surrounded the Hungarian Soviet
    Republic made good use of these vacillations within the
    Hungarian Soviet govern-ment and used the Rumanian butchers to
    crush it.
There can be no doubt that some of the Hungarian social-ists
    went over to Bela Kun sincerely, and sincerely
    proclaimed themselves Communists. But that changes nothing
    essen-tial: a man who “sincerely” proclaims himself a
    Communist, but who in practice vacillates and plays the coward
    instead of pursuing a ruthlessly firm, unswervingly determined and
    supremely courageous and heroic policy (and only such a policy is
    consonant with recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat)
    —such a man, in his weakness of character, vacillations and
    irresolution, is just as much guilty of treachery as a direct
    traitor. As far as the individual is concerned, there is a very
    great difference between a man whose weakness of character makes
    him a traitor and one who is a deliberate, calculating traitor;
    but in politics there is no such difference, because politics
    involves the actual fate of millions of people, and it makes, no
    difference whether the millions of workers and poor peasants are
    betrayed by those who are trailers from weakness of character or
    by those whose treachery pursues selfish aims.
We cannot yet say which of the Longuetists who signed the
    resolutions we are discussing will prove to belong to the first
    category, which to the second and which to some third, and it
    would be idle to speculate on it. The important thing is that
    these Longuetists, as a political trend, are now pursuing
    exactly the same policy as the Hungarian “social-ists”
    and “Social-Democrats” who brought about the fall of
    the Soviet government in Hungary. It is precisely this policy that
    the Longuetists are pursuing, for verbally they proclaim
    themselves supporters of the dictatorship of the proletariat and
    Soviet government, but actually they con-tinue to behave in the
    old way and to defend in their resolu-tions and to carry out in
    practice the old policy of petty concessions to social-chauvinism,
    opportunism and bour-geois democracy, the policy of vacillation,
    irresolution, evasiveness, subterfuge, suppression of facts, and
    the like. In their totality, these petty concessions, this
    vacillation, irresolution, evasiveness, subterfuge and suppression
    of facts inevitably constitute a betrayal of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat.
Dictatorship is a big, harsh and bloody word, one which
    expresses a relentless life-and-death struggle between two
    classes, two worlds, two historical epochs.
Such words must not be uttered frivolously.
To place the establishment of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat on the order of the day, and at the same time to
    “fear to offend” men like Albert Thomas, the Brackes,
    Sembats and the other champions of the vilest French
    so-cial-chauvinism, the heroes of the traitor newspapers
    l’Huinanité, La Bataille 121 and the like, is
    to betray the working class—be it from lack of thought, lack
    of understand-ing, weakness of character, or some other cause, it
    is nevertheless betrayal of the working class.
It was the divergence between word and deed that caused the
    collapse of the Second International. The Third Inter-national is
    not yet a year old, but it is already becoming fashionable and is
    a lure to those politicians who go wherever the masses go. The
    Third International is already in  danger of its word and deed
    diverging. This danger must be exposed everywhere and at all
    costs, and every manifestation of this evil must be
    eradicated.
The resolutions of the Longuetists (like the resolutions of the
    recent congress of the German Independents, who are German
    Longuetists) have transformed “dictatorship of the
    proletariat” into just such an icon as the resolutions of
    the Second International used to be for the leaders, the officials
    of the trade unions, the parliamentarians and the functionaries of
    the co-operative societies. An icon is something you pray to,
    something you cross yourself before, something you bow down to;
    but an icon has no effect on practical life and practical
    politics.
No, gentlemen, we shall not allow the slogan
    “dictator-ship of the proletariat” to be turned into
    an icon; we shall not consent to the Third International
    tolerating any diver-gence between word and deed.
If you stand for the dictatorship of the proletariat, then do
    not pursue that evasive, equivocal, compromising policy towards
    social-chauvinism which you are pursuing and which is expressed in
    the very first lines of your first reso-lution: the war, you see,
    “has rent” (a déchirée) the Second
    International, has severed it from the work of “socialist
    education” (education soclaUste), while
    “certain sections of this International”
    (certaines de ses fractions) have “weak-ened
    themselves” by sharing power with the bourgeoisie, and so on
    and so forth.
That is not the language of people who consciously and
    sincerely support the idea of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. It is the language either of people who take one step
    forward and two steps back, or of politicians. If you want to talk
    this language—or rather, as long as you talk this language,
    as long as this is your policy—stay in the Second
    International, where you belong. Or let the workers, whose mass
    pressure is pushing you towards the Third International, leave you
    behind in the Second Inter-national and themselves come over,
    without you, to the Third International. On the same
    terms we shall say “Wel-come” to these workers,
    whether of the French Socialist Party, the German Independent
    Social-Democratic Party, or the British Independent Labour
    Party.
If you recognise the dictatorship of the proletariat, and at
    the same time talk about the war of 1914-18, then you must talk
    differently and say that this war was a war be-tween the brigands
    of Anglo-Franco-Russian imperialism and the brigands of
    Austro-German imperialism for the division of spoils, of colonies
    and “spheres” of financial influence. Preaching
    “defence of the fatherland” in such a war was treason
    to socialism. If this truth is not thoroughly ex-plained, if this
    treasonis not eradicated from the minds, hearts and policy of the
    workers, it will be impossible to escape the miseries of
    capitalism, it will be impossible to escape new wars,
    which are inevitable as long as capitalism persists.
You do not want to talk this language, you cannot talk this
    language or carry on this propaganda, do you? You want to
    “spare” yourselves or your friends who yesterday
    preached the “defence of the fatherland” in Germany
    under Wilhelm or Noske, and in Britain and France under the rule
    of the bourgeoisie, don’t you? Then spare the Third
    International! Gladden it with your absence!
III
I have so far spoken of the first of the two resolutions.
    The second is no better: “solemn”
    (”solennelle”) condemnation of
    “confusionism”, and even of “all
    compromise” (”toute compromission”—this is
    an empty revolutionary phrase, because one cannot be opposed to
    all compromise), and, alongside of this, evasive, equivocal
    repetition of general phrases—phrases which do not explain
    the concept “dicta-torship of the proletariat” but
    obscure it—attacks upon the “policy of
    M. Clemenceau” (the usual trick of bourgeois pol-iticians in
    France, who represent a change of cliques to be a change of
    regime), and the exposition of a programme which is
    fundamentally reformist—taxes,
    “nationalisation of the capitalist monopolies”,
    etc.
The Longuetists do not understand and do not
    want to understand (partly, are incapable of
    understanding) that re-formism, masked by revolutionary
    phrase-mongering, was the chief evil of the Second International,
    the chief reason for its disgraceful collapse, for the support
    given by the “socialists” to the war in which ten
    million people were slaughtered in order to settle the great
    question whether the Anglo-Russo-French group or the German group
    of cap-italist depredators should plunder the world.
The Longuetists have in fact remained the reformists they were,
    masking their reformism by revolutionary phrases and employing the
    new tag “dictatorship of the proletariat” merely as a
    revolutionary phrase. The proletariat does not need such leaders,
    nor does it need the leaders of the German Independent
    Social-Democratic Party, or the leaders of the British Independent
    Labour Party. The proletariat cannot bring about its dictatorship
    with such leaders.
Recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat does not
    mean undertaking an assault, an uprising, at all costs and at
    any moment. That is nonsense. A successful insurrec-tion
    demands prolonged, skilful and persistent preparations,
    preparations entailing great sacrifice.
Recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat means making
    a determined, relentless, and, what is most important, a fully
    conscious and consistent break with the oppor-tunism, reformism,
    equivocation and evasiveness of the Second International—a
    break with the leaders who cannot help carrying on the
    old tradition, with the old (not in age, but in methods)
    parliamentarians, trade union and co-oper-ative society officials,
    etc.
A break with them is essential. To pity them would be criminal;
    it would mean betraying the fundamental inter-ests of tens of
    millions of workers and small peasants for the paltry interests of
    some ten thousand or hundred thou-sand people.
Recognition of the dictatorship of the proletariat requires the
    fundamental reconstruction of the day-to-day work of the Party, it
    means getting among the millions of workers, agricultural
    labourers and small peasants whom only Soviets, the
    overthrow of the bourgeoisie, can save from the miseries of
    capitalism and war. The dictatorship of the proletariat means
    explaining this concretely, simply, clearly, to the masses, to
    tens of millions of people; it means telling them that
    their Soviets must take over state power in its
    entirety, and that their vanguard, the party of the
    revolutionary proletariat, must lead the struggle.
The Longuetists have not the faintest inkling of this truth,
    nor have they the least desire or ability to give daily effect to
    it.
IV
In Austria, communism has passed through an extremely difficult
    period, which it seems is not quite over yet -growing pains, the
    illusion that by proclaiming themselves Communists a group can
    become a force without waging a profound struggle for influence
    over the masses, and mis-takes in the choice of people (mistakes
    that are inevitable at first in every revolution; we made
    a number of similar mistakes).
Die Rote Fahne, the daily organ of the Communists
    edited by Koritschoner and Tomann, shows that the movement is
    taking the right road.
And to what depths of stupidity, vileness and sordidness the
    Austrian Social-Democrats are sinking is only too clearly shown by
    the whole policy of Renner and similar Austrian Scheidemanns, who
    are helped—partly out of utter stupidity and weakness of
    character—by the Otto Bauers and Friedrich Adlers, who have
    become rank traitors.
Take, for example, Otto Bauer’s pamphlet, The Path to 
Socialism. [Der Weg zum
Sozialismus.—Ed.]
      I have before me a Berlin edition by
      Freihalt —apparently the publishing house of the
      Independent Party, which is entirely on the same wretched,
      vulgar and despicable level as this pamphlet.

    

      A glance at a couple of passages from $ 9 (”Expropria-tion
      of the Expropriators”) will be enough:
“Expropriation cannot and must not take the form of the
    brutal Ebrutaler] confiscation of the property of the
    capitalists and landowners; for in this form it could be
    accomplished only at the cost of a tremen-dous destruction of the
    productive forces, which would ruin the masses of the people
    themselves and would choke the sources of national income. On the
    contrary, the expropriation of the expropriators must take place
    in a systematic and regular way” ... by means of
    taxation.
And this learned man goes on to illustrate how
    “four-ninths” of the income of the wealthy classes
    could be extracted by means of taxation ....
Enough, is it not? As for myself, after these words (and I
    began reading the pamphlet from $ 9) I read nothing more; and I do
    not intend to read any more of Mr. Otto Bauer’s pamphlet
    unless there is special need to. For it is clear that this, the
    best of the social-traitors, is at most a learned and utterly
    hopeless fool.
He is a typical pedant, a thorough petty bourgeois at
    heart. Before the war he wrote useful and learned books and
    articles in which he “theoretically” admitted that the
    class struggle might attain the acuteness of a civil war. He even
    had a hand (if I am correctly informed) in drawing up the Basle
    Manifesto of 1912, which directly foretold a proletar-ian
    revolution in connection with that very war which actually
    broke out in 1914.
But when this proletarian revolution became a reality, the soul
    of the pedant and philistine got the upper hand, and he grew
    frightened and began to pour the oil of refor-mist
    phrase-mongering on the troubled waters of the revolution .

    

      He had got it firmly fixed in his mind (pedants cannot think,
      they can only commit to memory, learn by rote) that the
      expropriation of the expropriators without confis-cation is
      theoretically possible. He was always repeating this. He had
      learned it by rote. He knew it by heart in 1912. He repeated it
      from memory in 1919.
He cannot think. After an imperialist war, a war which has
    brought even the victors to the verge of ruin, after civil war has
    broken out in a number of countries, after facts have proved on a
    world-wide scale the inevitability of the conversion of
    imperialist war into civil war, to preach, in the year of our Lord
    1919, in the city of Vienna, the “systematic” and
    “regular” extraction from the capitalists of
    “four-ninths” of their income—to do this one
    must be either an imbecile or that old hero of grand old German
    poetry who flitted rapturously “from book to book”
    ....
This dear old gentleman, no doubt a most virtuous
    pater-familias, a most honest citizen and most conscientious
    reader and writer of learned works, has forgotten one tiny detail;
    he has forgotten that such a “systematic” and
    “regular” transition to socialism (the transition
    which undoubtedly would be the most advantageous to “the
    people”, abstractly speaking) presumes an absolutely secure
    victory of the pro-letariat, the absolute hopelessness of the
    position of the capitalists, the absolute necessity for them to
    display the most scrupulous obedience and their readiness to do
    so.
Is such a conjunction of circumstances possible?
Speaking theoretically, which in this case means speaking quite
    abstractly, it is possible, of course. For example, let us assume
    that in nine countries, including all the Great Powers, the
    Wilsons, Lloyd Georges, Millerands, and other champions of
    capitalism are already in the same position as Yudenich, Kolchak,
    Denikin, and their Ministers in our country. Let us assume that
    after this, in a tenth country, a small country, the capitalists
    propose to the workers: “Look here, we will conscientiously
    help you, in obedience to your decisions, to carry out a
    ’systematic’ and peaceful (without destruction!)
    ’expropriation of the expropriators’, for which you
    will let us have five-ninths of our former income in the first
    year and four-ninths in the second year.”
It is quite conceivable that under the circumstances I have
    mentioned the capitalists in the tenth country, one of the
    smallest and most “peaceful” countries, might make
    such a proposal, and there would be absolutely nothing wrong in
    the workers of this country discussing this proposal in a
    business—like way and (after bargaining a bit, for a
    mer-chant cannot help asking more than his wares are worth)
    accepting it.
Now, after this popular explanation, perhaps the thing will be
    clear even to the learned Otto Bauer and to the philosopher
    Friedrich Adler (who is as successful a philos-opher as he is a
    politician).
No, not clear yet?
Just think, dear Otto Bauer and dear Friedrich Adler, does the
    position of world capitalism and of its leaders at the present
    moment resemble that of Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin in
    Russia?
No, it does not. In Russia the capitalists have been smashed,
    after having put up a most desperate resistance. In the rest of
    the world they are still in power. They are the masters.
If, dear Otto Bauer and Friedrich Adler, it is not clear to you
    yet, let me add something in an even more popular form.
 Just imagine that at the time when Yudenich stood at the gates
    of Petrograd, when Kolchak held the Urals and Denikin the whole of
    the Ukraine, and when the pockets of these three heroes were
    stuffed with telegrams from Wilson, Lloyd George, Millerand and
    Co. informing them of the dis-patch of money, guns, officers and
    soldiers—just imagine that at this moment a representative
    of the Russian workers were to come to Yudenich, Kolchak or
    Denikin, and say: “We, the workers, are in the majority. We
    will let you have five-ninths of your income, and later will take
    away the rest as well, ’systematically’ and
    peacefully. Let’s shake hands on it! ’Without
    destruction!’ Is it a go?”
If this representative of the workers were simply clad, and if
    the Russian general, Denikin, for example, were alone when he
    received him, he would very likely commit the worker to a lunatic
    asylum, or just drive him away.
But if the representative of the workers were an intel-lectual
    wearing a decent suit of clothes, and, in addition, were the son
    of a respectable papa (like our good friend Friedrich Adler), and
    if, moreover, Denikin were not alone, but received him in the
    presence of a French or British “adviser”—this
    adviser would undoubtedly say to Denikin:
“Look here, general, this representative of the workers
    is a sensible fellow, lie is just the man for one of our
    min-isterial jobs, like Henderson in Britain, Albert Thomas in
    France, and Otto Bauer and Friedrich Adler in Austria.”
February 14, 1920

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. 
Stalin


Wired: 16 February, 1920
First Published: First published in 1938; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 363
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Stalin,
Revolutionary Military Council of the South-Western Front, Kharkov
Priority. By direct line
February 16, 1920
Today I heard you and all the others very clearly, every word. Threaten to shoot the incompetent person in charge of communications who cannot give you, a good amplifier and ensure uninterrupted telephone communication with me. I approve the reduced requisitioning and the obligatory distribution among the poor of a part of the requisitioned grain. You must first of all interest the poor.
Lenin

Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## Telegram to
  J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. 
Stalin


Wired: 18 February, 1920
First Published: First published in 1942; published according to
the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 364
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Stalin,
Ukrainian Council of the Labour Army, Kharkov
Copy to the Ukrainian Revolutionary Committee
I am glad to learn that you have requisitioned a moderate amount—158 [million poods}—and are leaving ten per cent for the poor, and that you have already detailed three regiments and four squadrons for the Ukrainian Council of the Labour Army.
My advice: (1) protect the coal that is ready and send reinforcements quickly to the Caucasian Front. That is most important of all; (2) protect the salt and let regiments and squadrons occupy one volost after another in the vicin-ity of the Donets Basin and carry out requisitioning fully, awarding bread and salt to the poor; (3) immediately mobi-lise part of the Kharkov and Donets Basin workers for the Food Army to work together with the regiments and squadrons; (4) the work of the Ukrainian Council of the Labour Army to be measured by the daily amount of grain and coal delivered and the number of locomotives repaired.
Lenin

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## In Reply to Questions Put By Karl Wiegand, BerlinCorrespondent of Universal Service











In Reply To Questions Put By Karl Wiegand, Berlin Correspondent Of Universal Service



V. I. Lenin
In Reply To Questions Put By Karl WiegandBerlin Correspondent Of Universal Service [1]


Interviewed: 18 February, 1920
First Published: Published on February 21, 1920 in the New York Evening Journal No. 12671 First published in Russian on April 22, 1950 in Pravda No, 112; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 365-367
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


1. Do we intend to attack Poland and Rumania?
No. We have declared most emphatically and officially, in the name of the Council of People’s Commissars and the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, our peaceful intentions. It is very much to be regretted that the French capitalist government is instigating Poland (and presumably Rumania, too) to attack us. This is even, mentioned by a number of American radios from Lyons.
2. What are our plans in Asia?
They are the same as in Europe: peaceful coexistence with all peoples; with the workers and peasants of all nations awakening to a new life—a life without exploiters, without landowners, without capitalists, without merchants. The imperialist war of 1914-18, the war of the capitalists of the Anglo-French (and Russian) group against the German-Austrian capitalist group for the partition of the world, has awakened Asia and has strengthened there, as everywhere else, the urge towards freedom, towards peaceful labour and against possible future wars.
3. What would be the basis of peace with America?
Let the American capitalists leave us alone. We shall not touch them. We are even ready to pay them in gold for any machinery, tools, etc., useful to our transport and industries. We are ready to pay not only in gold, but in raw materials too.
4. What are the obstacles to such a peace?
None on our part; imperialism on the part of the Ameri-can (and of any other) capitalists.
5. What are our views of the deportation of Russian revo-lutionaries from America?
We have accepted them. We are not afraid of revolution-aries here in this country. As a matter of fact, we are not afraid of anybody, and if America is afraid of a few more hundred or thousand of its citizens, we are ready to begin negotiations with a view of receiving any citizens whom Amer-ica thinks dangerous (with the exception of criminals, of course).
6. What possibilities are there of an economic alliance between Russia and Germany?
Unfortunately, they are not great. The Scheidemanns are bad allies. We stand for an alliance with all countries without exception.
7. What are our views upon the allied demand for the extradition of war criminals?
If we are to speak seriously on this matter of war guilt, the guilty ones are the capitalists of all countries. Hand over to us all your landed proprietors owning more than a hundred hectares and capitalists having a capital of more than 100,000 francs, and we shall educate them. to useful labour and make them break with the shameful, base and bloody role of exploiters and instigators of wars for the par-tition of colonies. Wars will then soon become absolutely impossible .
8. What would be the influence of peace with Russia upon the economic conditions in Europe?
Exchange of machinery for grain, flax and other raw materials—1 ask, can this he disadvantageous for Europe? Clearly, it cannot be anything but beneficial.
9. What is our opinion regarding the future development of the Soviets as a world force?
The future belongs to the Soviet system all the world over. The facts have proved it. One has only to count by quarterly periods, say, the growth in the number of pamphlets, books, leaflets and newspapers standing for or sympathising with the Soviets published in any country. It cannot be other-wise. Once the workers in the cities, the workers, landless peasants and the handicraftsmen in the villages as well as the small peasants (i.e., those who do not exploit hired labour)—once this enormous majority of working people have understood that the Soviet system gives all power into their hands, releasing them from the yoke of landlords and capitalists—how could one prevent the victory of the Soviet system all over the world? I, for one, do not know of any means of preventing it.
10. Has Russia still to fear counter-revolution from without?
Unfortunately, it has, for the capitalists are stupid, greedy people. They have made a number of such stupid, greedy attempts at intervention and one has to fear repe-titions until the workers and peasants of all countries thor-oughly re—educate their own capitalists.
11. Is Russia ready to enter into business relations with America?
Of course she is ready to do so, and with all other coun-tries. Peace with Estonia, to whom we have conceded a great deal, has proved our readiness, for the sake of business relations, to give even industrial concessions on certain conditions.
February 18, 1920
V. Ulyanov (TN. Lenin)

Endnotes
[1]  Lenin’s answers were wired to Berlin, and from there to New York on February 21, 1920. That same evening they were published in the New York Evening Journal. Lenin’s answers were reprinted in the German communist and socialist press.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## In Reply to Questions Put By a Correspondent of the Daily Express Telegram











In Reply To Questions Put By A Correspondent Of The Daily Express



V. I. Lenin
In Reply To Questions Put By
 A Correspondent Of The Daily Express


Interviewed: 18 February, 1920
First Published: Published on February 28, 1920 in the Daily Express No. 6198; First published In Russian on April 22, 1950 in Pravda No. 112; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 368-369
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


1. What is our attitude towards the raising of the blockade?
We consider it a big step forward. The possibility is being opened for us to pass from a war that was forced on us by the capitalist governments of the Entente to peaceful reconstruction. This is of the greatest importance to us. Straining all our efforts towards the restoration of the economic life of the country, ruined first by the war between capitalists over the Dardanelles and the colonies, then by the war of the capitalists of the Entente and Russia against the workers of Russia, we are now, among other measures, working out, with the aid of a number of scientists and experts, a plan of electrification of the whole country This plan is to be realised over a period of many years. The electrification will rejuvenate Russia. Electrification based on the Soviet system will mean the complete success of the foundations of communism in our country—foundations of a cultured life, without exploiters, without capitalists, without landlords, without merchants.
The raising of the blockade will help to accomplish Russia’s electrification.
2. What influence will the Allies’ decision to cease offensive action have on the offensive actions of the Soviet power?
The Allies, together with their allies and their lackeys—Kolchak, Denikin, and the capitalists of the surrounding countries—have attacked us. We did not attack anyone. We concluded peace with Estonia even at the cost of material sacrifices.
We are impatiently waiting to see the Allies’ “decision” supported by their deeds, but the story of the Versailles Peace and of its consequences, unfortunately, indicates that in most cases the Allies’ words disagree with their deeds and the decisions remain scraps of paper.
3. Is the present status quo satisfactory from the standpoint of Soviet policy?
Yes, because every status quo in politics is a transition from old forms to new ones. The present status quo is, from many points of view, a transition from war to peace. Such a change is desirable to us for this reason, and insofar do we consider the status quo satisfactory.
4. What are our aims in connection with the cessation of hostilities on the part of the Allies?
Our aims, as already mentioned, are peaceful economic building. A detailed plan of it, on the basis of electrification, is being at present worked out by a committee of scientists and technicians—or rather, by a number of committees—in accordance with the resolution of the February (1920) session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## To J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. Stalin


Wired: 20 February, 1920
First Published: First published on January 21, 1935 in Pravda No. 21; Published according to the telegram
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 370
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


To Comrade Stalin,
Member of the Revolutionary Military Council of the South-Western Front
By direct line
Moscow, February 20
The situation on the Caucasian Front is assuming a more serious
    character. In the situation obtaining today we may possibly lose
    Rostov and Novocherkassk and the enemy may attempt to develop his
    successes further to the north and threaten the Donets area. Adopt
    exceptional measures to hasten the transfer of the 42nd and the
    Latvian divisions and strengthen their fighting potential. I
    expect that you will appreciate the general situation and bend all
    your efforts to achieve important results.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## To the Working
    Women









To the Working Women



VI Lenin
To the Working Women

Written: 21 February, 1920
First Published: Pravda, February 22, 1920
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English
 Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 371-372
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: Sally RyanŒ
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002.
 Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License

Comrades, the elections to the Moscow Soviet show that the
      Party of the Communists is gaining strength among the working
      class.
It is essential that women workers take a greater part in the
    elections. The Soviet government was the first and only government
    in the world to abolish completely all the old, bourgeois,
    infamous laws which placed women in an inferior position compared
    with men and which granted privileges to men, as, for instance, in
    the sphere of marriage laws or in the sphere of the legal attitude
    to children. The Soviet government was the first and only
    government in the world which, as a government of the toilers,
    abolished all the privileges connected with property, which men
    retained in the family laws of all bourgeois republics, even the
    most democratic. 

    

      Where there are landlords, capitalists and
      merchants, there can be
      no equality between women and men even in law.
Where there are no landlords, capitalists and merchants, where
    the government of the toilers is building a new life without these
    exploiters, there equality between women and men exists in
    law.
But that is not enough.
It is a far cry from equality in law to equality in life.
We want women workers to achieve equality with men workers not
    only in law, but in life as well. For this, it is essential that
    women workers take an ever increasing part in the administration
    of public enterprises and in the administration of the state.
By engaging in the work of administration women will learn
    quickly and they will catch up
 with the men.
Therefore, elect more women workers, both Communist and
    non-Party, to the Soviet. If she is only an honest woman worker
    who is capable of managing work sensibly and conscientiously, it
    makes no difference if she is not a member of the Party--elect her
    to the Moscow
      Soviet.
Let there be more women workers in the Moscow Soviet! Let the
      Moscow proletariat show that it is prepared to do and is doing
      everything for the fight to victory, for the fight against
      the old inequality, against the old, bourgeois, humiliation of women!
The proletariat cannot achieve complete freedom, unless it
      achieves complete freedom for
      women.
N. Lenin
February 21, 1920


Women and
Marxism - Lenin Index
Collected Works Volume 30
Collected Works Table of Contents
Lenin Works Archive

 
 
 








==========

## Telegram to J. V. Stalin











Telegram To J. V. Stalin



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To J. V. 
Stalin


Wired: 22 February, 1920
First Published: First published In 1942; Published according to a typewritten copy
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 370
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Stalin

    
Kharkov
February 22
It is essential immediately to arrange for interpreters at all
    headquarters and army institutions, and make it the duty of all to
    accept applications and other papers written in Ukrainian. This is
    absolutely essential—as far as language is concerned there
    must be every concession and the maxi-mum of equality. I’ll
    tell you soon about the wages of the railwaymen. I hear you quite
    well when you speak dis-tinctly so please answer my two telegrams
    by telephone.
Lenin


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at the Third All-Russia
  Conference of Directors of Adult Education Divisions of
  Gubernia Education Departments











Speech At The Third All-Russia Conference Of Directors  Of Adult Education Divisions Of Gubernia Education Departments



V. I. Lenin
Speech at the Third All-Russia Conference Of 
Directors  of Adult Education
 Divisions of Gubernia Education Departments
February 25, 1920


Delivered: 18 February, 1920
First Published: Brief report published on March 2, 1920 in Vecherniye Izvestia Moskovskoga Soveta Rabochikh i Krasnoarmeiskikh Deputatov No. 481; First published in full in 1930; Published according to the verbatim report
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 374-379
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Permit me to greet your conference on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars and to share a few ideas with you.
As far as the international situation is concerned, I can tell you of a wireless message received today from Britain which better than anything else typifies it. The message says that yesterday, the twenty-fourth, the Allied Council decided that in the event of the states bordering on Russia asking its advice on policy it would say that it could not advise a war that would probably injure their interests, still less could it advise an aggressive war against Russia; if, however,, the Russian Soviet Republic attacked their legitimate frontiers, the Allied Council would give them its support. The Allied gentlemen also want to send to Russia a commission that belongs to the Washington labour committee. The organisers of the conference, social-traitors headed by Albert Thomas, have agreed on certain social reforms and want to send this crowd, which constitutes part of the League of Nations, to Russia to investigate bow far conditions in Russia coincide with the normal requirements of “civilised” states.
The report of yesterday’s decision by the Allies shows clearly enough that those gentlemen have got themselves into a mess, and also what benefit we can gain from that mess. They have wasted hundreds of millions (the British Government has) on support for the war and have now announced that they can no longer support it. Their offensive spirit is played out, although they are still delivering war materiel to Poland; they are still delivering armaments and we have authentic information that Poland is regrouping her forces for an offensive so that we cannot place any great reliance on their announcement. A certain threat still remains, although the external danger from the Allies has diminished by ninety per cent; we shall have to retain our military preparedness after the end of the war against Denikin; we cannot count on full demobilisation.
Nine-tenths of the danger of an attack on Russia by international capitalism has, therefore, disappeared; they have suffered such a thorough collapse that are proposing for the umpteenth time to send a commission to Russia. If that commission is to consist of gentlemen like Albert Thomas, who visited Russia during the war, it will end in nothing but a scandal for them and will be an excellent basis for agitation for us. We’ll give them such a welcome that they will leave Russia as quickly as possible and the only gain will be agitation for the workers of other countries. They want to scare us, but when we say we are welcoming them as honoured guests, they will hide this attempt of theirs. That shows the extent to which they are dismayed. We now have a window open on to Europe, thanks to the peace with Estonia, and are able to obtain the basic goods from there. There is, indeed, tremendous progress and improvement in our international situation; nine-tenths of all external danger to the Soviet Republic has been removed.
The more the danger is removed the more shall we be able to get on with our peaceful development, and we expect a lot from you and from your activities in the sphere of adult education. A number of material changes are necessary to put education in schools on a better footing-schools must be built, teachers selected and internal reforms carried out in organising and in selecting the staff. These are all things that require lengthy preparation. You are not hampered by this lengthy preparation in adult education. The demand of the people for an education outside the regular school system and the need for workers in this field are increasing very greatly. We are sure that with the common aid and by our common efforts more will he done than has hitherto been the case.
In conclusion I shall speak about the nature of adult education, which is connected with propaganda and agitation. One of the fundamental faults of education in the capitalist world was its alienation from the basic task of organising labour, since the capitalist had to train and educate obedient and disciplined workers. There was no connection in capitalist society between. the actual tasks of the organisation of social labour and teaching. There was dead, scholastic, routine teaching befouled by the influence of the clergy which everywhere, even in the most democratic republics, functioned in such a way that everything fresh and healthy was compelled to withdraw. Direct, vital work was made difficult because no extensive education was possible without a state apparatus and without material and financial aid. Since.we can and must prepare to transfer our entire Soviet life from the path of military training and defence to that of peaceful development it is essential for you, workers in the field of adult education, to take this change into consideration, and your propaganda work, its aims and programme should be made to fit this change.
To show you how I understand the tasks and the entire character of education, of teaching, training and upbringing, in their connection with the changing tasks of the Soviet Republic, I would remind you of the resolution on electrification that was adopted at the last session of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee; you are probably all familiar with it. A few days ago there was an announcement in the papers that within two months (in the official printed report it said two weeks, but that was a mistake)—that within two months a plan for the electrification of the country would be elaborated to cover a minimum period of two to three years and a maximum period of ten years. The character of all our propaganda, which includes purely Party propaganda, and school teaching, and adult education, must change, not in the sense that the fundamentals and general direction of teaching should be changed, but in the sense that the character of the work must be adapted to the transition to peaceful development with an extensive plan for the industrial and economic reconstruction of the country, because the general economic difficulty and the general task is the rehabilitation of the country’s economic forces so that the proletarian revolution can create the new foundations of economic life side by side with petty peasant economy. Up to now the peasant has been compelled to loan grain to the workers’ state; the pieces of coloured paper called money received in return for grain do not satisfy the peasant. The peasant, being dissatisfied, is demanding his legitimate rights—in exchange for grain he wants the industrial goods that we cannot give him until we have rehabilitated the economy. Rehabilitation—that Is the basic task, but we cannot rehabilitate on the old economic and technical basis. This is technically impossible and would be absurd; we have to find a new basis. This new basis Is our electrification plan.
We are talking to the peasants, to the mass of less—developed people, showing them that the new transition to a higher stage of culture and technical education is necessary for the success of all Soviet development. And so, it is essential to restore the economy. The most ignorant peasant will understand that the economy has been wrecked by the war and that he cannot overcome poverty and obtain the necessary goods in exchange for grain unless we restore it. All our work in the sphere of propaganda, school and adult education must be linked up closely with this most immediate and urgent need of the peasant in order not to be isolated from the most urgent requirements of our daily life; it should present them and their development in a way the peasant understands; it must be stressed that the way out of the situation is only through the rehabilitation of industry. Industry, however, cannot be rehabilitated on the old basis; it must be rehabilitated on the basis of modern . technology, which means the electrification of industry and a higher culture. Electrification takes up to ten years’ work, but it is work at a higher cultural and political level.
We shall evolve an extensive plan of work which must, in the minds of the peasantry, have a clearly defined practical aim. This cannot be done in a few months. The minimum programme should cover no less than three years. Without lapsing into utopias we may say that in ten years we shall be able to cover all Russia with a network of power stations and go over to an industry based on electricity that will meet the requirements of modern technology and put an end to the old peasant farming. This, however, requires a higher level of education and culture.
Without hiding from ourselves the fact that the immediate practical task is the restoration of transport and the delivery of food, and that with productivity at its present level we cannot undertake any extensive activities, you must nevertheless keep in mind and carry out, in the sphere of propaganda and education, the task of full rehabilitation on a basis commensurate with cultural and technical requirements. The old methods of propaganda are outmoded and until recently approached the peasants with general phrases about the class struggle; they served as grounds for the invention of all sorts of nonsense about proletarian culture,[1] etc., but we shall very rapidly cure ourselves of all this nonsense which seems very much like an infantile disorder. In propaganda and agitation, and in school and adult education, we shall present the question in a more sober and business-like manner, a manner worthy of the people of Soviet power who have learned something in the course of two years and who will go to the peasants with a practical, businesslike and clearcut plan for the reconstruction of all industry and will demonstrate that with education at its present level the peasant and the worker will not be able to carry out this task and will not escape from filth, poverty, typhus and disease. This practical task is clearly connected with cultural and educational improvements and must serve as the central point around which we must group all our Party propaganda and activities, all our school and extra-mural teaching. This will help to get a sound grasp of the most urgent interests of the peasant masses and will link up the general improvement in culture and knowledge with burning economic requirements to such an extent that we shall increase a hundredfold the demand of the working-class masses for education. We are absolutely certain that if we have solved the difficult war problem in two years, we shall solve a still more difficult problem—the cultural and educational problem—in five to ten years.
These are the ideas I wished to express to you. (Applause.)

Endnotes
[1] Lenin here refers to Proletcult (Proletarian Culture Organisation) formed in September 1917 as an independent workers' cultural and educational organisation. After the October Revolution A. A. Bogdanov and other leaders of the Proletcult continued to uphold its “independence” and thus counterposed it to the interests of the pro-letarian state. As a result, bourguois intellectuals made their way into the organisation and began to influence it. The Proletcult members practically rejected the cultural legacy of previous generations, strove to cut themselves off from mass cultural and educational work isolated themselves from life and advocated the need to create a special “proletarian culture” by “laboratory methods”. Bogdanov, the main ideologist of the Proletcult, recognised Marxism in words, but actually advocated subjective idealism and Machism. The Pruletcult was not a homogeneous organisation. Besides bourgeois intellectuals who made up the leadership of many of its organisations, there was also working youth who sincerely wanted to help the cultural development of the Soviet state. The Proletcult organisations made progress in 1919, but in the early twenties they went into decline. In 1932 the Proletcult ceased to exist.

Lenin sharply criticised its erroneous principles in a draft resolution on “Proletarian Culture” (see present edition, Vol. 31, “On Proletarian Culture”) and in a number of other works.
   

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## Speech Delivered at the First
  All-Russia Congress of Working Cossacks











Speech Delivered at the First All-Russia Congress of Working Cossacks ’ March 1, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at the
First All-Russia Congress of Working Cossacks[1] 
March 1, 1920


Delivered: 1 March, 1920
First Published: Pravda Nos. 47, 48 and 49, March 2, 3 and 4, 1920; Published according to the Pravda text, verified with the booklet, V. I. Lenin, Speech Delivered at the First All-Russia Congress of Working Cossacks, Moscow, 1920
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 380-400
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, allow me first of all to greet the
    Congress on behalf of the Council of People’s Commissars. I
    very much regret that I was unable to attend your meeting on the
    opening day and did not hear Comrade Kalinin’s report. But
    from what he has told me I conclude that many things relating to
    the direct and immediate tasks of Soviet development, and
    especially to the Cossacks, were dealt with in his speech. I
    should, therefore, like to deal mostly with the international
    situation of the Soviet Republic and the tasks which confront all
    the working masses, including the Cossacks, because of this
    situation.
Never has the international position of the Soviet Republic
    been as favourable and as triumphant as it is now. If some thought
    is given to the way our international situation has evolved in the
    course of two years of untold difficulties and incredible
    sacrifices, if some thought is given to the reasons for it, any
    intelligent person will discern the main forces, the mainsprings,
    and the chief alignment of forces in the incipient world
    revolution.
When, over two years ago, at the very beginning of the Russian
    revolution, we spoke about this approaching international, world
    revolution, it was a prevision, and to a certain extent a
    prediction. And the vast majority of the working people who did
    not live in the large cities and who had no had a schooling in the
    Party greeted this talk of an approaching world revolution with
    either mistrust or indifference, and at any rate with scanty
    understanding. And, indeed, it was impossible and would have been
    unnatural to expect the vast mass of the working population,
    especially the peasant, farming population, who are scattered over
    an immense territory, to form in advance anything like a correct
    idea of why world revolution was approaching, and whether it
    really was international. Our experience during these two
    incredibly difficult years and the experience of the working
    masses of remote border regions are worthy of attention, and not
    of merely being brushed aside with the remark that times were hard
    but have now become easier. Yes, we must give thought to the
    reason why things happened as they did, to the significance of
    their happening as they did, and to the lessons that are to be
    drawn from this; we must see which party’s views have been
    borne out by what our own history and world history have
    demonstrated during these two years. That is what I would like to
    deal with first of all.
From the standpoint of the international situation the issue is
    quite clear; when the matter is taken on a broad scale and
    regarded not from the standpoint of one party or of one country,
    but from the standpoint of all countries together, when the matter
    is taken on a broad scale, then particular and trifling details
    recede into the background and the chief motive forces of world
    history become apparent.
When we began the October Revolution by overthrowing the power
    of the landowners and capitalists, appealing for the termination
    of the war, and addressing this appeal to our enemies; when after
    this we came under the yoke of the German imperialists; when after
    this, in October and November 1918, Germany was crushed, and
    Britain, France, America and the other Entente countries became
    the lords of the earth—what was our situation then? The vast
    majority asked whether it was not then obvious that the cause of
    the Bolsheviks was hopeless. And many added, “Not only is it
    hopeless, but the Bolsheviks have turned out to be frauds. They
    promised peace, but instead, after the German yoke had been thrown
    off and Germany defeated, they were found to be enemies of the
    whole Entente—that is, of Britain, France, America and
    Japan, the most powerful countries in the world; and Russia,
    ruined, weakened and exhausted by the imperialist war, and
    moreover by the Civil War, has now to hold out in a fight against
    the foremost countries of the world.” This was easy to
    believe; and it is not surprising that lack of faith made
    indifference and often actual hostility to the Soviet government
    more and more widespread. There is nothing surprising in it. What
    is surprising is that we emerged victorious from the struggle
    against Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin who were supported in every
    possible way by all the wealthiest powers in the world, powers
    which no other military force on earth can even approximately
    equal. The truth of this is clear to everybody, even to the blind,
    and even to those who are worse than blind, those who refuse to
    see at any price—even to them it is clear that we have
    emerged from this struggle victorious.
How did this miracle happen? It is to this question that I
    would like most of all to direct your attention, because it most
    clearly reveals the chief motive forces of the entire
    international revolution. By analysing this question in a
    practical way, we can supply an answer to it, for this is
    something we have already been through; we are able to say what
    happened after the event.
We were victorious because we could be and were united, and
    because we were able to win over allies from the camp of our
    enemies. And our enemies, who are immeasurably stronger than we
    are, suffered defeat because they were not, never could be and
    never will be united, and because every month they fought against
    us brought them further disintegration within their own camp.
I shall now speak about the fact which proves these
    statements.
You know that after Germany was defeated, there was nobody in
    the world to oppose Britain, France and America. They had robbed
    Germany of her colonies, and there was no corner on earth, there
    was not a single country, where the military might of the Entente
    did not prevail. It would seem that under such circumstances,
    enemies of Soviet Russia as they were, they must have clearly
    realised that Bolshevism aims at world revolution. We have never
    made a secret of the fact that our revolution is only the
    beginning, that its victorious end will come only when we have lit
    up the whole world with these same fires of revolution. And we
    realised quite clearly that the capitalists were frenzied enemies
    of the Soviet government. It should be mentioned that when the
    European struggle was over they had an army of millions, and a
    powerful navy, to which we could not oppose even the semblance of
    a navy or an army of any strength. And all they had to do was to
    employ a few hundred thousand soldiers of this army of millions in
    the war against us in the same way as they were employed in the
    war against Germany, and the Entente would have crushed us. There
    cannot be the slightest doubt of this in the minds of those who
    have examined this question from the theoretical standpoint, and
    especially of those who went through the last war and know it from
    their own experience and observation.
Both Britain and France tried to seize Russia in this way. They
    concluded a treaty with Japan, who had taken practically no direct
    part in the imperialist war but who supplied a hundred thousand or
    so soldiers to crush the Soviet Republic, acting from the Far
    East. Britain at that time landed troops at Murmansk and
    Archangel, not to mention the movement in the Caucasus, while
    France landed soldiers and sailors in the South. This was the
    first historical phase of the struggle we sustained.
The Entente at that time had an army of millions and its
    soldiers were, of course, far superior to the whiteguard troops
    which were mustering in Russia and which had neither organisers
    nor arms. And it sent these soldiers against us. But what the
    Bolsheviks had predicted happened. They said that it was not only
    the Russian revolution that was concerned, but the world
    revolution as well, and that the Bolsheviks had allies in the
    workers of all civilised countries. These prophecies were not
    realised in their direct form at the time we proposed peace to all
    countries.[2] Our appeal did not meet with a general
    response. But the strike in Germany in January 1918[3] showed
    us that there we had the support of fairly large forces of workers
    and not only of Liebknecht, who even in the days of the Kaiser had
    the courage to declare publicly that the government and the
    bourgeoisie of Germany were robbers. This strike ended in
    bloodshed and the suppression of the workers. In the Entente
    countries, of course, the bourgeoisie deceived the workers, either
    lying about our appeal or not publishing it at all. For this
    reason the appeal we made in November 1917 to all the nations
    produced no direct result, and those who thought that this appeal
    alone would call forth revolution were bound, of course, to be
    bitterly disappointed. But we did not count only upon the appeal;
    we counted upon more profound motive forces. We said that the
    revolution would proceed differently in different countries, and
    that of course it was not merely a matter of removing a
    protégé of Rasputin or a villainous landowner, but of a
    struggle against the more developed and enlightened
    bourgeoisie.
And so, when the British landed troops in the North and the
    French in the South, the decisive test and the final denouement
    began. The question of who was right was now to receive its
    answer. Were the Bolsheviks right when they said that in order to
    win the fight they had to rely upon the workers? Or were the
    Mensheviks right when they said that an attempt to make a
    revolution in one country would be senseless and foolhardy,
    because it would be crushed by other countries? You heard this
    kind of talk not only from Party people but even from people who
    were just beginning to think about politics. And then came the
    acid test. For a long time we did not know what the result would
    be; for a long time we could not judge the result; but now, after
    the event, we know what it was. Even in the English newspapers, in
    spite of the frenzied lies about the Bolsheviks told by all the
    bourgeois papers—even in those papers letters began to
    appear from British soldiers near Archangel, saying that on
    Russian soil they had come across leaflets in English explaining
    to them that they had been deceived, that they were being led
    against workers and peasants who had set up their own state. These
    soldiers wrote that they did not want to fight. As for France, we
    know that there was a mutiny in the navy for which tens, hundreds,
    and perhaps thousands of Frenchmen are still doing penal
    servitude. These sailors declared that they would not fight the
    Soviet Republic. We can now see why neither French troops nor
    British troops are fighting us at present, why the British
    soldiers have been removed from Archangel, and why the British
    Government dare not bring them on to our soil.
One of our political writers, Comrade Radek, wrote that the
    Russian soil would prove to be such that no soldier from any other
    country who set foot on it would be able to fight. This seemed to
    be too boastful a promise, it seemed a delusion. But it proved
    correct. The soil on which the Soviet revolution had taken place
    proved to be very dangerous to all countries. It seems that the
    Russian Bolsheviks were right; they had already managed to bring
    about unity among the workers during the time of the tsar, and the
    workers had managed to create small cells, which greeted all who
    believed them, whether French workers or British soldiers, with
    propaganda in their own languages. True, we had only tiny sheets,
    whereas in the British and French press propaganda was carried on
    by thousands of newspapers and every phrase was publicised in tens
    of thousands of columns. We issued only two or three quarto sheets
    a month; at best it worked out at only one copy for every ten
    thousand French soldiers.[4] I am not certain
    whether even that many reached their destination. Why, then, did
    the French and British soldiers believe them? Because we told the
    truth, and because when they came to Russia they saw that they had
    been deceived. They had been told that they were to defend their
    own country; but when they came to Russia they found that they
    were to defend the rule of the landowners and capitalists, that
    they were to crush the revolution. The reason we were able to win
    over these people in two years was that although they had
    forgotten that they had once executed their own kings, the moment
    they stepped on to Russian soil, the Russian revolution and the
    victories of the Russian workers and peasants reminded the
    soldiers of France and Britain of their own revolutions, and,
    thanks to the events in Russia, they recalled what had once
    happened in their own countries.
And this showed that the Bolsheviks were right, that our hopes
    were better founded than those of the capitalists, although we had
    neither funds nor arms, while the Entente had both arms and an
    invincible army. But we won the sympathy of these invincible
    armies, so much so that they dare not bring either British
    soldiers or French soldiers against us, knowing from experience
    that every such attempt turns against them. That is one of the
    miracles that have occurred in Soviet Russia.
Now, after four years of war, when ten million people have been
    killed and twenty million crippled, when the imperialists are
    asking themselves what the war was for—such questions lead
    to some very interesting revelations. Certain negotiations which
    took place in 1916 were recently made public in France—the
    Austrian monarch began peace negotiations with France as early as
    1916, but France kept quiet about it, and Albert Thomas, who
    called himself a socialist and who was then a member of the
    Cabinet, came to Russia to promise Constantinople, the Dardanelles
    and Galicia to Nicholas II. All these facts have now become widely
    known, they have been published in a French newspaper. The French
    workers are now saying to Albert Thomas: “You said that you
    had joined the Cabinet in order to protect our French fatherland
    and the interests of the French workers; yet in 1916, when the
    Austrian monarch proposed peace, you, Albert Thomas, concealed the
    fact, and as a result millions of people perished in order that
    the French capitalists might make more profit.” These
    exposures are not ended yet. We began them by publishing the
    secret treaties, and the whole world saw why millions of people
    had perished, why rificed in order that Nicholas II might secure
    the Dardanelles and Galicia. All the imperialists knew this. So
    did the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries; and if they did
    not, they were downright idiots not to have studied politics and
    diplomacy enough to have known what has now been made public in
    the French papers. These exposures are now becoming more profound,
    and there will be no end to them. Thanks to this, the workers and
    peasants in every country are beginning more and more keenly to
    sense the truth and to realise what the imperialist war was
    about. That is why they are beginning to believe us, to see that
    we spoke the truth, and to see that the imperialists were lying
    when they led them to defend the fatherland.
That explains the miracle of our having won the sympathies of
    the soldiers of Britain and France, weakend helpless as we were
    from the military standpoint. It is no longer a prediction, but a
    fact. True, the victory cost us untold hardships and incredible
    sacrifices. During the past two years we have suffered untold
    torments of starvation which became particularly acute when we
    were cut off from the grain of the East and the
    South. Nevertheless, we gained a victory, and a victory that is
    not only for our country, but for all countries, for all
    mankind. Never before has there been a case in history when
    powerful military states have been unable to fight a country so
    helpless in the military field as the Soviet Republic. Why did
    this miracle happen? Because when we, the Bolsheviks, led the
    Russian people into the revolution, we knew very well that this
    revolution would be a painful one, that it would cost millions of
    lives; but we knew that we would have the working masses of all
    countries behind us, and that our truth, by exposing all lies,
    would triumph more and more as time went on.
After the campaign of the powers against Russia had failed,
    they tried another weapon. The bourgeoisie of those countries have
    hundreds of years of experience, and were able to replace their
    own unreliable weapons by others. At first they tried to use their
    own soldiers to crush and stifle Russia; now they are trying it
    with the help of the border states.
Tsarism, the landowners and the capitalists used to oppress a
    number of the border nations—Latvia, Finland, and so on,
    where they aroused hatred by centuries of oppression. “Great
    Russian” became a most hateful word to all these nations,
    which had been drenched in blood. And so the Entente, having
    failed in fighting the Bolsheviks with the help of its own
    soldiers, is now banking on the small states, hoping to strangle
    Soviet Russia with their help.
Churchill, who is pursuing the same sort of policy as Nicholas
    Romanov, wants to fight, and is fighting, without paying the
    slightest heed to parliament, He boasted that he would lead
    fourteen states against Russia—that was in 1919—and
    that Petrograd would he captured in September and Moscow in
    December. He was a little too boastful. He banked on the hatred of
    Russia in all these small states; but he forgot that in these
    small states there is a clear understandiiig of what Yudenich,
    Koichak and Denikin mean. They were once within a few weeks of
    complete victory.

    During Yudenicii’s campaign, when he was quite close to
    Petrograd, an article appeared in The Times, the richest
    of the British newspapers— I read this editorial
    myself—which implored, ordered, demanded that Finland help
    Yudenich—the eyes of the whole world are upon you; you will
    save liberty, civilisation and culture all over the world. Take
    the field against the Bolsheviks! This is what Britain said to
    Finland, and Britain has Finland completely in her pocket; it was
    said to Finland, who is up to her ears in debt, and who dares not
    utter a squeak because without Britain she has not enough grain to
    last her a week.
Such was the pressure brought to bear on all these small states
    to make them fight Bolshevism. And it failed twice. It failed
    because the peace policy of the Bolsheviks turned out to be a
    serious one, and was judged by its enemies to be more honest than
    the peace policy of any other country, and because a number of
    countries thought, “Much as we hate Great Russia, which used
    to suppress us, we know that it was Yudenich, Koichak and Denikin
    who suppressed us, and not the Bolsheviks.” The former head
    of the Finnish white-guard government has not forgotten that in
    November 1917 he personally received a document from my hands in
    which we said without the slightest hesitation that we
    unreservedly recognised Finland’s independence.[5]
At that time this seemed a mere gesture. It was thought that
    the revolt of the Finnish workers would cause it to be
    forgotten. But no, such things are not forgotten when they are
    corroborated by the whole policy of a definite party. And even the
    Finnish bourgeois government said, “Let’s think it
    over. After all, we have learned something during a hundred and
    fifty years of oppression by the Russian tsars. If we take the
    field against the Bolsheviks, we shall help to install Yudenich,
    Kolchak and Denikin. And who are they? Don’t we know? Are
    they not the same breed of tsarist generals who stifled Finland,
    Latvia, Poland and many other nationalities? And shall we help
    these enemies of ours to fight the Bolsheviks? No, let us
    wait!”
 They did not dare to refuse outright—they are dependent
    on the Entente. They did not help us directly; they waited,
    temporised, wrote Notes, sent delegations, formed commissions, sat
    in conference, and did so until Yudenich, Kolchak and Denikin had
    been crushed and the Entente defeated in the second campaign
    too. We were the victors.
If all these sÂaall states had taken the field against
    us—they were supplied with hundreds of millions of dollars
    and the finest guns and weapons, and had British instructors who
    had been through the war—if they had taken the field against
    us, there is not the slightest doubt that we would have been
    defeated. Everybody knows that very well. But they did not take
    the field against us, because they realised that the Bolsheviks
    are more honest. When the Bolsheviks say that they recognise the
    independence of any nation, that tsarist Russia was based on the
    oppression of other nations, and that the Bolsheviks never
    supported this policy, do not support it and never will support
    it, and that they will never go to war to oppress other
    nations—when they say that, they are believed. We know this
    not from the Latvian or Polish Bolsheviks, but from the
    bourgeoisie of Poland, Latvia, the Ukraine and so on.
Here the international significance of the Bolshevik policy had
    its effect. It was a test on international and not on Russian
    soil. It was a test by fire and sword, and not by words. It was a
    test in the last decisive struggle. The imperialists realised that
    they had no soldiers of their own, that they could strangle
    Bolshevism only by mustering international forces; but all
    international forces were beaten.
What does imperialism mean? It means that a handful of rich
    powers have a stranglehold on the whole world, when they know that
    they have the fifteen hundred million people of the world in their
    hands and have a stranglehold on them, and when these fifteen
    hundred million feel what British culture, French culture and
    American civilisation mean—rob for all you are worth! Today
    three-quarters of Finland has already been bought up by American
    multimillionaires. The officers who came from Britain and France
    to our border states to instruct their troops behaved like
    insolent scions of the Russian nobility in a defeated
    country. They all profiteered right and left. And the more the
    Finnish, Polish and Latvian workers starve, the more they are
    squeezed by a handful of British, American and French
    multimillionaires and their henchmen. And this is going on all
    over the world.
The Russian Socialist Republic alone has raised the standard of
    war for real emancipation; and sympathy is turning in its favour
    all over the world. Through the small countries, we have won the
    sympathy of all the nations of the world, and they represent
    hundreds of millions of people. They are at present oppressed and
    downtrodden, they are the most backward part of the population;
    but the war has enlightened them. Huge masses of people were drawn
    into the imperialist war. Britain brought regiments from India to
    fight the Germans. France called millions of Africans to the
    colours to fight the Germans. They were formed into shock units
    and hurled into the most dangerous sectors, where they were mown
    down like grass by machine-guns. But they learned something. Under
    the tsar the Russian soldiers said, “If die we must, then
    let it be fighting the landowners”—now the Africans
    say, “If die we must, then let it not be to help the French
    predators rob the German capitalist predators, but to emancipate
    ourselves from the capitalists, German and French.” In every
    country of the world, even in India, where three hundred million
    people are oppressed and treated as labourers by the British,
    minds are awakening and the revolutionary movement is growing from
    day to day. They all look towards one star, the star of the Soviet
    Republic, because they know that it made tremendous. sacrifices in
    order to fight the imperialists, and that it has withstood the
    most severe trials.
This was the significance of the second card of the Entente to
    he beaten—victory on an international scale. It means that
    our peace policy is approved by the vast majority of people all
    over the world. It means that the number of our allies in all
    countries is growing—much more slowly than we would like, it
    is true, but growing nevertheless.
The victory we won in the offensive engineered against us by
    Churchill shows that our policy was right. And after that we won a
    third victory—a victory over the bourgeois intelligentsia,
    over the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Mensheviks, who in all
    countries were rabidly hostile to us, They all began to oppose the
    war against Soviet Russia. In all countries the bourgeois
    intelligentsia, the Socialist Revolutionaries and
    Mensheviks—this breed, unfortunately, is to be found in all
    countries (applause) —condemned interference in Russian
    affairs. They declared in all countries that it was a
    disgrace.
When Britain proposed that the Germans blockade Soviet Russia,
    and Germany refused, this exhausted the patience of the British
    and other Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks. They said,
    “We are enemies of the Bolsheviks and regard them as
    violators and robbers. But we cannot support the proposal that the
    Germans join us in strangling Russia by a hunger blockade.”
    And so, within the camp of the enemies, inside their own
    countries, in Paris, London and so on, where Bolsheviks are being
    hounded and treated in the way revolutionaries were treated under
    the tsar—in all cities, the bourgeois intelligentsia have
    issued the call “Hands off Soviet Russia I” In Great
    Britain this is the slogan under which the bourgeois
    intelligentsia are summoning meetings and issuing manifestos.
That is why the blockade had to be lifted. They could not
    restrain Estonia, and we have concluded peace and can trade with
    her. We have cut a window open on the civilised world. We have the
    sympathy of the majority of the working people, and the
    bourgeoisie are anxious to start trade with Russia as soon as
    possible.
Now the imperialists are afraid of us and they have reason to
    be, for Soviet Russia has emerged from this war stronger than
    ever. British writers have written that the armies all over the
    world are disintegrating, and that if there is any country in the
    world whose army is gaining strength, that country is Soviet
    Russia. They tried to slander Comrade Trotsky and said that this
    was so because the Russian army is being kept under iron
    discipline, which is enforced by ruthless measures, as well as by
    skilful and widespread agitation.
We have never denied this. War is war, and it demands iron
    discipline. Have you capitalist gentlemen not employed the same
    methods? Have you not carried on agitation? Have you not a hundred
    times more paper and printing works? To compare our literature
    with yours is like comparing a molehill to a mountain. Yet your
    propaganda has failed, and ours has succeeded. 

    

      The
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks tried an experiment to
    see whether it was not possible to get along with the capitalists
    peacefully, and to pass from them to social reform. In Russia they
    wanted to go over to social reform in an amicable way, so as not
    to offend the capitalists. They forgot that capitalists are
    capitalists, and that the only thing to do with them is to
    vanquish them. They say that in the Civil War the Bolsheviks have
    drenched the country in blood. But, my dear
    Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks, did you not have eight
    months to experiment in? Were you not in power with Kerensky from
    February to October 1917, during which period you had the help of
    all the Cadets, of the whole Entente, of all the richest countries
    in the world? Your programme then was one of social reform,
    without civil war. Is there a fool in the. world who would have
    resorted to revolution if you had really begun social reform? Why
    did you not do so? Because your programme was a blank, an absurd
    dream. Because it is impossible to come to terms with the
    capitalists and secure their obedience peacefully, especially
    after four years of imperialist war. Do you think there are no
    clever people in Britain, France and Germany who understand that
    they went to war for the division of colonies, and that ten
    million people were killed and twenty million crippled over the
    division of the spoils? That is what capitalism means. How can you
    expect to persuade, how can you expect to come to terms with this
    capitalism which has crippled twenty million people and killed ten
    million? And we say to the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, “You had the opportunity of
    trying your experiment. Why did nothing come of it? Because your
    programme was a sheer utopia, a utopia not only for Russia, but
    even for Germany, the Germany where the German Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, whom nobody will listen to, are now in
    power, the Germany where a German Kornilov, armed from head to
    foot, is preparing reaction,[6] the German republic
    where fifteen thousand workers have been slaughtered in the
    streets of the cities. And this is called a democratic
    republic!” Yet the German Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries have the hardihood to say that the
    Bolsheviks are a wicked lot, that they have reduced the country to
    a state of civil war, whereas in their own country social peace
    prevails and only fifteen thousand workers have been killed in the
    streets!
They say that the Civil War and bloodshed in Russia are due to
    the fact that it is a backward country. But tell us, why is the
    same thing happening in countries like Finland which are not
    backward? Why is there a White Terror in Hungary which has shocked
    the whole world? Why were Luxemburg and Liebknecht assassinated in
    the German republic, where, since the overthrow of the Kaiser, the
    Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries have been in power? And
    why is it not the Mensheviks who are strong there, but
    Kornilov—and the Bolsheviks too, who, although they are
    crushed, are strong because of their faith in the justice of their
    cause and because of their influence over the masses?
There you have the world revolution—which they said the
    Bolsheviks were using to deceive the people with, when as a matter
    of fact all hopes of compromise proved to be sheer nonsense.
A big tussle is developing among the bourgeois countries
    themselves. America and Japan are on the verge of flinging
    themselves at each other’s throats because Japan sat snug
    during the imperialist war and has grabbed nearly the whole of
    China, which has a population of four hundred million. The
    imperialist gentlemen say, “We are in favour of a republic,
    we are in favour of democracy; but why did the Japanese grab more
    than they should under our very noses?” Japan and America
    are on the verge of war, and there is absolutely no possibility of
    preventing that war, in which another ten million will be killed
    and twenty million crippled. France, too, says, “Who got the
    colonies?—Britain.” France was victorious, but she is
    up to her ears in debt; she is in a hopeless position, whereas
    Britain has piled up wealth. Over there, new combinations and
    alliances are already being engineered. They want to fling
    themselves at each other’s throats again over the division
    of colonies. And an imperialist war is again brewing and cannot be
    prevented. It cannot be prevented, not because the capitalists,
    taken individually, are vicious—individually they are just
    like other people —but because they cannot free themselves
    of the financial meshes in any other way, because the whole world
    is in debt, in bondage, and because private property has led and
    always will lead to war.
All this is causing the roots of the international revolution
    to strike deeper and deeper. Because of this we have won over the
    French and British soldiers; because of this we have won the
    confidence of the small states, and our international position is
    now better than ever before. And on the basis of a simple
    calculation we can say that though many hardships still await us,
    the worst difficulties have already been overcome. The
    all-powerful Entente no longer holds out any terrors for us: we
    have defeated it in decisive battles. (Applause.)
True, they may still incite Poland against us. The Polish
    landowners and capitalists are growling and threatening, saying
    that they want to get back the territory of I772,[7]

    that they want to subjugate the Ukraine. We know that France is
    inciting Poland, flinging millions into that country, because
    France is bankrupt anyhow and is now putting her last stake on
    Poland. And we say to the comrades in Poland that we respect her
    liberty as we respect the liberty of every other nation, and that
    the Russian workers and peasants, who have experienced the yoke of
    tsarism, know very well what that yoke meant. We know that it was
    a heinous crime to divide Poland up among the German, Austrian and
    Russian capitalists, and that this division doomed the Polish
    nation to long years of oppression, when the use of the native
    language was regarded as a crime, and when the whole Polish nation
    was brought up in one idea, namely, to throw off this treble
    yoke. We therefore understand the hatred the Poles feel, and we
    declare to them that we shall never cross the line on which our
    troops are now stationed—and they are stationed a long way
    from any Polish population. We are proposing peace on this basis,
    because we know that this will be a tremendous acquisition for
    Poland. We do not want war on account of frontiers, because we
    want to obliterate that accursed past when every Great Russian was
    regarded as an oppressor.
But since Poland responds to our peace proposal by silence,
    since she continues to give a free hand to French imperialism,
    which is inciting her to a war against Russia, since fresh
    trainloads of munitions are arriving in Poland every day and the
    Polish imperialists threaten to start a war on Russia, we say,
    “Just try it! You’ll get a lesson you’ll never
    forget.” (Applause.)
When soldiers died during the imperialist war for the
    enrichment of the tsar and the landowners, we said frankly and
    openly that defence of the fatherland in the imperialist war was
    treachery, that it meant defence of the Russian tsar, who was to
    get the Dardanelles, Constantinople and so on. But now that we
    have published the secret treaties, now that we have embarked on a
    revolution against imperialist war, now that we have borne untold
    hardships for the sake of that revolution, now that we have shown
    that the capitalists in Russia have been suppressed and dare not
    even dream of returning to the old system, we say that we are not
    defending the right to plunder other nations, but are defending
    our proletarian, revolution, and will defend it to the very
    end. The Russia which has been emancipated and which for two years
    has borne untold suffering for the sake of her Soviet
    revolution—that Russia we shall defend to our last drop of
    blood! (Applause.)
We know that the time is gone when we were pressed on all sides
    by imperialist armies and when the working folk of Russia still
    did not understand the tasks that confronted us. Guerrilla methods
    prevailed then, each tried to grab a weapon for himself without
    consideration for the cause as a whole, and disorder and robbery
    prevailed in the localities. In the course of, these two years we
    have created a united and disciplined army. It has been a very
    difficult task. You know that the science of war cannot be learned
    all at once and you also know that only the officers, the colonels
    and generals, who have remained from the tsarist army, know that
    science. You have heard, of course, that these old colonels and
    generals have been responsible for a great deal of treachery,
    which cost us tens of thousands of lives. All such traitors had to
    he cleared out, and at the same time we had to select a corps of
    commanders from among the former officers, so that the workers and
    peasants might learn from them; for a modern army cannot be built
    up without science, and we have had to put it in the hands of
    military experts. It has been a difficult task, but that, too, we
    have accomplished. 

    

      We have created a united army, an army which is
    now directed by the advanced section, by experienced Communists,
    who have everywhere succeeded in putting agitation and propaganda
    on a proper footing. True, the imperialists are also carrying on
    propaganda, but the peasants are already beginning to understand
    that there are different kinds of propaganda. They are beginning
    to tell by instinct what is true and what is false. At any rate,
    the propaganda which is being carried on by the Mensheviks and
    which was carried on by Kolchak and Denikin is no longer as
    successful as it was. Take their posters and pamphlets. They talk
    about a Constituent Assembly, they talk about liberty and a
    republic. But the workers and peasants, who have secured liberty
    at the price of their blood, now understand that the term
    “Constituent Assembly” serves as a screen for the
    capitalists; and if anything decided the issue of the struggle
    against Kolchak and Denikin in our favour, despite the fact that
    they were supported by the Great Powers, it was that both the
    peasants and working Cossacks, who for a long time remained in the
    other camp, have in the end come over to the workers and
    peasants—and it was only this that finally decided the war
    and brought about our victory.
With this victory behind us, we must now do our utmost to
    consolidate it on another front, the bloodless front, the front of
    the war against the economic chaos to which we have been reduced
    by the war against the landowners and capitalists, against Kolchak
    and Denikin. You know what this victory has cost us; you know what
    a desperate fight we had to put up when we were cut off from the
    graingrowing regions, from the Urals and Siberia. At that time the
    Moscow and Petrograd workers had to suffer intolerable torments of
    hunger. Attempts were made to frighten you with the term
    “dictatorship of the proletariat”, to frighten the
    peasants and working Cossacks, and instil into their minds the
    idea that dictatorship meant the arrogant rule of the
    worker. Actually, however, while Britain and America were doing
    all they could to support Kolchak and Denikin, the workers of the
    central cities, exercising their dictatorship, did their best to
    show everyone by their example how to break away from the
    landowners and capitalists and march with the working people; for
    labour unites, while property disunites.
    That was the thesis we stuck to throughout these two years, and it
    led us to victory. We were united by labour, whereas the Entente
    is steadily disintegrating, because property has turned the
    imperialists into wild beasts, who from first to last are always
    squabbling over the division of spoils. Labour has made us a force
    that is uniting all the working people. And now
    “dictatorship” is a word that can frighten only
    utterly ignorant people, if such are still to be found in
    Russia.
I do not know if any person still remains who has not been
    taught a lesson by Kolchak and Denikin, and who has not come to
    realise what the dictatorship of the proletariat means—it
    means that never has the proletariat of Petrograd, Moscow and the
    industrial centres suffered such hardships as during these past
    two years. The peasants of the producing gubernias are now in such
    a position that they, having possession of the land, get the whole
    product for themselves. Since the Bolshevik revolution the Russian
    peasants, for the first time in thousands of years, are working
    for themselves and can feed better. Yet at the same time, during
    these two years of struggle the workers, the proletariat, while
    exercising their dictatorship, have been suffering untold torments
    of hunger. You now see that dictatorship means leadership, the
    union of the disunited and scattered working masses, a single,
    closely—knit whole directed against the capitalists in order
    to defeat them and to prevent a recurrence of the bloodshed in
    which ten million people perished and twenty million were
    crippled. The union of all the labouring people, a single iron
    will is required to defeat a force like this, which can rely on
    mighty armies and modern culture. This single iron will can be
    furnished only by the working masses, only by the workers, the
    proletariat, only by those class-conscious workers whom decades of
    strikes and demonstrations have trained in struggle, and who have
    succeeded in overthrowing tsarism. It can be furnished only by the
    workers who have borne the brunt of the two years of unparalleled
    civil war, fighting in the front ranks and creating a united Red
    Army, which has been joined by tens of thousands of the finest
    workers, peasants and military and political students, who have
    been the first to perish and who, in Moscow, Petrograd, I
    vanovo-Voznesensk, Tver, Yaroslavi and all the industrial cities,
    have been suffering the terrible torments of hungers And this
    hunger has welded the workers together and brought the peasants
    and working Cossacks of the producing gubernias to see for
    themselves that the Bolsheviks were right, for the workers were
    thus enabled to hold their own in the struggle against the
    whiteguards.
That is why the working class is entitled to say that by these
    two years of sacrifice and war it has proved to all the working
    peasants and to every working Cossack that we must unite and join
    forces. We must fight those who are profiteering on the famine
    because they find it more profitable to sell grain at a thousand
    rubles a pood than to sell it at the fixed price. There is money
    to be made that way, but it leads back to the old times, and we
    shall once more find ourselves in that accursed pit where tsarisin
    ruled and where the capitalists condemned humanity to the
    imperialist slaughter for the sake of their profits. It would turn
    us back, and that i something that cannot be allowed. After the
    struggle against Kolchak and Denikin, the working peasants and
    Cossacks came to realise the truth that we need unity, and they
    are taking their places by the side of the workers and looking
    upon the working class as their leaders. The working peasants saw
    that no injury derived from the workers’ government for
    there was none to see; it was only the landowners, capitalists and
    kulaks who did, but then, they are the worst enemies of the
    working people, they are the allies of those imperialists who were
    the cause of the bloody war and all the miseries of the
    people. All working people must unite—only then shall we be
    victorious.
The bloody war is over and we are now waging a bloodless war, a
    war against the economic chaos, ruin, poverty and disease to which
    we have been reduced by four years of imperialist war and two
    years of civil war. You know that the economic chaos is
    terrible. In the border regions of Russia, in Siberia and in the
    South there are today tens of millions of poods of grain; millions
    of poods have already been collected and transported, yet there is
    a terrible famine in Moscow, people are dying of starvation
    because grain cannot be delivered; and it cannot be delivered
    because the Civil War has completely devastated the country,
    wrecked the railways and destroyed scores of bridges. Locomotives
    have broken down, and we are unable to repair them quickly. We are
    now trying with great difficulty to secure aid from abroad. We
    know, however, that it is now possible to start on the complete
    restoration of industry.
How are we going to restore industry when we cannot exchange
    manufactured goods for grain because there aren’t any?
We know that when the Soviet government takes grain from the
    peasants at a fixed price it pays them only in paper. What is this
    paper worth? Although it is not the price of the grain we can only
    pay in paper money. But we say that this is essential, that the
    peasants must give their grain as a loan. Is there a single
    well-fed peasant who would refuse bread to a hungry worker if he
    knew that this worker, once he had been fed, would repay him in
    goods? No honest and politically-conscious peasant would refuse to
    give grain as a loan. Peasants who have surplus grain must let the
    state have it for paper money—and that means a loan. The
    only people who do not understand, who do not realise this, are
    the supporters of capitalism and exploitation, those who want the
    well-fed man to profit even more at the expense of the hungry
    man. The workers’ government cannot tolerate that, and we
    shall stop at no sacrifice to combat it. (Applause.)
We have now concentrated all our forces on the restoration of
    industry and are steadfastly waging this new war, in which we
    shall be as victorious as we have been hitherto. We have
    instructed a commission of scientists and engineers to draw up a
    plan for the electrification of Russia. The plan will be ready in
    two months and will enable us to got a full and clear picture of
    how, in a few years, the whole of Russia will be covered by a
    network of electric transmission lines, will be restored in a new
    way, not the old way, and how she will achieve that culture which
    our prisoners of war saw in Germany.
That is the way we must restore our industry, and that is the
    way we shall return a hundredfold the loan of grain we are taking
    from the peasants. We know that this cannot be done in a year or
    two; the minimum programme of electrification is calculated for a
    period of not less than three years, and the complete success of
    this advanced industry will require not less than ten years. But
    if we were able to I hold on for two years in such a bloody war,
    we shall be able to hold on for ten years and more in face of any
    difficulties. We have gained that experience in leading the masses
    with the help of urban workers which will carry us through all
    difficulties on this bloodless front of struggle against economic
    chaos and will lead to greater victories than those we gained in
    the war against international
    imperialism. (Applause.)
    

Endnotes
[1]
    The First All-Russia Congress of Working Cossacks was held
    February 29-March 6, 1920. It was attended by 339 delegates from
    nearly all Cossack regions. The agenda of the Congress was the
    following: Soviet development in Cossack regions; food policy;
    organisation of national economy, etc. Lenin took part in the work
    of the Congress, and showed the true road for the working Cossacks
    in his speech on March 1. The Congress denounced the attempts of
    the upper strata of Cossacks, in company with the landowners and
    bourgeoisie, to separate the Cossacks from the common cause of all
    the working people . The Congress resolution stressed that the
    chief task of the working Cossacks was to unite with the workers
    and peasants of Soviet Russia. The Congress expressed in favour of
    the participation of working Cossacks in Soviet governmental
    bodies on the same conditions as all workers and peasants, called
    upon the Cossacks to strengthen the union of workers and peasants
    and concentrate all efforts on overcoming the economic devastation
    in the country.
[2]
    Lenin refers to the Decree on Peace adopted by the Second
    All-Russia Congress of Soviets of Workers’ and
    Soldiers’ Deputies on October 26 (November 5), 1917 (see
    present edition, Vol. 26, pp. 249-53).
 The Decree on Peace proposed to all
    belligerent nations and their governments that they immediately
    sign an armistice and start negotiations on a just democratic
    peace.
[3]Lenin refers to a strike of workers in Germany
    which began on January 28, 1918 in protest against the rapacious
    peace terms pro-posed by the German delegation during the
    Brest-Litovsk peace talks. Over 500,000 workers at armaments
    factories went on strike. The strikers demanded peace without
    annexations and indemnities as proposed by the Soviet delegation,
    the participation of worker representatives of all countries in
    peace talks, the repeal of the war-time laws in the country and
    granting of democratic civil rights to the people. The workers of
    Hamburg, Kid, Leipzig, the Ruhr region and other industrial
    centres also went on strike. All in all, over 1,000,000 people
    took part in the January political strike. Arbeiterrkte were set
    up in a number of cities during the strike.
At the head of the strike were revolutionary
    stewards elected by workers mainly from among the active trade
    unionists. However, the majority of revolutionary stewards were
    members of the Independent Social-Democratic Party, the activities
    of which were directed by collaborators. This weakened the forces
    of the strikers.
Though the January political strike ended in
    the defeat of the workers, its significance was very great. Lenin
    considered that this strike "marks a turn of sentiment among the
    German proletariat (see present edition, Vol. 27, p. 546)
[4]
    This refers to the newspapers published in 1918-19 in English
    German and French by the groups of foreign Communists set up at
    the C.C., R.C.P.(B.); they were for distribution among soldiers of
    the interventionist armies and among prisoners of war. The
      English newspaper The Call was distributed on the Northern
    Front.  Two German publications, Der Vdlkerfriede (Peace
    of the Peoples and Revolution (World Revolution), were
    distributed among the German prisoners of war and in the
    Ukraine. The French weekly La Lanserne was distributed in
    the South of Russia
[5]
    On December iS (31), 1917, Lenin handed Svinhufvnd, head of the
    Finnish bourgeois government, the decree of the Council of
    People’s Commissars granting independence to Finland. The
    decree was endorsed by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee
    on December22, 1917 (January 4, 1918).

[6]
    Lenin refers to the preparations for a military-monarchist putsch
    in Germany. The leader of the German reactionaries, Kapp, gave his
    name to the revolt known as the "Kapp putsch" to which the Social
    Democratic government offered no resistance. On March 13, 1920,
    army units were moved to Berlin and meeting with no resistance
    from the government declared it dissolved and set up a military
    junta. The German working class responded with a general strike
    and on March 17, under pressure from the working class,
    Kapp’s government fell and state power again passed into the
    hands of the Social-Democrats, who by deceit succeeded in
    frustrating the general strike.
[7]
    The slogan calling for restoration of the 1772 frontiers implied
    the seizure of Byelorussia, Lithuania, part of the Ukraine as far
    as the middle Dnieper, and the southern part of Latvia; it
    reflected the aggressive tendencies of the Polish bourgeoisie and
    landowners.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at the Second
  All-Russia Congress of Medical Workers











Speech Delivered at the Second All-Russia Congress Of Medical Workers ’33 March 1, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At The
Second All-Russia Congress Of Medical Workers ’[1]
March 1, 1920
Minutes

Delivered: 1 March, 1920
First Published: Brief report published in Izvestia No. 51, March 6, 1920; Published according to the booklet Second All-Russia Congress of Representatives of
the All-Russia Union of Medical Workers. Minutes and Resolutions, Moscow, 1920
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 380-400
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Comrade Lenin, who was greeted by prolonged applause and
    by  the singing of the Internationale, delivered a brief
    speech of greeting.) Comrades, allow me to greet your
    Congress on behalf of the Council of People’s
    Commissars. There is no need to speak here at length about the
    purposes of the Con-gress and the work you have done. With the
    exception of the war front, there is perhaps no field of work that
    has involved so many sacrifices as yours. Four years of
    imperial-ist war have given mankind several million cripples and a
    number of epidemics.
A tremendous, difficult and responsible task has fallen on our
      shoulders. The struggle on the war front has shown that the
      attempts of the imperialists have produced no results. The
      greatest difficulties in the military field are behind us, but
      we must now set about the task of peaceful de-velopment. The
      experience we gained on the bloody front we shall apply to the
      bloodless front, where we shall meet with far greater sympathy.

    

      We have succeeded in enlisting the services of thousands of
      experts, of a vast number of officers and generals, who are
      occupying responsible posts side by side with Communist
      workers. We must apply all the determination and all the
      experience of the Civil War to the fight against epidemics. 

    

      Time
      was when members of the medical profession, too, entertained a
      distrust of the working class; time was when they, too, dreamed
      of the restoration of the bourgeois sys-tem. But now they, too,
      are convinced that only together with the proletariat will it be
      possible to achieve a flourish-ing state of culture in
      Russia. Only collaboration between scientists and workers can
      put an end to oppressive poverty, disease and dirt. And this
      will be done.
No forces of darkness can withstand an alliance of the
    scientists, the proletariat and the technologists.

Endnotes
[1]
    The Second All-Russia Congress of Medical Workers was held
    February 25-March 2, 1920. It was attended by 312 delegates, of
    whom 125 were Communists. The agenda of the Congress was the
    following: report of the C.C. of the All-Russia Union of Medical
    Workers, elections of the auditing commission, organisational
    report, sanitary service in the Republic, medical service and
    others. Lenin addressed the Congress with a brief speech of
    greeting on March 1. The Congress paid special attention to the
    organisation of the medical services. It also dealt with the
    questions of training new medical personnel and drafted a plan for
    the organisation of medical education.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Letter to R.C.P. Organisations On Preparations For the Party Congress











A Letter To R.C.P. Organisations On Preparations For The Party 
Congress



V. I. Lenin
A Letter To R.C.P. Organisations
On Preparations For The Party  Congress


Written: Unknown
First Published: March 2,1920 Bulletin of the C.C., R.C.P.(B,) No. 13; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 380-400
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Dear Comrades,
The Party Congress has been appointed for March 27. The agenda of the Congress has been published, and no doubt all Party organisations have already begun to prepare for the Congress. The Central Committee of the Party deems it its duty to express certain views in connection with this work.
Our Party, which by its persistent struggle over a period of fifteen years (1903-17) had proved its bonds with the working class of Russia, its ability to combat bourgeois influences within the working class and to lead the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat in the most diverse and most difficult circumstances, naturally had to take upon itself the direct implementation of the tasks of the dictatorship of the proletariat after the October Revolution. The Congress of our Party is therefore of the utmost importance not only for the entire working-class movement, but also for the entire development of Soviet power and for the guidance of the Russian—and to a certain extent the international-communist movement.
The importance of our Party Congress in this respect is still further enhanced by the specific features of the present moment, when the Soviet government has to accomplish a most difficult transition from the military tasks that formerly absorbed its entire attention to the tasks of peaceful economic development.
The membership of our Party has greatly increased, chiefly owing to the immense influx of workers and peasants during the Party Weeks that were organised at the most difficult period of our revolution, when Yudenich and Denikin were closest to Petrograd and Moscow. The workers and peasants who joined the Party at such a critical moment constitute a fine and reliable body of leaders of the revolutionary proletariat and of the non-exploiting section of the peasantry. We are confronted with the task of helping, as rapidly, successfully and efficiently as possible, to complete the training of these new members of the Party, of helping to mould them into a body of builders of communism, people who are the most politically conscious and capable of filling the most responsible posts, and at the same time most closely connected with the masses, i.e., with the majority of the workers and of the peasants who do not exploit the labour of others.
Relevant to the specific nature of the present moment, the chief item on the agenda of the forthcoming Congress will be the question of economic development and, in particular, of the measures, ways and means, and results of having a greater proportion of workers in our chief administrations, central boards and Soviet government apparatus in general.
This must be the principal question at the Party Congress, for the principal question in the entire Soviet development in Russia (and—inasmuch as she has become the centre of the world revolution—to a large extent in international communism as well) is the transition from the fight on the bloody front to the fight on the bloodless front, the front of labour, the front of the war against economic chaos, the war for the restoration, improvement, reorganisation arid development of Russia’s entire economy.
The procurement and transportation of large state supplies of foodstuffs, the restoration of the ruined transport system, the implementation of these measures with military speed, energy and discipline; side by side with this and indivisibly from it, the greater proportion of workers employed in the Soviet government apparatus, the elimination of sabotage and red tape from this apparatus, the achievement of the maximum productivity of labour, the utmost exertion of all the forces of the country for the restoration of the economy—such is the task imperatively dictated by circumstances, an urgent task demanding methods involving the supreme revolutionary energy of millions and millions of workers and peasants.
The Party Congress must take into account the experience of the labour armies, that young and new institution; it must take into account the experience gained by the entire apparatus of Soviet government over a period of more than two years, and adopt a number of decisions permitting the whole of our Socialist Republic to concentrate all the forces of the working people with redoubled firmness, determination, energy and efficiency on achieving the best possible solution of the urgent problem of rapidly and thoroughly overcoming economic chaos.
We invite all Party members and all Party organisations to concentrate the maximum effort on this problem, both in the practical work of all Soviet institutions and in the work of preparation for the Congress. For these tasks merge into one indivisible whole.
Happily, the time for purely theoretical discussions, disputes over general questions and the adoption of resolutions on principles has passed. That stage is over; it was dealt with and settled yesterday and the day before yesterday. We must march ahead, and we must realise that we are now confronted by a practical task, the business task of rapidly overcoming economic chaos, and we must do it with all our strength, with truly revolutionary energy, and with the same devotion with which our finest worker and peasant comrades, the Red Army men, defeated Koichak, Yudenich and Denikin.
We must march ahead, we must look ahead, and we must bring to the Congress the practical experience of economic development to which thought has been given and which has been carefully analysed by the common labour and common effort of all members of the Party.
We have learned something, and in order to march ahead and to overcome economic chaos, what we have to do is not to start anew, not to reconstruct everything right and left, but to utilise to the utmost what has already been created. There must be as little general reconstruction as possible and as many as possible business-like measures, ways, means and directions for the attainment of our chief aim which have been tested in practice and verified by results—we must have more workers in our apparatus, and see that it is done still more widely, still more rapidly and still better, we must enlist an even greater number of workers and labouring peasants in the work of administering industry and the national economy generally; not only must we enlist individual workers and peasants who have best proved themselves on the job, but we must enlist to a larger extent the trade unions and conferences of non-party workers and peasants; we must enlist literally all bourgeois specialists (because there are incredibly few of them)—i.e., specialists who have been trained under bourgeois conditions and who have reaped the fruits of bourgeois culture. We must organise things so that, in conformity with the demands of our Party Programme, our working masses may really learn from these bourgeois specialists and at the same time place them “in a comradely environment of common labour hand in hand with the masses of rank-and-file workers led by class-conscious Communists” (as our Party Programme puts it); such are our chief aims.
Comrades, we have hitherto been able to surmount the untold difficulties which history has placed in the way of the first socialist republic because the proletariat has properly understood its tasks as dictator, i.e., as the leader, organiser and teacher of all the working people. We won because we have always correctly defined the most urgent, insistent and pressing task and have really concentrated on this task the forces of all the working people, of the whole nation.
Military victories are easier to win than economic victory. It was much easier to defeat Kolchak, Yudenich and Demkmn than to defeat the old petty-bourgeois customs, relations, habits and economic conditions upheld and reproduced by millions and millions of small owners, alongside of the workers, together with them, and in the midst of them.
Victory in this field requires greater endurance, greater patience, greater persistence, greater steadfastness, greater system in work, greater organisational and administrative skill on the grand scale. This is what we, a backward nation, lack most of all.
Let all members of the Party exert their efforts to bring to the Party Congress practical experience, tested, analysed and summarised. If we bend all our efforts and succeed in pooling, testing and analysing in a careful, thoroughgoing and business-like way this practical experience, exactly what each of us has attempted and completed, or has seen others attempt and complete, then, and only then, will our Party Congress, and, following it, all our Soviet institutions, accomplish the practical task of overcoming economnic chaos as rapidly and surely as possible.
From congresses and meetings to discuss general questions to congresses and meetings to summarise practical experience—that is the slogan of our times. The task of the moment and the task of time Party Congress, as we conceive it, is to learn from practical experience, to discard what is harmful, to combine all that is valuable, in order to determine precisely a number of immediate practical measures, and to carry out these measures at all costs, not hesitating at any sacrifices.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## On International Women’s Day








On International Women's Day



VI Lenin
On International Women's Day

Written: Pravda, March 4, 1920
Published: Women and Communism, Lawrence & Wishart, London,
 1950
Transcribed and HTML Markup: Sally Ryan

 
Capitalism combines formal equality with economic and,
    consequently, social inequality. This is one of the principal
    distinguishing features of capitalism, one that is mendaciously
    screened by the supporters of the bourgeoisie, the liberals, and
    that is not understood by the petty-bourgeois democrats. Out of
    this distinguishing feature of capitalism, by the way,
      the necessity arises, while fighting resolutely for economic
    equality, openly to recognise capitalist inequality and, under
    certain conditions, even to include this open recognition of
    inequality as a basis for the proletarian state organisation (the
    Soviet Constitution).
But capitalism cannot be consistent even with regard
    to formal equality (equality before the law, "equality" between
    the well-fed and the hungry, between the property-owner and the
    property-less). And one of the most flagrant manifestations of
    this inconsistency is the inferior position of woman
    compared with man. Not a single bourgeois state, not
      even the most progressive, republican democratic state, has
    brought about complete equality of rights.
But the Soviet Republic of Russia promptly wiped out,
    without any exception, every trace of inequality in the
    legal status of women, and secured her complete equality in its
    laws.
It is said that the level of culture is best characterised by
    the legal status of woman. There is a grain of profound truth in
    this saying. From this point of view, only the dictatorship of the
    proletariat, only the socialist state, could achieve and did
    achieve a higher level of culture.

      Therefore, the foundation (and consolidation) of the first
      Soviet Republic--and alongside and in connection with this, the
      Communist International-inevitably lends a new, unparalleled,
      powerful impetus to the working women's movement.
For, when we speak of those who, under capitalism, were
    directly or indirectly, wholly or partially oppressed, it is
    precisely the Soviet system, and the Soviet system only, that
    secures democracy. This is clearly demonstrated by the position of
    the working class and the poor peasants. It is clearly
    demonstrated by the position of women.
But the Soviet system represents the final decisive conflict
    for the abolition of classes, for economic and social
    equality. For us, democracy, even democracy for those who
    were oppressed under capitalism, including democracy for the
    oppressed sex, is inadequate.
The working women s movement has for its objective the fight
      for the economic and social, and not merely formal, equality of
      woman. The main task is to draw the women into socially productive
      labour, extricate them from "domestic slavery", free them of their
      stultifying and humiliating resignation to the perpetual and
      exclusive atmosphere of the kitchen and
      nursery.
It is a long struggle, requiring a radical remaking both of
      social technique and of customs. But this struggle will end with
      the complete triumph of communism.
 


Women and
Marxism - Lenin Index

      | Lenin Works Archive








==========

## Speech at a Meeting of the Moscow
  Soviet of Workers’s and Red army Deputies











Speech Delivered at the Moscow Soviet of  Workers’ and Red Army Deputies, March 6, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered
at a Meeting of the
Moscow Soviet of Workers’ and Red Army Deputies
March 6, 1920


Delivered: 6 March, 1920
First Published:  1921 in Verbatim Reports of the Plenary Sessions of the Moscow Soviet of Workers’, Peasants’ and Red Army Deputies, Moscow; Published according to the book 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 410-416
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, I very much regret that there is little probability of my being able to discharge the duties hinted at by the Chairman in reference to my membership of the Moscow Soviet.[1] I am nevertheless very glad to have the opportunity of greeting the new Moscow Soviet. Permit me to say a few words about the tasks which, owing to the general situation in the country, fall particularly to the lot of the Moscow workers, and first and foremost of the Moscow Soviet.
Comrades, it seems there is every hope that we shall, in the near future, emerge completely victorious from the war which was forced upon us by the landowners and capitalists of Russia in alliance with the capitalists of the whole world. I have just received a telegram from a member of the Revolutionary Military Council of the Caucasian Front, the last remaining front of any importance. This telegram states that the resistance of the enemy has been broken in all directions (applause), so that now that we have finished with the Kolchak front and the Archangel front, the day is apparently not far off when the Denikin front, too, will be completely eliminated. But, comrades, no matter how greatly the results of the Civil War and the international situation may favour us, and even though the imperialist powers are obviously on the eve of a complete break-down, and all their attempts to unite anybody at all for a war against us have ended in failure—no matter how favourable this situation may be, it must be said that the danger, even the foreign danger, is not yet over. Attempts are still being made, especially by imperialist France, to incite Poland to make war on Russia. You all know, of course, from the press, from the decisions of the Central Executive Committee, and from all the statements made at the Cossack Congress and many other congresses, that the Soviet Republic, on its part, has done all it could to prevent this war, that we have proposed peace to the Polish nation not only officially but in the most friendly way, and have most solemnly rec-ognised the independence of the Polish state, and have made the most positive declarations to this effect. From the military standpoint, we have done everything we could to prevent the Polish landowners and capitalists from carrying out their designs—perhaps not so much their own designs as those of imperialist France, who stands behind their back and to whom they are up to their ears in debt. We have done everything we could to prevent these capitalists and landowners from carrying out their design of inciting the Polish nation to make war on Russia. But although we have done everything we could, future action does not depend upon us. Even the Polish landowners and capitalists themselves do not know what they will do tomorrow. The internal situation in Poland is so grave that they may embark on such a dubious venture because of the obvious danger to their class position, because they feel their end approaching. Consequently, although we have won many victories, we have no guarantee at all that we are secure against foreign attack, and we must be on our guard, we must preserve, develop and strengthen our military pre-paredness, so as to accomplish the task that confronts the working class. If, in spite of all our efforts, the Polish imperialists, supported by France, embark on a war against Russia, if they launch their military venture, they must receive, and will receive, such a rebuff that their fragile capitalism and imperialism will fail to pieces.
We do not conceal from ourselves, especially from the Moscow and other Russian workers, that fresh effort and new and gigantic sacrifices are now demanded of us, which will be all the more severe because we are just now at the end of a winter—February and March—that has broughta new aggravation of want, hunger and suffering owing to the ruined state of our railway system. Arid I must tell you that the war on the bloody front, the civil war directed against the imperialists, is to all appearances coming to an end, and that anyway the enemy can offer no serious menace to us since the attempts of the Entente to launch a general war against us have suffered decisive defeat; the war on the bloodless front, however, still continues and will continue for a long time to come. For the more we leave the military danger behind us the more we are faced with the tasks of internal development; and these have to be carried out by the working class, which has taken upon itself the mission of leading the working masses. These tasks—the restoration of a ruined country and a ruined economy, and the organisation of a socialist society—cannot be accomplished without a war on the bloodless front. That is what the advanced workers, who are now forming the new Moscow Soviet, must impress most firmly on their minds, for the Moscow workers have always been a model, and for some time to come must continue to be a model, which will be followed by the workers of other cities.
We must remember that we are grappling with the task of making a socialist revolution in a country where peasants form the greater part of the population. We have now been joined by the peasant masses of Siberia, where the peasants have surpluses of grain, where they have been corrupted by capitalism, cling to the old freedom of trade, and consider it their sacred right—in this respect they are being led astray by the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries (that is their sad lot—there is nothing else for them to do)—they consider it their sacred right to practise freedom of trade in grain surpluses, believing that they can retain this right. It does not matter to them that this supposed civil equality implies the exploitation of the hungry by the well-fed; for peasants who have grain surpluses and refuse to let the starving have them are putting into effect the principles of capitalist relations. They are people who, after having been exploited for hundreds of years, have now become their own masters for the first time, and are in a position, owing to their grain surpluses, to enslave the workers, who, as a result of the collapse of industry, are unable to give any equivalent in return for the grain. For this reason our attitude towards these petty-bourgeois property-owners, towards the small profiteers, who number millions and who think that because they possess surpluses of grain the farther we go the more they will make, and that the worse the famine the more profitable it will be for those who have grain—our attitude towards them must he one of war. This we say bluntly, and this is the basis of the dicta-torship of the proletariat, which openly declares to the work-er and peasant masses: “The working peasant is our ally, our friend and brother; but when the peasant acts as a prop-erty-owner holding a surplus of grain not required by his household, and acts towards us as a property-owner, as a well-fed man towards a hungry man, such a peasant is our enemy, and we will fight him with the utmost determina-tion, the utmost ruthlessness.” Victory over the small prop-erty-owners, over the small profiteers, is no easy matter. They cannot be eliminated in one year, many years will be required; it will take organised resistance, stubborn and steadfast work, step by step over a long period of time -it will take an incessant day-to-day struggle, which it is particularly difficult to wage and in which the profiteering peasant is very often victorious over the worker. But we will fight on the bloodless front so that the hungry may secure from the well-fed the surpluses they possess, despite all obstacles and despite the desire of the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Mensheviks to introduce freedom of trade and leave these surpluses in the possession of the well-fed.
We have done a great deal of work during the past two years. We have enlisted the peasant and worker masses in this work, and have everywhere been able to secure what we needed. At a time when the whiteguard officers, the former tsarist officers, were fighting us on the side of our enemies, we enlisted tens and hundreds of these experts in our work, which helped to remake them. They helped us do our work, in conjunction with our commissars. They themselves learned from us how the work should be done, and in return gave us the benefit of their technical knowledge. And it was only with their help that the Red Army was able to win the victories it did. We must now divert all this work into another channel. It must be work of a peaceful character; we must devote everything to the work on the labour front. We must direct our former property-owners, who were our enemies. We must mobilise all who are capable of working and compel them to work with us. We must at all costs wipe from the face of the earth the last traces of the policy o the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries—the policy which talks of personal freedom, etc.—because it would doom us to starvation. This attitude must be adopted in all our work. The advanced section of the proletariat is assuming the leadership of the rest of the population, and it says: “We must get you to understand our ideas fully and to put them into effect, just as we got you to come over more and more to our side.”
The first task that confronts us here is to clean up Moscow, to put an end to the filth and state of neglect into which it has sunk. We must do this so as to set an exam-ple to the whole country, where this filth, which brings with it epidemics and disease, is becoming more and more prevalent. We must set this example here, in Moscow, an example such as Moscow has set many times before.
We must bear in mind that we are faced with the task of restoring the transport system. In the spring we must intro-duce control by the worker masses. We must effect it in respect of those market gardeners in the vicinity of Moscow who are taking advantage of the fact that there are starving fellow-beings around them to pocket millions. The fact that any rich market gardener can squeeze untold profits out of his poor neighbours is an atrocious injustice, which we cannot tolerate.
What must we do? Specialists must give us the benefit of their knowledge so that we may carry our ideas into effect. The class which has just elected the new Moscow Soviet must tackle this work, and carry it out more practi-cally and in greater detail than hitherto.
We know that the proletariat is not very large numeri-cally; but we also know that the Petrograd workers, who were in the front ranks of the Red Army, gave us their best forces whenever we needed them, gave them for the fight against the enemy in greater numbers than we thought possible. We have said that Petrograd, Moscow and Ivanovo-Voznesensk have given us a vast number of people. But that is not enough; they must give us all we need. We have to utilise all the bourgeois specialists who accumulated knowledge in the past and who must pay with this knowledge now. It is with the help of these people that we must do our work; it is with their help that we must conquer all we need-conquer, and create our own militant contingents of workers who will learn from them and direct them, and who will always turn to the broad masses of the workers to explain this experience. That is what the Moscow Soviet, as one of the most important and one of the biggest of the proletarian Soviets, must accomplish at all costs. The fifteen hundred members of the Moscow Soviet, plus the alternate members, constitute an apparatus through which you can draw upon the masses and constantly enlist them, inexperienced though they are, in the work of administering the state.
The worker and peasant masses who have to build up our entire state must start by organising state control. You will obtain this apparatus from among the worker and peas-ant masses, from among the young workers and peasants who have been fired as never before with the independent desire, the readiness and determination to set about the work of administering the state themselves. We have learned from the experiences of the war and shall promote thousands of people who have passed through the school of the Soviets and are capable of governing the state. You must recruit the most diffident and undeveloped, the most timid of the workers for the workers’ inspection and promote them. Let them progress in this work. When they have seen how the workers’ inspection participates in state affairs, let them  gradually proceed from the simple duties they are able to carry out—at first only as onlookers—to more important functions of state. You will secure a flow of assistants from the widest sources who will take upon themselves the burden of government, who will come to lend a hand and to work. We need tens of thousands of new advanced workers. Turn for support to the non-party workers and peasants, turn to them, for our Party must remain a narrow party, surrounded as it is by enemies on all sides. At a time when hostile elements are trying by every method of warfare, deceit and provocation to cling to us and to take advantage of the fact that membership of a government party offers certain privileges, we must act in contact with the non-party people. The laws on the Workers’ and Peasants’ Inspection grant the right to enlist non-party workers and peasants and their conferences in the work of government. This apparatus is one of the means whereby we can increase the number of workers and peasants who will help us to achieve victory on the internal front in a few years. For a long time this victory will not be as simply, decisively and clearly apparent as the victory on the war front. This victory demands vigilance and effort, arid you can ensure it by carrying out the job of development of Moscow and its environs and helping in the general work of restoring the transport system, of restoring that general economic organi-sation which will help us to get rid of the direct and indi-rect influence of the profiteers and to vanquish the old traditions of capitalism. We should not grudge a few years for this. Even if we had these conditions, such social re-forms as these would be without parallel, and here to set ourselves tasks designed only for a short period of time would be a great mistake.
Allow me to conclude by expressing the hope and assurance that the new Moscow Soviet, bearing in mind all the experience gained by its predecessor in the course of the Civil War, will draw new forces from among the youth and will tackle the affairs of economic development with all the energy, firmness and persistence with which we tackled military affairs, and so gain victories which, if not as brilliant, will be more solid and substantial.

Endnotes
[1] On February 16, 1920, Lenin was elected deputy to the Moscaw Soviet from State Confectionery Factory No. 3 (new the Bolshevik Factory) and from the workers and employees of Khovrine Station, Nikolayevskaya (new Oktyabrskaya) Railway. On February 20 his rights as member of the Moscow Soviet were confirmed by the cre-dentials commission and he was issued with Deputy’s Identification Card No. 1. Ever since then at every convocation of the Moscow City Soviet Deputy’s identification Card No. 1 has been issued in Lenin’s name. 

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Meeting of the Moscow
  Soviet in Celebration of the First anniversary of the Third
  International











Speech Delivered at a Meeting of the Moscow Soviet in Celebration of the First Anniversary of the Third International March 6, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Meeting of the Moscow Soviet in
Celebration of the First Anniversary of the Third
      International
March 6, 1920


Delivered: 6 March, 1920
First Published: Communist International No. 10, 1920; Published according to the magazine text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 417-425
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, a year has passed since the founding of
    the Communist International. During this year the Communist
    International has been successful beyond all expectation; we may
    say boldly that at the tithe of its foundation no one expected
    such immense successes.
In the early period of the revolution many entertained the hope
    that the socialist revolution would begin in Western Europe
    immediately the imperialist war ended; at the time when the masses
    were armed there could have been a successful revolution in some
    of the Western countries as well. It could have taken place, had
    it not been for the split within the proletariat of Western Europe
    being deeper and the treachery of the former socialist leaders
    greater than had been imagined.
To this day we lack exact information on how the demobilisation
    proceeded and how the war is being wound up. We do not know, for
    example, what happened in Holland, and only from an article
    containing an account of a Dutch Communist’s speech (from
    one chance article—there were many such articles) have I
    been able to learn that the revolutionary movement in Holland, a
    neutral country that was less involved in the imperialist war,
    assumed such dimensions that the formation of Soviets was started,
    and Troelstra, one of the most important figures in the
    opportunist Dutch Social-Democratic Party, admitted that the
    workers could have seized power. 

    

      Had the International not been in
    the hands of traitors who worked to save the bourgeoisie at the
    critical moment, there would have been many chances of a speedy
    revolution in many belligerent countries as soon as the war ended
    and also in some neutral countries, where the people were armed;
    then the outcome would have been different.
Things did not turn out that way, revolution did not succeed so
    quickly, and it now has to follow the whole path of development
    that we began even before the first revolution, before 1905; for
    it was only due to more than ten years having passed before 1917
    that we were capable of leading the proletariat.
What happened in 1905 was, so to speak, a rehearsal for the
    revolution, and it was partly because of this that we in Russia
    succeeded in using the moment of the collapse of the imperialist
    war for the proletariat to seize power. Owing to historical
    developments, owing to the utter rottenness of the autocracy, we
    were able to begin the revolution with ease; but the easier it was
    to begin it the harder it has been for this solitary country to
    continue it, and with the experience of this year behind us we can
    say to ourselves that in other countries, where the workers are
    more developed, where there is more industry, where the workers
    are far more numerous, the revolution has developed more
    slowly. It has taken our path, but at a much slower pace.
The workers are continuing this slow development, paving the
    way for the proletarian victory which is advancing with
    undoubtedly greater speed than was the case with us; because when
    you look at the Third International you wonder that it has spread
    so rapidly, moving from success to success.
Look at the way our ugly words, such as
    “Bolshevism”, for example, are spreading throughout
    the world. Despite the fact that we call ourselves the Communist
    Party, and that the name “Communist” is a scientific,
    European term, it is not as widespread in European and other
    countries as the word “Bolshevik” is. Our Russian word
    “Soviet” is one of the most widely used; it is not
    even translated into other languages, but is pronounced everywhere
    in Russian.
 Despite the lies in the bourgeois press, despite the furious
    resistance offered by the entire bourgeoisie, the sympathies of
    the masses of the workers are on the side of the Soviets, Soviet
    power and Bolshevism. The more the bourgeoisie lied the more they
    helped to spread throughout the world what we had experienced with
    Kerensky.
On their arrival from Germany, some of the Bolsheviks were met
    here with attacks and persecutions, organised in the
    “democratic republic” in real American
    style. Kerensky, the Socialist-Revolutionaries and the Monsheviks
    did their best to assist this witch-hunt. In this way they stirred
    up sections of the proletariat and made them think that there must
    be something good about the Bolsheviks if they are subjected to
    such persecution. (Applause,)


      And when you get fragmentary information from abroad from time
      to time, when—being unable to follow the entire
      press—you read, for example, Britain’s richest
      newspaper, The Times, and find it quoting Bolshevik
      statements to prove that during the war the Bolsheviks were
      preaching civil war, you draw the conclusion that even the
      cleverest representatives of the bourgeoisie have completely
      lost their heads, This British newspaper directs attention to
      the book Against the Stream, recommends it to British
      readers and gives quotations to show that the Bolsheviks are the
      very worst of people, who speak of the criminal character of the
      imperialist war and preach civil war; it convinces you that the
      entire bourgeoisie, while they hate us, are helping us—and
      we bow to them and thank them. (Applause.)
We have no daily press either in Europe or in America;
    information about our work is very meagre, and our comrades are
    suffering the most severe persecution. But when you see that the
    very wealthy Allied imperialist press, from which hundreds of
    thousands of other newspapers draw their information, has lost its
    sense of proportion to such a degree that in its desire to injure
    the Bolsheviks it prints numerous quotations from the writings of
    Bolsheviks, digging them up from war-time publications in order to
    prove that we spoke of the criminal character of the war and
    worked to transform it into a civil war, it shows that these very
    clever gentlemen will become as stupid as our Kerensky and his
    comrades were. We can therefore vouch for it that these people,
    the leaders of British imperialism, will make aclean and enduring
    job of helping the communist revolution. (Applause.)
Comrades, before the war it seemed that the main division in
    the working-class movement was the division into socialists and
    anarchists. Not only did it seem so; it was so. In the protracted
    period that preceded the imperialist war and the revolution, no
    objective revolutionary situation existed in the overwhelming
    majority of European countries. What had to be done at that time
    was to use this slow process for revolutionary preparation. The
    socialists began it, but the anarchists did not see the need for
    it. The war created a revolutionary situation, and the old
    division proved to be outdated. On the one hand, the top leaders
    of anarchism and socialism became chauvinists; they showed what it
    meant to defend their own bourgeois robbers against other
    bourgeois robbers, both of whom were responsible for the loss of
    millions of lives in the war. On the other hand, new trends arose
    among the rank and file of the old parties—against the war,
    against imperialism and for social revolution. A most profound
    crisis thus developed owing to the war; both the anarchists and
    the socialists split, because the parliamentary leaders of the
    socialists were in the chauvinist wing while an ever-growing
    minority of the rank and file left them and began to take the side
    of the revolution.
Thus the working-class movement in all countries followed a new
    line, not the line of the anarchists and the socialists, but one
    that could lead to the dictatorship of the proletariat. This split
    had become apparent throughout the world and had started before
    the Third International was founded.
If our Party has been successful it is because it came into
    being when the situation was revolutionary and when the labour
    movement was already in existence in all countries; and we
    therefore see now that a split has taken place in socialism and
    anarchism All over the world, this is leading to communist workers
    participating in the formation of new organisations and to their
    uniting in the Third International. That is the most correct
    attitude.
 Disagreements are again arising, for example, over the
    question of using parliaments, but since the experience of the
    Russian revolution and the Civil War, since the figure of
    Liebknecht and his role and importance among parliamentarians,
    have become known to the world, it is absurd to reject the
    revolutionary use of parliaments. It has become clear to people of
    the old way of thinking that the question of the state cannot be
    presented in the old way, that the old, bookish approach to this
    question has been succeeded by a new one based on practice and
    born of the revolutionary movement.
A united and centralised force of the proletariat must be
    counterposed to the united and centralised force of the
    bourgeoisie. The question of the state has thus now been shifted
    to a new plane, and the old disagreement has begun to lose its
    meaning. The old division of the working-class movement has
    yielded to new ones, the attitude towards Soviet government and to
    the dictatorship of the proletariat having assumed prime
    importance.
The Soviet Constitution is clear evidence of what the Russian
    revolution has produced. Our experience and the study of it have
    shown that all the groups of the old issues are now reduced to
    one: for or against Soviet rule, either for bourgeois rule, for
    democracy (for those forms of democracy which promise equality
    between the well-fed and the hungry, equality between the
    capitalist and the worker at the ballot-box, between the
    exploiters and the exploited, and serve to camouflage capitalist
    slavery), or for proletarian rule, for the ruthless suppression of
    the exploiters, for the Soviet state.
Only supporters of capitalist slavery can favour bourgeois
    democracy. We can see that in the whiteguard literature of Koichak
    and Denikin, Many Russian cities have been cleared of this filth,
    and the literature collected and sent to Moscow. When you scan the
    writings of Russian intellectuals like Chirikov, or of bourgeois
    thinkers like Y. Trubetskoi, it is interesting to see that they
    help Denikin and at the same time argue about the Constituent
    Assembly, equality, etc. These arguments about the Constituent
    Assembly are of service to us; when they conducted this propaganda
    among the whiteguard rank and file they helped us in the same way
    as the entire course of the Civil War, all the events, helped
    us. By their own arguments they proved that Soviet rule is backed
    by sincere revolutionaries who sympathise with the struggle
    against the capitalists. That has been made perfectly clear during
    the Civil War.
After the experience gained, after what has happened in Russia,
    Finland and Hungary, after a year’s experience in the
    democratic republics, in Germany, one cannot object to, and write
    disquisitions about, the need for a central authority, for
    dictatorship and a united will to ensure that the vanguard of the
    proletariat shall close its ranks, develop the state and place it
    upon a new footing, while firmly holding the reins of
    power. Democracy has completely exposed itself; that is why signs
    of the strengthening of the communist movement for Soviet rule,
    for the dictatorship of the proletariat, have increased
    tremendously in all countries and have taken on the most diverse
    forms.
This has reached a point where such parties as the German
    Independents and the French Socialist Party, which are dominated
    by leaders of the old type who have failed to understand either
    the new propaganda or the new conditions, and have not in the
    least changed their parliamentary activity, but are turning it
    into a means of dodging important issues and engaging the
    workers’ attention with parliamentary debates—even
    these leaders have to recognise the dictatorship of the
    proletariat and Soviet power. This is because the masses of the
    workers are making themselves felt and forcing them to recognise
    it.
You know from the speeches of other comrades that the breakaway
    of the German Party of Independents, the recognition of the
    dictatorship of the proletariat and of Soviet government was the
    last decisive blow dealt to the Second International. Taking the
    existing state of affairs into consideration, it may be said that
    the Second International has been killed, and that the proletarian
    masses in Germany, Britain and France are taking the side of the
    Communists. In Britain there is also a party of Independents which
    persists in adhering to legality and in condemning the violence of
    the Bolsheviks, A discussion forum was recently opened in their
    newspaper. Well, the question of Soviets is being discussed there,
    and next to an article printed in British working-class newspapers
    we see an article by an Englishman who refuses to reckon with the
    theory of socialism and persists in his stupid contempt for
    theory, but who, taking the conditions of life in Britain into
    consideration, reaches a definite conclusion and says that they
    cannot condemn the Soviets, but should support them.
This shows that things have begun to change even among the
    backward sections of the workers in countries like Britain, and it
    may be said that the old forms of socialism have been killed for
    ever.
Europe is not moving towards revolution the way we did,
    although essentially Europe is going through the same
    experience. In its own way, every country must go through, and has
    begun to go through, an internal struggle against its own
    Mensheviks and against its own opportunists and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, which exist under different names to a
    greater or lesser degree in all countries.
And it is because they are experiencing this independently that
    we can be sure the victory of the communist revolution in all
    countries is inevitable and that the greater the vacillations in
    the enemies’ ranks, and the uncertainty in their
    declarations that the Bolsheviks are criminals and that they will
    never conclude peace with them, the better for us.
They are now saying that even if they do trade with the
    Bolsheviks they will not recognise them. We have nothing against
    that; try it, gentlemen, please. As for your not recognising us,
    we can understand that. We would consider it a mistake on your
    part if you did recognise us. But if you have become so muddled
    that you first declare that the Bolsheviks are violators of all
    the laws of God and man, and that you will not talk or make peace
    with them and then say that you will begin exchanges, without
    recognising our policy, that is a victory for us which will give
    an impulse to and strengthen the communist movement among the
    masses in every country. So deep is the movement that, in addition
    to those that are officially affiliated to the Third
    International, a number of movements are to be seen in the
    advanced countries, movements that do not adhere either to
    socialism or communism, but which are being drawn towards
    Bolshevism by the force of circumstances although they continue to
    condemn it.
War in the twentieth century, in a civilised country, compels
    governments to expose their own actions. A French newspaper has
    published some documents belonging to the ex-Emperor Charles of
    Austria who in 1916 offered peace to France. Now that his letter
    has been published, the workers are asking Albert Thomas, the
    socialist loader, who was in the government at the time, what he
    did when an offer of peace was made to that government. When
    Albert Thomas was asked about it, he made no reply.
These exposures have only just begun. The masses of the people
    are literate, and neither in Europe nor in America can they retain
    the old attitude towards war. They are asking for what cause 10
    million people were killed and 20 million crippled. The
    presentation of this question makes the popular Masses turn
    towards the dictatorship of the proletariat. To present this
    question is to answer it: 10 million people were killed and 20
    million crippled in order to settle the issue of who would amass
    the greater wealth, the German or the British capitalists. That is
    the truth, and no matter what efforts are made to conceal it, it
    is spreading.
The fall of the capitalist governments is unavoidable, because
    everybody can see that another war like the last is inevitable if
    the imperialists and the bourgeoisie remain in power. New disputes
    and conflicts are developing between Japan and America. They have
    been prepared by decades in the diplomatic history of the two
    countries. Wars are inevitable because of private property. War is
    inevitable between Britain, which has acquired colonies through
    plunder, and France, which considers herself robbed of her full
    share. No one knows where and how it will break out, but everybody
    sees, knows and says that war is inevitable, and is being prepared
    again.
This situation in the twentieth century, in countries with a
    totally literate population, is our guarantee that the old
    reformism and anarchism are out of the question. They were killed
    by the war. To talk of using reforms in order to remake the
    capitalist society which spent thousands of millions of rubles on
    the war, to talk of remaking this society without a revolutionary
    government and without force, without tremendous upheavals, is
    impermissible. Anyone who speaks and thinks that way is of no
    importance.
The Communist International is strong because it is based on
    the lessons of the world imperialist slaughter. In every country
    the correctness of its position finds increasing confirmation in
    the experience of millions of people, and the movement towards the
    Communist International is now a hundred times wider and deeper
    than before. It has brought about the complete breakdown of the
    Second International in one year.
In every country (even the most undeveloped) in the world, all
      thinking workers are aligning themselves with the Communist
      International, and are accepting its ideas. Therein lies the full
      guarantee that the victory of the Communist International
      throughout the world, in the not very distant future, is
      assured. (Applause.)



Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Congress of Water Transport Workers









Speech Delivered at the Third All-Russian Congress of Water Transport Workers



Vladimir Lenin’s
Speech Delivered at the 
Third All-Russian Congress of Water Transport Workers

Delivered: March 15, 1920
Source: Collected Works, Volume 30, p. 426 - 32
First Published: Pravda Nos. 59 and 60, March 17 and 18, 1920
Online Version: marx.org in 1996, marxists.org 1999
Transcribed: Robert Cymbala
HTML Markup: Brian Baggins and David Walters

The water transport system
    is at the moment of the  greatest importance and significance to
    Soviet Russia, and the Congress will certainly devote  the most
    serious attention and care to the tasks that confront water
    transport workers. Allow  me to dwell on the question which the
    Communist Party and the trade unions are more  interested in than
    in any other, and which you too no doubt are keenly debating; I
    refer to  the management of industry. This question figures as a
    special point on the agenda of the  Party Congress. Theses on the
    subject are being published. The comrades in the water  transport
    system must also discuss it.
You know that one of the points in dispute, one that arouses
    the liveliest discussion both  in the press and at meetings, is
    that of one-man management or corporate management. I think  that
    the preference for corporate management not infrequently betrays
    an inadequate  comprehension of the tasks confronting the
    Republic; what is more, it often testifies to  insufficient
    class-consciousness. When I reflect on this question, I always
    feel like saying  that the workers have not yet learned enough
    from the bourgeoisie. This is graphically shown  by the countries
    where the democratic socialists, or Social-Democrats, prevail, who
    are now  participating in governments in Europe and America, under
    various guises and in some form of  alliance with the
    bourgeoisie. They have been ordained by God himself to share the
    old  prejudices; but in our country, after two years of
    proletarian rule, we should not only want,  but should strive to
    inculcate upon the proletariat a class-consciousness that does not
    fall  short of that of the bourgeoisie. Look how the bourgeoisie
    administer the state; how they  have organised the bourgeois
    class. In the old days, could you have found anyone who shared
    the views of the bourgeoisie and was their loyal defender, and yet
    argued that individual  authority is incompatible with the
    administration of the state? If there had been such a  blockhead
    among the bourgeoisie he would have been laughed to scorn by his
    own class fellows,  and would not have been allowed to talk or
    hold forth at any important meeting of capitalists  and
    bourgeois. They would have asked him what the question of
    administration through one  person or through a corporate body had
    to do with the question of class.
The shrewdest and richest bourgeoisies are the British and
    American; the British are in  many respects more experienced, and
    they know how to rule better than the Americans. And do  they not
    furnish us with examples of maximum individual dictatorship, of
    maximum speed in  administration, and yet they keep the power
    fully and entirely in the hands of their own  class? There you
    have a lesson, comrades, and I think that if you give it some
    thought, if  you recall the not very distant past, when the
    Ryabushinskys, Morozovs and other capitalists  ruled
    Russia—if you recall how, after the overthrow of the
    autocracy, during the eight  months Kerensky, the Mensheviks and
    the Socialist-Revolutionaries were in power, they managed  so
    perfectly and with such remarkable rapidity to change their hue,
    to assume every kind of  label, to make every kind of outward,
    formal concession, and yet keep the power fully and  completely in
    the hands of their own class—I think that a little
    reflection on the lesson  of Britain and on this concrete example
    will do much more to help understand the matter of  one-man
    management than many abstract, purely theoretical resolutions,
    compiled in  advance.
It is claimed that corporate management means management by the
    workers, and that  individual management means non-worker
    management. The mere fact that the question is  presented in this
    way, the mere fact that this sort of argument is used shows that
    we still  lack a sufficiently clear class-consciousness; and not
    only so, but that we are less clear  about our class interests
    than the bourgeois gentry are. And that is natural. They did not
    learn to rule in two years, but in two hundred years, and much
    more than two hundred years if  you take the European
    bourgeoisie. We must not give way to despair because we have been
    unable to learn everything in two years; but it is
    important—events demand it—that we  should learn more
    rapidly than our enemies have. They have had hundreds of years to
    learn in;  they have opportunities to learn all over again and
    correct their mistakes, because on a  world scale they are
    infinitely stronger than we are. We have no time to learn; we must
    approach the question of corporate management from the standpoint
    of positive and concrete  facts. I am sure you will come to adopt
    the policy on this question outlined by the Central  Committee of
    the Party; it has been published and is being discussed at every
    Party meeting,  but for the men on the job, for the water
    transport workers, who have been at it for two  years the truth of
    this is obvious. And I hope the vast majority of those present
    here, who  are familiar with practical management, will understand
    that we must not confine ourselves to  a general discussion of the
    question, but must act like serious practical men, abolishing the
    collegiums and managing without them.
All administrative work requires special qualifications. You
    may be the very best of  revolutionaries and propagandists, and
    yet be absolutely useless as an administrator. But  anybody who
    studies real life and has practical experience knows that
    management necessarily  implies competency, that a knowledge of
    all the conditions of production down to the last  detail and of
    the latest technology of your branch of production is required;
    you must have  had a certain scientific training. These are the
    conditions we must satisfy at any cost. And  when we move general
    resolutions in which we talk with the pomposity of experts about
    corporate management and one-man management, the conviction
    gradually dawns upon us that we  know practically nothing about
    management, but we are beginning to learn a little from
    experience, to weigh every step and to promote every administrator
    who shows any ability.
You know from the debates in the Central Committee that we are
    not opposed to placing  workers at the head, but we say that this
    question must be settled in the interests of  production. We
    cannot wait. The country is so badly ruined,
    calamities—famine, cold and  general want—have reached
    such a pitch that we cannot continue like this any longer. No
    devotion, no self-sacrifice can save us if we do not keep the
    workers alive, if we do not  provide them with bread, if we do not
    succeed in procuring large quantities of salt, so as to
    recompense the peasants by properly organised exchange and not
    with pieces of coloured paper  which cannot keep us going for
    long. The very existence of the power of the workers and
    peasants, the very existence of Soviet Russia is at stake. With
    management in the hands of  incompetent people, with fuel not
    delivered in time, with locomotives, steamers and barges
 standing unrepaired, the very existence of Soviet Russia is at stake.
Our rail transport system is in a far worse state than our
    water transport system. It has  been ruined by the Civil War,
    which was mainly conducted along the land routes; both sides
    destroyed mostly bridges, and this has put the whole railway
    system in a desperate state of  ruin. We shall restore it. Almost
    daily we are doing a little bit towards restoring it. But  it will
    be some time before the system is completely restored. If even
    advanced and cultured  countries are suffering from disrupted
    transport systems, how are we to restore ours in  Russia? But
    repaired it must be, and quickly, for the population cannot endure
    another winter  like the last. Whatever the heroism of the
    workers, whatever their spirit of self-sacrifice,  they cannot go
    on enduring all the torments of hunger, cold, typhus and so on. So
    tackle the  question of management like practical men. See to it
    that management is conducted with the  minimum expenditure of
    forces; see to it that the administrators, whether experts or
    workers,  are capable men, that they all work and manage, and let
    it be considered a crime for them not  to take part in the work of
    management. Learn from your own practical experience. Learn from
    the bourgeoisie as well. They knew how to maintain their class
    rule; they have the experience  we cannot do without and to ignore
    it would be sheer conceit and entail the utmost danger to
 the revolution.
Earlier revolutions perished because the workers were unable to
    retain power by means of a  firm dictatorship and did not realise
    that they could not retain power by dictatorship, by  force, by
    coercion alone; power can be maintained only by adopting the whole
    experience of  cultured, technically-equipped, progressive
    capitalism and by enlisting the services of all  these
    people. When workers undertaking the job of management for the
    first time adopt an  unfriendly attitude towards the expert, the
    bourgeois, the capitalist who only recently was a  director, who
    raked in millions and oppressed the workers, we say—and no
    doubt the  majority of you also say—that these workers have
    only just begun to move towards  communism. If communism could be
    built with experts who were not imbued with the bourgeois
    outlook, that would be very easy; but such communism is a myth. We
    know that nothing drops  from the skies; we know that communism
    grows out of capitalism and can be built only from its  remnants;
    they are bad remnants, it is true, but there are no
    others. Whoever dreams of a  mythical communism should he driven
    from every business conference, and only those should be  allowed
    to remain who know how to get things done with the remnants of
    capitalism. There are  tremendous difficulties in the work, but it
    is fruitful work, and every expert must be  treasured as being the
    only vehicle of technology and culture, without whom there can be
 nothing, without whom there can be no communism.
Our Red Army was victorious in another sphere because we solved
    this problem in relation  to the Red Army. Thousands of former
    officers, generals, and colonels of the tsarist army  betrayed and
    sold us, and thousands of the finest Red Army men perished as a
    result—that  you know. But tens of thousands are serving us
    although they remain supporters of the  bourgeoisie, and without
    them there would have been no Red Army. And you know that when two
    years ago we tried to create a Red Army without them, it ended in
    guerrilla methods and  disorder; the result was that our ten to
    twelve million soldiers did not make up a single  division. There
    was not a single division fit to fight, and with our millions of
    soldiers we  were unable to cope with the tiny regular army of the
    whiteguards. We learned this lesson at  the cost of much
    bloodshed, and it must now be applied to industry.
Experience tells us that everyone with a knowledge of bourgeois
    culture, bourgeois science  and bourgeois technology must be
    treasured. Without them we shall be unable to build
    communism. The working class, as a class, rules; it created Soviet
    power, holds that power as  a class, and can take every supporter
    of bourgeois interests and fling him out neck and crop.  Therein
    lies the strength of the proletariat. But if we are to build a
    communist society, let  us frankly admit our complete inability to
    conduct affairs, to be organisers and  administrators. We must
    approach the matter with the greatest caution, bearing in mind
    that  only that proletarian is class-conscious who is able to
    prepare the bourgeois expert for the  forthcoming navigation
    season and who does not waste his time and energy, more than
    enough of
 which is always wasted on corporate management.
I repeat, our fate may depend more on the forthcoming
    navigation season than on the  forthcoming war with Poland, if it
    is forced upon us. War too, you know, is hampered by the
    break-down of the transport system. We have plenty of troops, but
    we cannot transport them,  we cannot supply them with food; we
    cannot bring up salt, of which we have large quantities,  and
    without an exchange of goods, proper relations with the peasants
    are inconceivable. That  is why the entire Republic, Soviet power
    as a whole, the very existence of the power of the  workers and
    peasants, imposes on the present navigation season tasks of great
    and exceptional  importance. Not one week, not one day, not one
    minute must be lost; we must put an end to
 this chaos and increase our possibilities three- and fourfold.
Everything, perhaps, depends on fuel, but the fuel situation is
    now better than it was  last year. We can float more timber, if we
    do not allow mismanagement. Things are much better  with regard to
    oil, to say nothing of the fact that in the near future Grozny
    will most  likely be in our hands; and although this is still
    problematical, the Emba fields are ours,
 and there we have ten to fourteen million poods of oil already. And if the water transport  system helps us to deliver large quantities of building material to Saratov quickly and in  good time, we shall cope with the railway to the Emba fields. And you know what it means to  have oil for the water transport system. We shall not be able to get the railways going in a  short time. God grant—not God, of course, but our ability to overcome the old prejudices  of the workers—that we improve the railways a little in four or five months. And so, the  water transport system must carry out a task of heroic proportions during this year’s
 navigation period.
Dash, ardour and enthusiasm alone can do nothing; organisation,
    endurance and honest  effort are what will help, when the loudest
    voice is not that of the man who fears the  bourgeois expert and
    treats us to general talk but that of the man who is able to
    establish  and to exercise firm authority—let it be even
    individual authority provided it is used in  the interests of the
    proletariat—and who realises that everything depends on the
    water  transport system.
To make progress we must erect a ladder; in order to get the
    sceptical to climb that  ladder, we must put things in order, we
    must select and promote people who are able to put  the water
    transport system in order. There are some who say in reference to
    military  discipline: “The idea! What do we want it
    for?” Such people do not realise the situation in  Russia
    and do not realise that although the fight on the bloody front is
    coming to an end,  the fight on the bloodless front is only
    beginning, that no less effort, exertion and  sacrifice is
    required here, and that the stakes are no smaller and the
    resistance greater rather than less. Every wealthy peasant, every
    kulak and every member of the old administration who does not want
    to act in the interests of the workers is our enemy. Do not
    cherish any illusions. Victory demands a tremendous struggle and
    iron, military discipline. Whoever does not understand this
    understands nothing about the conditions needed to maintain the
    power of the workers, and his ideas do great harm to this power of
    the workers and peasants.
That is why, comrades, I will conclude my speech by expressing
      the hope and certainty that you will devote the greatest attention
      to the tasks of the forthcoming navigation season, and will make
      it your aim, and will stop at no sacrifice, to create real, iron,
      military discipline and to perform in the sphere of water
      transport miracles as great as those performed during the past two
      years by our Red Army.
      (Applause)



Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech at a Meeting in Memory of
  Y. M. Sverdlov











Speech Delivered at Meeting In Memory of Y. M. Sverdlov  March 16, 1920



V. I. Lenin
Speech at a Meeting In
Memory of Y. M. Sverdlov[1]
March 16, 1920
Brief Newspaper Report


Delivered: 16 March, 1920
First Published: Pravda No. 59, March 17, 1920 Published according to the Pravda text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 433-434
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Referring to the late Comrade Sverdlov's great talent as an organiser, Lenin said that this reminded one of the significance of organisation and of the role of organisers in Soviet development. Describing the extreme importance of organisation, Lenin pointed out that organisation was, in fact, the principal weapon of the working class in the revolutionary struggle. He spoke of the alignment of social forces at various periods since the October Revolution, and declared that the dictatorship of the proletariat would have been impossible had the working people not been united. He drew the conclusion that organisation was the mainspring of all our successes on the war fronts, as well as of the successes gradually being achieved in combating economic disruption. Lenin gave an appreciation from this angle of the work of the late Comrade Sverdlov as an organiser, and went on to say that we had such a vanguard of organisers because they had passed through a severe school of life when they had to work in underground organisations. Such a vanguard of organisers was particularly needed at that moment in Germany, which was passing through a stage of Kornilovism. Lenin said that there were many talented organisers among the working people, even among the non-party workers and peasants, but that we had not yet learned to find them and to place them in suitable posts. He expressed the conviction that increasing numbers of organizers would in future emerge from among the working people, and that they would remember the work of Comrade Sverdlov and firmly follow in his footsteps.

Endnotes
[1] On March 16, 1920, a meeting dedicated to the memory of Y. M. Sverdlov was held in the Bolshoi Theatre. It was attended by members of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.), All-Russia Moscow Committee of the R,.C.P.(B.), representatives of trade unions and factory committees, and delegates of the gubernia congress of Soviets which  was going on at the same time. Comrades who knew Sverdlov closely spoke of their work with him. Lenin spoke on behalf of the  C. C., R.C.P.(B.).

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Two Recorded Speeches











Two Recorded Speeches



V. I. Lenin
Two Recorded Speeches[1]


Recorded: end of March, 1920
First Published: No. 1: Recorded at the end of March 1920; First published in Pravda No. 18, January 21, 1928; Published according to the gramophone record; No. 2: Recorded at the end of March 1920; First published in Pravda No. 18, January 21, 1928; Published according to the gramophone record
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 435-439
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


I
Work For The Railways
Comrades, the great victories of the Red Army have
    delivered us from the onslaught of Koichak and Yudenich and have
    almost put an end to Denikin.
The troops of the landowners and capitalists who wanted, with
    the aid of the capitalists of the whole world, to re-establish
    their rule in Russia have been routed.
The imperialist war and then the war against
    counter-revolution, however, have laid waste to and ruined the
    entire country.
We must bend all efforts to conquer the chaos, to restore
    industry and agriculture, and to give the peasants the goods they
    need in exchange for grain.
Now that we have defeated the landowners and liberated Siberia,
    the Ukraine, and the North Caucasus, we have every opportunity of
    restoring the country's economy.
We have a lot of grain, and we now have coal and oil. We are
    being held up by transport. The railways are out of
    action. Transport must be rehabilitated. Then we can bring grain,
    coal and oil to the factories, then we can deliver salt, then we
    shall begin to restore industry and put an end to the hunger of
    the factory and railway workers.
Let all workers and peasants set about rehabilitating the
    railways, let them set about the work with persistence and
    enthusiasm.
All the work necessary for the restoration of transport must be
    carried out with the greatest zeal, with revolution-ary fervour,
    with unreserved loyalty. 

    

      We have been victorious on the front of
      the bloody war.
We shall be victorious on the bloodless front, on the labour
    front.
All out for work to restore transport!
2
Labour Discipline
Why was it we defeated Yudenirh, Kolehak and Denikin although
    the capitalists of all the world helped them?
Why are we confident that we shall now defeat the economic
    chaos and rehabilitate industry and agriculture?
We overthrew the landowners and capitalists because the men of
    the Red Army, workers and peasants, knew they were fighting for
    their own vital interests.
We won because the best people from the entire working class
    and from the entire peasantry displayed unparalleled heroism in
    the war against the exploiters, performed miracles of valour,
    withstood untold privations, made great sacrifices and got rid of
    scroungers and cowards.
We are now confident that we shall conquer the chaos because
    the best people from the entire working class and from the entire
    peasantry are joining this struggle with the same political
    consciousness, the same firmness and the same heroism.
When millions of working people unite as one and follow the
    best people from their class, victory is assured.
We drove the scroungers out of the army. And now we say,
    “Down with the scroungers, down with those who think of
    their own advantage, of speculation and of shirking work, those
    who are afraid of the sacrifices necessary for victory!”
Long live labour discipline, zeal in work and loyalty to the
    cause of the workers and peasants!
Eternal glory to those who died in the front ranks of the Red
    Army!

    

      Eternal glory to those who are now leading millions of
      working people and who with the greatest zeal march in the front
      ranks of the army of labour!

Endnotes
[1]
    The recording of Lenin's speeches was organised by the Central
    Press Agency. In 1919-21, 16 of his speeches were
    recorded. Gramophone records with his speeches were distributed in
    tens of thousands at agitation centres, peasant meetings, clubs,
    Red Army units and were of tremendous significance for mass
    agitation work. Particularly popular were his speeches “The
    Middle Peasants”, “What Is Soviet Power?” and
    “The Tax in Kind”.


Collected Works Volume 30

Collected Works Table of
      Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Ninth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)











Ninth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.)



V. I. Lenin
 Ninth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) 
March 29- April 5, 1920[1]


Delivered: 16 March, 1920
First Published: Published in the book— Ninth Congress of the Russian Communist Party. Verbatim Report. Moscow, 1920: Published according to the book, verified with the shorthand notes 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 439-490
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


 

Opening Speech March 29  
Report Of The Central Committee March 29
Reply To The Discussion On The Report Of The Central Committee March 30 
Speech On Economic Development March 31 
Speech On The Co-Operatives April 3 
Speech Closing The Congress April 5 
Endnotes


1
 Opening Speech
March 29
 First of all allow me on behalf of the Central
    Committee of the Russian Communist Party to greet the delegates
    who have assembled for the Party Congress.
Comrades, we are opening this present Congress of the Party at
    a highly important moment. The internal development of our
    revolution has led to very big and rapid victories over the enemy
    in the Civil War, and, in view of the international situation,
    these victories, we find, are nothing more nor less than the
    victory of the Soviet revolution in the first country to make this
    revolution—a very weak and backward country—a victory
    over the combined forces of world capitalism and imperialism. And
    after these victories we may now proceed with calm and firm
    assurance to the immediate tasks of peaceful economic development,
    confident that the present Congress, having reviewed the
    experience of over two years of Soviet work, will be able to
    utilise the lesson gained in order to cope with the more difficult
    and complex task of economic development that now confronts
    us. From the international standpoint, our position has never been
    as favourable as it is now; and what fills us with particular joy
    and vigour is the news we are daily receiving from Germany, which
    shows that, however difficult and painful the birth of a socialist
    revolution may be, the proletarian Soviet power in Germany is
    spreading irresistibly. The part played by the German
    Kornilov-type putsch was similar to that of Kornilov revolt in
    Russia. After that a swing towards a workers’ government
    began, not only among the masses of urban workers, but also among
    the rural proletariat of Ger- many. And this swing is of historic
    importance. Not only is it one more absolute confirmation of the
    correctness of the line, but it gives us the assurance that the
    time is not far off when we shall be marching hand in hand with a
    German Soviet government. (Applause.) 
 I hereby open the Congress and request you to nominate a
    presidium. 
    

2
Report Of The Central Committee
March 29
 Comrades, before beginning my report I must say that, like the
    report at the preceding Congress, it is divided into two parts:
    political and organisational. This division first of all leads one
    to think of the way the work of the Central Committee has
    developed in its external aspect, the organisational aspect. Our
    Party has now been through its first year without Y. M. Sverdlov,
    and our loss was bound to tell on the whole organisation of the
    Central Committee. No one has been able to combine organisational
    and political work in one person so successfully as Comrade
    Sverdlov did and we have been obliged to attempt to replace his
    work by the work of a collegium.
During the year under review the current daily work of the
    Central Committee has been conducted by the two collegiums elected
    by the plenary meeting of the Central Committee—the
    Organising Bureau of the Central Committee and the Political
    Bureau of the Central Committee. In order to achieve co-ordination
    and consistency in the decisions of these two bodies, the
    Secretary was a member of both. In practice it has become the main
    and proper function of the Organising Bureau to distribute the
    forces of the Party, and that of the Political Bureau to deal with
    political questions. It goes without saying that this distinction
    is to a certain extent artificial; it is obvious that no policy
    can be carried out in practice without finding expression in
    appointments and transfers. Consequently, every organisational
    question assumes a political significance; and it has become the
    established practice for the request of a single member of the
    Central Committee to be sufficient to have any question, for one
    reason or another, examined as a political question. To have
    attempted to divide the functions of the Central Committee in any
    other way would hardly have been expedient and in practice would
    hardly have achieved its purpose.
This method of conducting business has produced extremely good
    results: no difficulties have arisen between the two bureaus on
    any occasion. The work of these bodies has on the whole proceeded
    harmoniously, and practical implementation has been facilitated by
    the presence of the Secretary who acted, furthermore, solely and
    exclusively in pursuance of the will of the Central Committee. It
    must be emphasised from the very outset, so as to remove all
    misunderstanding, that only the corporate decisions of the Central
    Committee adopted in the Organising Bureau or the Political
    Bureau, or by a plenary meeting of the Central
    Committee—only these decisions were carried out by the
    Secretary of the Central Committee of the Party. The work of the
    Central Committee cannot otherwise proceed properly.
After these brief remarks on the arrangement of work within the
    Central Committee, I shall get on with my job, which is the report
    of the Central Committee. To present a report on the political
    work of the Central Committee is a highly difficult task if
    understood literally. A large part of the work of the Political
    Bureau has this year consisted in making the current decision on
    the various questions of policy that have arisen, questions of
    co-ordinating the activities of all the Soviet and Party
    institutions and all organisations of the working class, of
    co-ordinating and doing their utmost to direct the work of the
    entire Soviet Republic. The Political Bureau adopted decisions on
    all questions of foreign and domestic policy. Naturally, to
    attempt to enumerate these questions, even approximately, would be
    impossible. You will find material for a general summary in the
    printed matter prepared by the Central Committee for this
    Congress. To attempt to repeat this summary in my report would be
    beyond my powers, and I do not think it would be interesting to
    the delegates. All of us who work in a Party or Soviet
    organisation keep daily track of the extraordinary succession of
    political questions, both foreign and domestic. The way these
    questions have been decided, as expressed in the decrees of the
    Soviet government, and in the activities of the Party
    organisations, at every turn, is in itself an evaluation of the
    Central Committee of the Party. It must be said that the questions
    were so numerous that they frequently had to be decided under
    conditions of extreme haste, and it was only because the members
    of the body concerned were so well acquainted with each other,
    knew every shade of opinion and had confidence in each other, that
    this work could be done at all. Otherwise it would have been
    beyond the powers of a body even three times the size. When
    deciding complex questions it frequently happened that meetings
    had to be replaced by telephone conversations. This was done in
    the full assurance that obviously complicated and disputed
    questions would not be overlooked. Now, when I am called upon to
    make a general report, instead of giving a chronological review
    and a grouping of subjects, I shall take the liberty of dwelling
    on the main and most essential points, such, moreover, as link up
    the experience of yesterday, or, more correctly, of the past year,
    with the tasks that now confront us.
The time is not yet ripe for a history of Soviet
    government. And even if it were, I must say for myself—and I
    think for the Central Committee as well—that we have no
    intention of becoming historians. What interests us is the present
    and the future. We take the past year under review as material, as
    a lesson, as a stepping-stone, from which we must proceed
    further. Regarded from this point of view, the work of the Central
    Committee falls into two big categories—work connected with
    war problems and those determining the international position of
    the Republic, and work of internal, peace-time economic
    development, which only began to come to the fore at the end of
    the last year perhaps, or the beginning of this year, when it
    became quite clear that we had won a decisive victory on the
    decisive fronts of the Civil War. Last spring our military
    situation was an extremely difficult one; as you remember, we were
    still to experience quite a number of defeats, of new, huge and
    unexpected offensives on the part of the counter-revolution and
    the Entente, none of which could have been anticipated by us. It
    was therefore only natural that the greater part of this period
    was devoted to the military problem, the problem of the Civil War,
    which seemed unsolvable to all the faint-hearted, not to speak of
    the parties of the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries and
    other petty-bourgeois democrats, and to all the intermediate
    elements; this induced them to declare quite sincerely that the
    problem could not be solved, that Russia was backward and
    enfeebled and could not vanquish the capitalist system of the
    entire world, seeing that the revolution in the West had been
    delayed. And we therefore had to maintain our position and to
    declare with absolute firmness and conviction that we would win,
    we had to implement the slogans “Everything for
    victory!” and “Everything for the war!”
To carry out these slogans it was necessary to deliberately and
    openly leave some of the most essential needs unsatisfied, and
    time and again to deny assistance to many, in the conviction that
    all forces had to be concentrated on the war, and that we had to
    win the war which the Entente had forced upon us. It was only
    because of the Party’s vigilance and its strict discipline,
    because the authority of the Party united all government
    departments and institutions, because the slogans issued by the
    Central Committee were adopted by tens, hundreds, thousands and
    finally millions of people as one man, because incredible
    sacrifices were made—it was only because of all this that
    the miracle which occurred was made possible. It was only because
    of all this that we were able to win in spite of the campaigns of
    the imperialists of the Entente and of the whole world having been
    repeated twice, thrice and even four times. And, of course, we not
    only stress this aspect of the matter; we must also bear in mind
    that it teaches us that without discipline and centralisation we
    would never have accomplished this task. The incredible sacrifices
    that we have made in order to save the country from
    counter-revolution and in order to ensure the victory of the
    Russian revolution over Denikin, Yudenich and Kolchak are a
    guarantee of the world social revolution. To achieve this, we had
    to have Party discipline, the strictest centralisation and the
    absolute certainty that the untold sacrifices of tens and hundreds
    of thousands of people would help us to accomplish all these
    tasks, and that it really could be done, could be
    accomplished. And for this purpose it was essential that our Party
    and the class which is exercising the dictatorship, the working
    class, should serve as elements uniting millions upon millions of
    working people in Russia and all over the world.
If we give some thought to what, after all, was the underlying
    reason for this historical miracle, why a weak, exhausted and
    backward country was able to defeat the most powerful countries in
    the world, we shall find that it was centralisation, discipline
    and unparalleled self-sacrifice. On what basis? Millions of
    working people in a country that was anything but educated could
    achieve this organisation, discipline and centralisation only
    because the workers had passed through the school of capitalism
    and had been united by capitalism, because the proletariat in all
    the advanced countries has united—and united the more, the
    more advanced the country; and on the other hand, because
    property, capitalist property, small property under commodity
    production, disunites. Property disunites, whereas we are uniting,
    and increasingly uniting, millions of working people all over the
    world. This is now clear even to the blind, one might say, or at
    least to those who will not see. Our enemies grew more and more
    disunited as time went on. They were disunited by capitalist
    property, by private property under commodity production, whether
    they were small proprietors who profiteered by selling surplus
    grain at exorbitant prices and enriched themselves at the expense
    of the starving workers, or the capitalists of the various
    countries, even though they possessed military might and were
    creating a League of Nations, a “great united league”
    of all the foremost nations of the world. Unity of this kind is a
    sheer fiction, a sheer fraud, a sheer lie. And we have
    seen—and this was a great example—that this notorious
    League of Nations, which attempted to hand out mandates for the
    government of states, to divide up the world—that this
    notorious alliance proved to be a soap-bubble which at once burst,
    because it was an alliance founded on capitalist property. We have
    seen this on a vast historical scale, and it confirms that
    fundamental truth which told us that our cause was just, that the
    victory of the October Revolution was absolutely certain, and that
    the cause we were embarking on was one to which, despite all
    difficulties and obstacles, millions and millions of working
    people in all countries would rally. We knew that we had allies,
    that it was only necessary for the one country to which history
    had presented this honourable and most difficult task to display a
    spirit of self-sacrifice, for these incredible sacrifices to be
    repaid a hundredfold—every month we held out in our country
    would win us millions and millions of allies in all countries of
    the world.
If, after all, we give some thought to the reason we were able
    to win, were bound to win, we shall find that it was only because
    all our enemies—who were formally tied by all sorts of bonds
    to the most powerful governments and capitalists in the
    world—however united they may have been formally, actually
    turned out to be disunited. Their internal bond in fact disunited
    them, pitted them against each other. Capitalist property
    disintegrated them, transformed them from allies into savage
    beasts, so that they failed to see that Soviet Russia was
    increasing the number of her followers among the British soldiers
    who had been landed in Archangel, among the French sailors in
    Sevastopol, among the workers of all countries, of all the
    advanced countries without exception, where the
    social-compromisers took the side of capital. In the final
    analysis this was the fundamental reason, the underlying reason,
    that made our victory certain and which is still the chief,
    insuperable and inexhaustible source of our strength; and it
    permits us to affirm that when we in our country achieve the
    dictatorship of the proletariat in full measure, and the maximum
    unity of its forces, through its vanguard, its advanced party, we
    may expect the world revolution. And this in fact is an expression
    of will, an expression of the proletarian determination to fight;
    it is an expression of the proletarian determination to achieve an
    alliance of millions upon millions of workers of all
    countries.
The bourgeoisie and the pseudo-socialist gentry of the Second
    International have declared this to be mere propagandist talk. But
    it is not, it is historical reality, borne out by the bloody and
    painful experience of the Civil War in Russia. For this Civil War
    was a war against world capital; and world capital disintegrated
    of itself, devoured itself, amidst strife, whereas we, in a
    country where the proletariat was perishing from hunger and
    typhus, emerged more hardened and stronger than ever. In this
    country we won the support of increasing numbers of working
    people. What the compromisers formerly regarded as propagandist
    talk and the bourgeoisie were accustomed to sneer at, has been
    transformed in these years of our revolution, and particularly in
    the year under review, into an absolute and indisputable
    historical fact, which enables us to say with the most positive
    conviction that our having accomplished this is evidence that we
    possess a world-wide basis, immeasurably wider than was the case
    in any previous revolution. We have an international alliance, an
    alliance which has nowhere been registered, which has never been
    given formal embodiment, which from the point of view of
    “constitutional law” means nothing, but which, in the
    disintegrating capitalist world, actually means everything. Every
    month that we gained positions, or merely held out against an
    incredibly powerful enemy, proved to the whole world that we were
    right and brought us millions of new supporters. 

    

      This process has been a difficult one; it has been accompanied
      by tremendous defeats. In this very year under review the
      monstrous White terror in Finland[2] was followed by the
      defeat of the Hungarian revolution, which was stifled by the
      governments of the Entente countries that deceived their
      parliaments and concluded a secret treaty with Rumania.
It was the vilest piece of treachery, this conspiracy of the
    international Entente to crush the Hungarian revolution by means
    of a White terror, not to mention the fact that in order to
    strangle the German revolution they were ready for any
    understanding with the German compromisers,[3] and that
    these people, who had declared Liebknecht to be an honest German,
    pounced on this honest German like mad dogs together with the
    German imperialists. They exceeded all conceivable bounds; but
    every such act of suppression on their part only strengthened and
    consolidated us, while it undermined them.
And it seems to me that we must first and foremost draw a
    lesson from this fundamental experience. Here we must make a
    special point of basing our agitation and propaganda on an
    analysis, an explanation of why we were victorious, why the
    sacrifices made in the Civil War have been repaid a hundredfold,
    and how we must act, on the basis of this experience, in order to
    succeed in another war, a war on a bloodless front, a war which
    has only changed its form, but which is being waged against us by
    those same representatives, lackeys and leaders of the old
    capitalist world, only still more vigorously, still more
    furiously, still more zealously. More than any other, our
    revolution has proved the rule that the strength of a revolution,
    the vigour of its assault, its energy, determination, its victory
    and its triumph intensify the resistance of the bourgeoisie. The
    more victorious we are the more the capitalist exploiters learn to
    unite and the more determined their onslaught. For, as you all
    distinctly remember—it was not so long ago when judged by
    the passage of time, but a long time ago when judged by the march
    of events—at the beginning of the October Revolution
    Bolshevism was regarded as a freak; this view, which was a
    reflection of the feeble development and weakness of the
    proletarian revolution, very soon had to be abandoned in Russia
    and has now been abandoned in Europe as well. Bolshevism has
    become a world-wide phenomenon, the workers’ revolution has
    raised its head. The Soviet system, in creating which in October
    we followed the traditions of 1905, developing our own
    experience—this Soviet system has become a phenomenon of
    world-historic importance.
Two camps are now quite consciously facing each other all over
    the world; this may be said without the slightest exaggeration. It
    should be noted that only this year have they become locked in a
    decisive and final struggle. And now, at the time of this very
    Congress, we are passing through what is perhaps one of the
    greatest, most acute but not yet completed periods of transition
    from war to peace.
You all know what happened to the leaders of the imperialist
    powers of the Entente who loudly announced to the whole world:
    “We shall never stop fighting those usurpers, those bandits,
    those arrogators of power, those enemies of democracy, those
    Bolsheviks”—you know that first they lifted the
    blockade, that their attempt to unite the small states failed,
    because we succeeded in winning over not only the workers of all
    countries, but also the bourgeoisie of the small countries, for
    the imperialists oppress not only the workers of their own
    countries but the bourgeoisie of the small states as well. You
    know that we won over the vacil- lating bourgeoisie in the
    advanced countries. And the present position is that the Entente
    is breaking its former promises and assurances and is violating
    the treaties which, incidentally, it concluded dozens of times
    with various Russian whiteguards. And now, as far as these
    treaties are concerned, the Entente is the loser, for it
    squandered hundreds of millions on them but failed to complete the
    job.
It has now lifted the blockade and has virtually begun peace
    negotiations with the Soviet Republic. But it is not completing
    these negotiations, and therefore the small states have lost faith
    in it and in its might. So we see that the position of the
    Entente, its position in foreign affairs, defies all definition
    from the standpoint of the customary concepts of law. The states
    of the Entente are neither at peace with the Bolsheviks nor at war
    with them; they have recognised us and they have not recognised
    us. And this utter confusion among our opponents, who were so
    convinced that they represented something, proves that they
    represent nothing but a pack of capitalist beasts who have fallen
    out among themselves and are absolutely incapable of doing us any
    harm. 

    

      The position today is that Latvia has officially made peace
      proposals[4] to us. Finland has sent a telegram
      which officially speaks of a demarcation line but actually
      implies a swing to a policy of peace.[5] Lastly, Poland, the
      Poland whose representatives have been, and still are,
      sabre-rattling so vigorously, the Poland that has been, and
      still is, receiving so many trainloads of artillery and promises
      of help in everything, if only she would continue the war with
      Russia—even Poland, the unstable position of whose
      government compels her to consent to any military gamble, has
      invited us to begin negotiations for peace.[6] We
      must be extremely cautious. Our policy demands the most careful
      thought. Here it is hardest of all to find the proper policy,
      for nobody as yet knows on what track the train is standing; the
      enemy himself does not know what he is going to do next. The
      gentlemen who represent French policy and who are most zealous
      in egging Poland on, and the leaders of landowner and bourgeois
      Poland do not know what will happen next; they do not know what
      they want. Today they say, “Gentlemen, let us have a few
      trainloads of guns and a few hundred millions and we are
      prepared to fight the Bolsheviks.” They are hushing up the
      news of the strikes that are spreading in Poland; they are
      tightening up the censorship so as to conceal the truth. But the
      revolutionary movement in Poland is growing. The spread of
      revolution in Germany, in its new phase, in its new stage, now
      that the workers, after the German Kornilov-type putsch, are
      creating Red Armies, plainly shows (as can be seen from the
      recent dispatches from Germany) that the temper of the workers
      is rising more and more. The Polish bourgeoisie and landowners
      are themselves beginning to wonder whether it is not too late,
      whether there will not be a Soviet Republic in Poland before the
      government acts either for war or for peace. They do not know
      what to do. They do not know what the morrow will bring.
But we know that our forces are growing vastly every month, and
    will grow even more in future. The result is that our
    international position is now more stable than ever. But we must
    watch the international crisis with extreme care and be prepared
    for any eventuality. We have received a formal offer of peace from
    Poland. These gentlemen are in desperate straits, so desperate
    that their friends, the German monarchists, people with better
    training and more political experience and knowledge, plunged into
    a venturous gamble, a Kornilov-type putsch. The Polish bourgeoisie
    are throwing out offers of peace because they know that any
    venturous gamble may prove to be a Polish Kornilov-type
    affair. Knowing that our enemy is in desperate straits, that our
    enemy does not know what he wants to do or what he will do
    tomorrow, we must tell ourselves quite definitely that in spite of
    the peace overtures war is possible. It is impossible to foretell
    what their future conduct will be. We have seen these people
    before, we know these Kerenskys, these Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. During the past two years we have seen
    them one day drawn towards Kolchak, the next day almost towards
    the Bolsheviks, and then towards Denikin—and all this
    camouflaged by talk about freedom and democracy. We know these
    gentlemen, and therefore we grasp at the proposal of peace with
    both hands and are prepared to make the maximum concessions, in
    the conviction that the conclusion of peace with the small states
    will further our cause infinitely more than war. For the
    imperialists used war to deceive the working masses, they used it
    to conceal the truth about Soviet Russia. Any peace, therefore,
    will open channels for our influence a hundred times wider, which,
    as it is, has grow n considerably in these past few years. The
    Third, Communist International has achieved unparalleled
    successes. But at the same time we know that war may be forced
    upon us any day. Our enemies do not themselves know as yet what
    they are capable of doing in this respect.
That war preparations are under way, of that there is not the
    slightest doubt. Many of the states bordering on Russia—and
    perhaps many of those not bordering on Russia—are now
    arming. That is why we must manoeuvre so flexibly in our
    international policy and adhere so firmly to the course we have
    taken, that is why we must be prepared for anything. We have waged
    the war for peace with extreme vigour. This war is yielding
    splendid results. We have made a very good showing in this sphere
    of the struggle, at any rate, not inferior to the showing made by
    the Red Army on the front where blood is being shed. But the
    conclusion of peace with us does not depend on the will of the
    small states even if they desire it. They are up to their ears in
    debt to the countries of the Entente, who are wrangling and
    competing desperately among themselves. We must therefore remember
    that peace is of course possible from the point of view of the
    world situation, the historical situation created by the Civil War
    and by the war against the Entente.
But the measures we take for peace must be accompanied by
    intensified preparedness for defence, and in no case must our army
    be disarmed. Our army offers a real guarantee that the imperialist
    powers will not make the slightest attempt or encroachment on us;
    for although they might count on certain ephemeral successes at
    first, not one of them would escape defeat at the hands of Soviet
    Russia. That we must realise, that must be made the basis of our
    agitation and propaganda, that is what we must prepare for, in
    order to solve the problem which, in view of our growing fatigue,
    compels us to combine the one with the other.
I now pass to those important considerations of principle which
    induced us to direct the working masses so resolutely along the
    lines of using the army for the solution of certain basic and
    immediate problems. The old source of discipline, capital, has
    been weakened, the old source of unity has disappeared. We must
    create a different kind of discipline, a different source of
    discipline and unity. Coercion evokes the indignation, the howls,
    the yells and outcries of the bourgeois democrats, who make great
    play of the words “freedom” and
    “equality”, but do not understand that freedom for
    capital is a crime against the working people, that equality
    between the rich and the destitute is a crime against the working
    people. In our fight against falsehood, we introduced labour
    conscription and proceeded to unite the working people, not
    hesitating to use coercion. For no revolution has ever been
    effected without coercion, and the proletariat has a right to
    exercise coercion in order to hold its own at all costs. When
    those gentry, the bourgeois, the compromisers, the German
    Independents, the Austrian Independents, and the French
    Longuetists, argued about the historical factor, they always
    forgot such a factor as the revolutionary determination, firmness
    and steadfastness of the proletariat. And that factor is precisely
    the steadfastness and firmness of the proletariat of our country,
    which declares, and has proved by its deeds, that we are prepared
    to perish to a man rather than yield our territory, rather than
    yield our principle, the principle of discipline and firm policy,
    for the sake of which everything else must be sacrificed. At the
    time when the capitalist countries and the capitalist class are
    disintegrating, at this moment of crisis and despair, this
    political factor is the only decisive one. Talk about minority and
    majority, about democracy and freedom decides nothing, however
    much the heroes of a past historical period may invoke them. It is
    the class-consciousness and firmness of the working class that
    count here. If the working class is prepared to make sacrifices,
    if it shows that it is able to strain every nerve, the problem
    will be solved. Everything must be directed to the solution of
    this problem. The determination of the working class, its
    inflexible adherence to the watchword “Death rather than
    surrender!” is not only a historical factor, it is the
    decisive, the winning factor.
We are now going over from this victory and this conviction to
    problems of peaceful economic development, the solution of which
    is the chief function of our Congress. In this respect we cannot,
    in my opinion, speak of a report of the Political Bureau of the
    Central Committee, or, rather, of a political report of the
    Central Committee. We must say frankly and bluntly that this,
    comrades, is a question which you must decide, which you must
    weigh with all your authority as the supreme Party body. We have
    laid the question before you quite clearly. We have taken up a
    definite stand. It is your duty finally to endorse, correct or
    amend our decision. But in its report the Central Committee must
    say that on this fundamental and urgent question it has adopted an
    absolutely definite stand. Yes, the thing now is to apply to the
    peaceful work of economic development, to the restoration of our
    shattered industry, everything that can weld the proletariat into
    an absolute unity. Here we need the iron discipline, the iron
    system, without which we could not have held on for two months,
    let alone over two years. We must be able to utilise our
    success. On the other hand, it must be realised that this
    transition will demand many sacrifices, of which the country has
    already made so many.
On the principle involved the Central Committee was quite
    clear. Our activities were entirely governed by this policy and
    conducted in this spirit. Take, for example, the question of
    corporate management versus individual management, which you will
    have to settle—a question which may appear to be a
    subsidiary one, and which in itself, if torn from its context,
    cannot of course claim to be a fundamental question of
    principle. This question should be examined only from the point of
    view of our basic knowledge, experience and revolutionary
    practice. For instance, we are told that “corporate
    management is one of the forms in which the masses participate in
    the work of administration”. But we on the Central Committee
    discussed this question and took our decision, which we have to
    report to you—comrades, such theoretical confusion cannot be
    tolerated. Had we permitted a tenth part of this theoretical
    confusion in the fundamental question of our military activities,
    of our Civil War, we would have been beaten, and would have
    deserved to be beaten.
Permit me, comrades, in connection with the report of the
    Central Committee and with this question of whether the new class
    should participate in the work of administration on a corporate or
    an individual basis, to introduce a little bit of theory, to point
    out how a class governs and what class domination actually
    is. After all, we are not novices in these matters, and what
    distinguishes our revolution from former revolutions is that there
    is nothing utopian about it. The new class, having replaced the
    old class, can maintain itself only by a desperate struggle
    against other classes; and it will finally triumph only if it can
    bring about the abolition of classes in general. That is what the
    vast and complex process of the class struggle demands; otherwise
    you will sink into a morass of confusion. What is class
    domination? In what way did the bourgeoisie dominate over the
    feudal lords? The Constitution spoke of freedom and equality. That
    was a lie. As long as there are working men, property-owners are
    in a position to profiteer, and indeed, as property-owners, are
    compelled to profiteer. We declare that there is no equality, that
    the well-fed man is not the equal of the hungry man, that the
    profiteer is not the equal of the working man.
How is class domination expressed today? The domination of the
    proletariat consists in the fact that the landowners and
    capitalists have been deprived of their property. The spirit and
    basic idea of all previous constitutions, even the most republican
    and democratic, amounted to one thing—property. Our
    Constitution has the right, has won itself the right, to a place
    in history by virtue of the fact that the abolition of property is
    not confined to a paper declaration. The victorious proletariat
    has abolished property, has completely annulled it—and
    therein lies its domination as a class. The prime thing is the
    question of property. As soon as the question of property was
    settled practically, the domination of the class was
    assured. When, after that, the Constitution recorded on paper what
    had been actually effected, namely, the abolition of capitalist
    and landed property, and added that under the Constitution the
    working class enjoys more rights than the peasantry, while
    exploiters have no rights whatever—that was a record of the
    fact that we had established the domination of our class, thereby
    binding to ourselves all sections and all small groups of working
    people.
 The petty-bourgeois property-owners are disunited; those who
    have more property are the enemies of those who have less
    property; and the proletarians, by abolishing property, have
    declared open war on them. There are still many unenlightened and
    ignorant people who are wholly in favour of any kind of freedom of
    trade, but who cannot fight when they see the discipline and
    self-sacrifice displayed in securing victory over the exploiters;
    they are not with us, but are powerless to come out against us. It
    is only the domination of a class that determines property
    relations and which class is to be on top. Those who, as we so
    frequently observe, associate the question of the nature of class
    domination with the question of democratic centralism create such
    confusion that all successful work on this basis becomes
    impossible. Clarity in propaganda and agitation is a fundamental
    condition. When our enemies said and admitted that we had
    performed miracles in developing agitation and propaganda, that
    was not to be understood in the superficial sense that we had
    large numbers of agitators and used up large quantities of paper,
    but in the intrinsic sense that the truth contained in that
    propaganda penetrated to the minds of all; there is no escaping
    from that truth.
Whenever classes displaced each other, they changed property
    relations. When the bourgeoisie superseded the feudals, it changed
    property relations; the Constitution of the bourgeoisie says:
    “The man of property is the equal of the beggar.” That
    was bourgeois freedom. This kind of “equality” ensured
    the domination of the capitalist class in the state. But do you
    think that when the bourgeoisie superseded the feudals they
    confused the state with the administration? No, they were no such
    fools. They declared that the work of administration required
    people who knew how to administer, and that they would adapt
    feudal administrators for that purpose. And that is what they
    did. Was it a mistake? No, comrades, the art of administration
    does not descend from heaven, it is not inspired by the Holy
    Ghost. And the fact that a class is the leading class does not
    make it at once capable of administering. We have an example of
    this: while the bourgeoisie were establishing their victory they
    took for the work of administration members of another class, the
    feudal class; there was nowhere else to get them from. We must be
    sober and face the facts. The bourgeoisie had recourse to the old
    class; and we, too, are now confronted with the task of taking the
    knowledge and training of the old class, subordinating it to our
    needs, and using it all for the success of our class. We,
    therefore, say that the victorious class must be mature, and
    maturity is attested not by a document or certificate, but by
    experience and practice.
When the bourgeoisie triumphed, they did not know how to
    administer; and they made sure of their victory by proclaiming a
    new constitution and by recruiting, enlisting administrators from
    their own class and training them, utilising for this purpose
    administrators of the old class. They began to train their own new
    administrators, fitting them for the work with the help of the
    whole machinery of state; they sequestrated the feudal
    institutions and admitted only the wealthy to the schools; and in
    this way, in the course of many years and decades, they trained
    administrators from their own class. Today, in a state which is
    constructed on the pattern and in the image of the dominant class,
    we must act as every state has acted. If we do not want to be
    guilty of sheer utopianism and meaningless phrase-mongering, we
    must say that we must take into account the experience of the
    past; that we must safeguard the Constitution won by the
    revolution, but that for the work of administration, of organising
    the state, we need people who are versed in the art of
    administration, who have state and business experience, and that
    there is nowhere we can turn to for such people except the old
    class.
Opinions on corporate management are all too frequently imbued
    with a spirit of sheer ignorance, a spirit of opposition to the
    specialists. We shall never succeed with such a spirit. In order
    to succeed we must understand the history of the old bourgeois
    world in all its profundity; and in order to build communism we
    must take technology and science and make them available to wider
    circles. And we can take them only from the
    bourgeoisie—there is nowhere else to get them
    from. Prominence must be given to this fundamental question, it
    must be treated as one of the basic problems of economic
    development. We have to administer with the help of people
    belonging to the class we have overthrown; they are imbued with
    the prejudices of their class and we must re-educate them. At the
    same time we must recruit our own administrators from our own
    class. We must use the entire machinery of state to put the
    schools, adult education, and all practical training at the
    service of the proletarians, the factory workers and the labouring
    peasants, under the guidance of the Communists.
That is the only way to get things going. After our two
    years’ experience we cannot argue as though we were only
    just setting about the work of socialist construction. We
    committed follies enough in and around the Smolny period. That is
    nothing to be ashamed of. How were we to know, seeing that we were
    undertaking something absolutely new? We first tried one way, then
    another. We swam with the current, because it was impossible to
    distinguish the right from the wrong; that requires time. Now that
    is all a matter of the recent past, which we have got beyond. That
    past, in which chaos and enthusiasm prevailed, is now over. One
    document from that past is the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. It is a
    historic document—more, it was a period of history. The
    Treaty of Brest-Litovsk was forced upon us because we were
    helpless in every way. What sort of period was it? It was a period
    of impotence, from which we emerged victorious. It was a period in
    which corporate management was universal. You cannot escape that
    historical fact by declaring that corporate management is a school
    of administration. You cannot stay for ever in the preparatory
    class of a school! (Applause.) That will not do. We are
    grown-up now, and we shall be beaten and beaten again in every
    field if we behave like schoolboys. We must push forward. We must
    push higher with energy and unanimity of will. Tremendous
    difficulties face the trade unions. We must get them to regard
    this task in the spirit of the fight against the survivals of the
    celebrated democracy. All these outcries against appointees, all
    this old and dangerous rubbish which finds its way into various
    resolutions and conversations must be swept away. Otherwise we
    cannot succeed. If we have failed to master this lesson in these
    two years, we are lagging, and those who lag, get beaten.
The task is an extremely difficult one. Our trade unions have
    been of tremendous assistance in building the proletarian
    state. They were a link between the Party and the unenlightened
    millions. Let us not close our eyes to the fact that the trade
    unions bore the brunt of the struggle against all our troubles
    when the state needed help in food work. Was this not a tremendous
    task? The recent issue of the Bulletin of the Central
    Statistical Board contains summaries by statisticians who
    certainly cannot be suspected of Bolshevism. Two interesting
    figures are given: in 1918 and 1919 the workers in the consuming
    gubernias received seven poods a year, while the
    peasants in the producing gubernias consumed seventeen
    poods a year. Before the war they used to consume sixteen
    poods a year. There you have two figures illustrating the
    relation of classes in the struggle for food. The proletariat
    continued to make sacrifices. People shout about coercion! But the
    proletariat justified and legitimatised coercion; it justified it
    by making the greatest sacrifices. The majority of the population,
    the peasants of the producing gubernias of our starving
    and impoverished Russia, for the first time had more food than
    throughout the centuries of tsarist and capitalist Russia. And we
    say that the masses will go on starving until the Red Army is
    victorious. The vanguard of the working class had to make this
    sacrifice. This struggle is a school; but when we leave this
    school we must go forward. This step must now be taken at all
    costs. Like all trade unions, the old trade unions have a history
    and a past. In the past they were organs of resistance to those
    who oppressed labour, to capitalism. But now that their class has
    become the governing class, and is being called upon to make great
    sacrifices, to starve and to perish, the situation has
    changed.
Not everybody understands this change, not everybody grasps its
    significance. And certain Mensheviks and Socialist Revolutionaries
    who are demanding that corporate management be substituted for
    individual management have helped us in this matter. No, comrades,
    that won’t work. We have got beyond that. We are now faced
    with a very difficult task; having gained victory on the bloody
    front, we must now gain victory on the bloodless front. This war
    is a more difficult one. This front is the most arduous. We say
    this frankly to all class-conscious workers. The war which we have
    withstood at the front must be followed by a bloodless war. The
    fact is that the more we were victorious, the more regions we
    secured like Siberia, the Ukraine and the Kuban. In those regions
    there are rich peasants; there are no proletarians, and what
    proletariat there is, has been corrupted by petty-bourgeois
    habits. We know that everybody who has a piece of land in those
    parts says: “A fig for the government, I’ll get all I
    can out of the starving. A fat lot I care for the
    government.” The peasant profiteer who, when left to the
    tender mercies of Denikin, was swinging towards us will now be
    aided by the Entente. The war has changed its front and its
    forms. It is now taking the form of trade, of food profiteering,
    which it has made international. In Comrade Kamenev’s theses
    published in the Bulletin of the C.C.,
    R.C.P.(B.) the underlying principles are stated
    fully. They want to make food profiteering international. They
    want to turn peaceful economic development into the peaceful
    disintegration of Soviet power. No you don’t, my imperialist
    gentlemen! We are on our guard. We declare: we have fought and
    won, and we shall therefore retain as our basic slogan the one
    which helped us to victory; we shall fully preserve that slogan
    and apply it to the field of labour. That slogan is the firmness
    and unity of will of the proletariat. The old prejudices, the old
    habits that still remain, must be discarded.
I should like in conclusion, to dwell on Comrade Gusev’s
    pamphlet,
  [7] 
      which in my opinion deserves attention for two reasons. It is a
    good pamphlet not only from the formal standpoint, not only
    because it has been written for our Congress. Somehow, up to now
    we have all been accustomed to writing resolutions. They say that
    all literature is good except tedious literature. Resolutions, I
    take it, should he classed as tedious literature. It would be
    better if we followed Comrade Gusev’s example and wrote
    fewer resolutions and more pamphlets, even though they bristled
    with errors as his does. The pamphlet is good in spite of these
    errors, because it centres attention on a fundamental economic
    plan for the restoration of industry and production throughout the
    country, and because it subordinates everything to this
    fundamental economic plan. The Central Committee has introduced
    into the theses distributed today a whole paragraph taken entirely
    from Comrade Gusev’s theses. This fundamental economic plan
    can be worked out in greater detail with the help of experts. We
    must remember that the plan is designed for many years to come. We
    do not promise to deliver the country from hunger all at once. We
    say that the struggle will be much harder than the one on the war
    front. But it is a struggle that interests us more; it brings us
    nearer to our immediate and main tasks. It demands that maximum
    exertion of effort and that unity of will which we have displayed
    before and must display now. If we accomplish this, we shall gain
    no less a victory on the bloodless front than on the front of
    civil war. (Applause.) 
    

3
Reply To The Discussion On The Report Of The Central
      Committee
March 30
Comrades, the part of the political report of the Central
    Committee which evoked chief attack was the one Comrade Sapronov
    called vituperation. Comrade Sapronov lent a very definite
    character and flavour to the position he defended; and in order to
    show you how matters actually stand, I would like to begin by
    reminding you of certain basic dates. Here I have before me
    Bulletin of the C.C., R.C.P.(B.) for March 2 in
    which we printed a letter from the Central Committee to
    R.C.P. organisations on the subject of the organisation of the
    Congress. And in this first letter we said: “Happily, the
    time for purely theoretical discussions, disputes over general
    questions and the adoption of resolutions on principles has
    passed. That stage is over; it was dealt with and settled
    yesterday and the day before yesterday. We must march ahead, and
    we must realise that we are now confronted by a practical
    task, the business task of rapidly overcoming
    economic chaos, and we must do it with all our strength, with
    truly revolutionary energy, and with the same devotion with which
    our finest worker and peasant comrades, the Red Army men, defeated
    Kolchak, Yudenich and Denikin.”
I must confess that I was guilty of optimism in thinking that
    the time of theoretical discussions had passed. We had theorised
    for fifteen years before the revolution, we had been administering
    the state for two years, and it was about time we displayed
    practical, business-like efficiency; and so, on March 2 we
    appealed to comrades with practical experience. In reply,
    Tomsky’s theses were published in Ekonomicheskaya
    Zhizn on March 10, the theses of Comrades Sapronov, Osinsky
    and Maximovsky on March 23, and on March 27 the theses of the
    Moscow Gubernia Committee appeared—that is, all after our
    appeal to the Party. And in all the theses the question was
    treated wrongly from the theoretical standpoint. The view we
    expressed in the letter was optimistic, mistaken; it had seemed to
    us that this period had already passed, but the theses showed that
    it had not yet passed, and the comrades from the trade unions have
    no right to complain of having been treated unfairly. The question
    now is, which is right—our view, or the position advocated
    after our appeal of March 2 by all these theses? All of them
    contain a lot of practical material to which attention must be
    given. If the Central Committee did not give it serious attention,
    it would be an absolutely worthless institution. 
But listen to what Comrade Tomsky says:
 
      “§7. The basic structural principle of the regulation
      and management of industry, the only one that can ensure the
      participation of broad masses of non-party workers through the
      trade unions, is the existing principle of corporate management
      of industry, from the Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council
      down to the factory managements. Only in special cases, and by
      mutual agreement between the Presidiums of the Supreme Economic
      Council and the All-Russia Central Trade Union Council, or the
      Central Committees of the trade unions concerned, should one-man
      management be permitted in certain enterprises, but only on the
      obligatory condition that control be exercised over the
      administrators by the trade unions and their bodies.
 “§8. To ensure a single plan of
    economic development and co-ordination of the activities of the
    trade unions and the economic bodies, the participation of the
    trade unions in the management and regulation of industry should
    be based on the following principles: (a) general questions of
    economic policy shall be discussed by the Supreme Economic Council
    and its organs with the participation of the trade unions; (b) the
    directing economic collegiums shall be formed by the Supreme
    Economic Council and its organs in conjunction with the relevant
    trade union bodies; (c) the collegiums of economic bodies, while
    discussing general questions of the economic policy of any branch
    of production in conjunction with the trade unions and furnishing
    them with periodical reports on their activities, shall be
    regarded as organs of the Supreme Economic Council only, and shall
    be obliged to carry out the decisions only of that body, (d) all
    collegiums of economic bodies shall unreservedly carry out the
    decisions of the higher organs of the Supreme Economic Council,
    individually and corporately, and be accountable for their
    fulfilment only to the Supreme Economic Council.”
Here the most elementary theoretical questions are terribly
    muddled. 
It is true that management is the job of the individual
    administrator; but who exactly that administrator will be—an
    expert or a worker—will depend on how many administrators we
    have of the old and the new type. That is elementary theory. Well,
    then, let us talk about that. But if you want to discuss the
    political line of the Central Committee, do not attribute to us
    things we did not suggest and did not say. On March 2 we appealed
    to the comrades to give us practical support, and what did we get
    in reply? From the comrades in the localities we got in reply
    things that are obviously wrong from the theoretical
    standpoint. The theses of Comrades Osinsky, Maximovsky and
    Sapronov that appeared on March 23 contain nothing but theoretical
    blunders. They say that corporate management in one form or
    another is an indispensable basis of democracy. I assert that you
    will find nothing like it in the fifteen years’
    pre-revolutionary history of the Social-Democratic
    movement. Democratic centralism means only that representatives
    from the localities get together and elect a responsible body,
    which is to do the administering. But how? That depends on how
    many suitable people, how many good administrators are
    available. Democratic centralism means that the congress
    supervises the work of the Central Committee, and can remove it
    and appoint another in its place. But if we were to go into the
    theoretical errors contained in these theses, we should never be
    done. I personally will not deal with this any more, and will only
    say that the Central Committee adopted the only line that could be
    adopted on this question. I know very well that Comrade Osinsky,
    and the others do not share the views of Makhno and Makhaisky, but
    Makhno’s followers are bound to seize upon their
    arguments. They are connected with them. Take the theses of the
    Moscow Gubernia Committee of the Party that we have been given. It
    says there that in a developed socialist society, where there will
    be no social division of labour or fixed professions, the
    periodical replacement of people performing administrative
    functions in rotation will be possible only on the basis of a
    broad corporate principle, and so on and so forth. This is a sheer
    muddle! 
 We appealed to the experienced people in the localities to
    help us with their practical advice. Instead, we are told that the
    Central Committee ignores the localities. What does it ignore?
    Dissertations on socialist society? There is not a trace of
    anything practical or business-like here. Of course, we have some
    splendid workers, who are borrowing a lot from the intelligentsia;
    but sometimes they borrow the worst, not the best. Then something
    has to be done about it. But if in reply to an appeal of the
    Central Committee for practical advice you bring up questions of
    principle, we have to talk about those questions. We have to say
    that errors of principle must be combated. And the theses
    published since March 2 contain preposterous errors of
    principle.
That is what I affirm. Well, let us talk about that and argue
    it out. Don’t try to evade it! It is no use claiming that
    you are not theoreticians. Pardon me, Comrade Sapronov, your
    theses are the theses of a theoretician. You would see if they
    were put into practice that you would have to turn back and settle
    questions in an unbusiness-like manner. Anybody who tried to take
    the theses of Comrades Maximovsky, Sapronov and Tomsky as
    practical guidance, would be profoundly mistaken; they are
    fundamentally wrong. I consider that their idea of the attitude of
    the class to the structure of the state is fundamentally wrong and
    would drag us back. Naturally, it is backed by all the elements
    who are lagging behind and have not yet got beyond all this. And
    the authors of these theses are to be blamed not for deliberately
    advocating inefficiency, but for their theoretical mistake on the
    question the Central Committee asked them to discuss; a mistake
    which in a way provides a banner, a justification, for the worst
    elements. And why? From want of thought. Authentic documents prove
    this beyond all doubt.
I now pass to the accusation made by Comrade Yurenev in
    connection with Comrade Shlyapnikov. If the Central Committee had
    removed Comrade Shlyapnikov, as a representative of the
    opposition, just before the Congress, that certainly would have
    been infamous. When we had established that Comrade Shlyapnikov
    was leaving, we said in the Political Bureau that we were not
    giving him any instructions before his departure; and on the eve
    of his departure Comrade Shlyapnikov came to me and said that he
    was not going on the instructions of the Central Committee. And so
    Comrade Yurenev simply heard a rumour and is now spreading
    it. (Yurenev : “Shlyapnikov told me so
    himself. . . .”)
I do not know how he could have told you so himself, seeing
    that he came to me before he left and said that he was not going
    on the instructions of the Central Committee. Yes, of course, if
    the Central Committee had banished the opposition before the
    Congress that would have been an unpardonable thing. But, in
    general, when there is talk about banishing people, I say:
    “Well, then, just try to elect a Central Committee which
    could distribute forces properly without giving any cause for
    complaint.” How can forces be distributed so that everybody
    is satisfied? If forces are not distributed, how can you talk
    about centralism? And if there were distortions of principles, let
    us have instances. If you say that we banished representatives of
    the opposition, give us an instance, and we shall examine it, for
    there may have been mistakes. Perhaps Comrade Yurenev, who
    complained to the Political Bureau of having been wrongfully
    withdrawn from the Western Front—perhaps he was banished?
    The Political Bureau examined the matter and found it correct. And
    whatever Central Committee you elected, it would have to
    distribute its forces.
Further, as regards the division of business between the
    Organising Bureau and the Political Bureau. Comrade Maximovsky is
    more experienced in matters of organisation than I am, and he says
    that Lenin is mixing Organising Bureau and Political Bureau
    questions. Well, let us see. In our opinion, the Organising Bureau
    should distribute forces and the Political Bureau deal with
    policy. If such a division is wrong, how are the functions of
    these two bodies to be divided? Do you want us to write a
    constitution? It is difficult to draw a hard and fast line between
    the Political Bureau and the Organising Bureau, to delimit their
    functions precisely. Any question may become a political one, even
    the appointment of the superintendent of a building. If anyone has
    any other solution to suggest, please let us have it. Comrades
    Sapronov, Maximovsky and Yurenev, let us have your proposals; just
    try to divide, to delimit the Organising Bureau and the Political
    Bureau. As we have it, the protest of a single member of the
    Central Committee is enough for us to treat the question as a
    political one. Yet in all this time there has not been a single
    protest. Independence is not hampered in any way: any member of
    the Central Committee may declare a question to be a political
    one. And anybody who has any practical experience in organisation,
    even if he is not as competent as Comrade Maximovsky, even if he
    has worked in this field only six months, ought to have made a
    different sort of criticism from the one Comrade Maximovsky
    made. Let the critics make definite recommendations. We shall
    accept them, and advise the election of a new Central Committee,
    which will carry out these recommendations. But all we have had is
    abstract criticism and false assertions.
Let us suppose you keep the Organising Bureau away from
    political leadership. What, then, I ask, will political leadership
    amount to? Who does the leading, if not people? And how can you
    lead except by distributing forces? How can you compel a man to
    carry out instructions if he is incompetent? He is given certain
    instructions, his work is checked, and finally he is put on
    another job. What more must we do to bring this home to Comrades
    Maximovsky, Sapronov and Osinsky, who in their theses propose a
    theoretical amendment that was rejected long ago? What they are
    doing in practice is even worse, and they are making it quite
    clear that they have no material for serious criticism.
I heard one practical point in Comrade Sapronov’s speech
    and jumped at it. Comrade Sapronov said: “The Seventh
    Congress of Soviets gave a ruling, and we are violating it; the
    decree on requisitioning flax is an infringement of the decision
    of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee.” I cannot
    remember even a tenth of the decrees we pass. But I made inquiries
    in the Secretariat of the Council of People’s Commissars
    about the regulations governing flax procurements. The decree was
    passed on February 10. And what has happened? There is not a
    comrade, whether on the Political Bureau or on the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee, who is opposed to independent
    initiative. We haveseen them all here on this platform. Comrades
    know that they can speak for themselves. Why did they not appeal
    against this decision? Let us have your complaints! There was no
    such complaint after February 10. After a long fight, we adopted
    this decision, which was proposed by Comrade Rykov and agreed to
    by Comrade Sereda and the People’s Commissariat of
    Food. “You have made a mistake!” we are told. Perhaps
    we have. Correct us. Submit this question to the Political
    Bureau. That will be a formal decision. Let us have the
    minutes. If they show that we have violated a decision of the
    Congress, we ought to be put on trial. Where is the charge? On the
    one hand, they reproach us on account of Shlyapnikov; on the
    other, they say that the flax business was a violation of a
    decision. Be good enough to bring facts to show that we violated
    the decision. But you do not bring any facts. All your words are
    mere words: initiative, appointments, and so on. Why then have
    centralism? Could we have held out for even two months if we had
    made no appointments during this period, during these two years
    when in various places we passed from complete exhaustion and
    disruption to victory again? Just because you are displeased with
    the recall of Comrade Shlyapnikov or Comrade Yurenev, you fling
    these words among the crowd, among the unenlightened
    masses. Comrade Lutovinov says that the question has not been
    settled. It will have to be settled. If two people’s
    commissars differ in their opinion of Ivan Ivanovich, and one says
    that a question of policy is involved, what is to be done? What
    method do you propose? Do you think that it is only in the
    Presidium of the All-Russia Central Executive Committee that
    tedious questions arise? Let me tell you that there is not a
    single institution where tedious questions do not arise, and we
    all have to deal with questions of Maria Ivanovna and Sidor
    Ivanovich. But you cannot say that no politics are involved here,
    for politics fill all minds. Comrade Lutovinov had—I do not
    know how to put it; I fear to offend Comrade Sapronov’s
    delicate ear and I shrink from using a polemical
    expression—but he said that Comrade Krestinsky threatened to
    bring about a split. A meeting of the Bureau was held on the
    subject. We have the minutes of the Bureau, and I would ask all
    the Congress delegates to take these minutes and read them. We
    came to the conclusion that Comrade Krestinsky was hot-headed and
    that you, Comrade Lutovinov and Comrade Tomsky, had raised a very
    malodorous scandal. Perhaps we were wrong—then correct our
    decision; but it is preposterous to say what you said, without
    having read the documents and without mentioning that there was a
    special meeting and that the matter was investigated in the
    presence of Tomsky and Lutovinov.
There are two other points I still have to deal with. First,
    the appointment of Comrades Bukharin and Radek. It is said that we
    sent them to the All-Russia Central Trade Union Council as
    political commissars, and the attempt is being made here to
    represent this as a violation of independence, as
    bureaucracy. Perhaps you know better theoreticians than Radek and
    Bukharin. Then by all means let us have them. Perhaps you know
    people better acquainted with the trade union movement. Let us
    have them. Do you mean to say that the Central Committee has no
    right to reinforce a trade union with people who have the best
    theoretical knowledge of the trade union movement, who are
    acquainted with the experience of the Germans, and who can
    counteract an incorrect line? A Central Committee which did not do
    that could not be a directing body. The more we are surrounded by
    peasants and Kuban Cossacks the more difficulties we have with the
    proletarian dictatorship. Therefore the line must be straightened
    out at all costs and made as hard as steel, and this is the line
    we recommend to the Party Congress.
Comrade Bubnov told us here that he has close connections with
    the Ukraine and thereby betrayed the true character of his
    objections. He said that the Central Committee is responsible for
    the growing strength of the Borotba Party. This is a very
    complex and important issue, and I think in this important issue,
    which demanded manoeuvring, and very complex manoeuvring at that,
    we emerged victorious. When we said in the Central Committee that
    the maximum concessions should be made to the Borotbists, we were
    laughed at and told that we were not following a straight
    line. But you can fight in a straight line when the enemy’s
    line is straight. But when the enemy moves in zigzags, and not in
    a straight line, we have to follow him and catch him at every
    turn. We promised the maximum concessions to the Borotbists, but
    on condition that they pursued a communist policy. In this way we
    showed that we are in no way intolerant. And that these
    concessions were made quite rightly is shown by the fact that all
    the best elements among the Borotbists have now joined our
    Party. We have carried out a re-registration of this party, and
    instead of a revolt of the Borotbists, which seemed inevitable, we
    find that, thanks to the correct policy of the Central Committee,
    which was carried out so splendidly by Comrade Rakovsky, all the
    best elements among the Borotbists have joined our Party under our
    control and with our recognition, while all the rest have
    disappeared from the political scene. This victory was worth a
    couple of good tussles. So anybody who says that the Central
    Committee is guilty of strengthening the Borotbists does not
    understand the political line on the national question.
I shall just touch on the speech of the last comrade, who said
    that everything in the programme about the trade unions should be
    deleted. There you have an example of hastiness. We don’t do
    things so simply. We say that nothing should be deleted, that the
    question should be discussed in pamphlets, articles in the press,
    and so on. The trade unions are heading for the time when they
    will take economic life, namely industry, into their hands. The
    talk about not admitting bourgeois specialists into the trade
    unions is a prejudice. The trade unions are educational bodies,
    and strict demands must be made on them. The Central Committee
    will not tolerate bad educators. Education is a long and difficult
    business. A decree is not enough here; patient and skilful
    handling is required. And that is what we are aiming at and will
    continue to aim at. It is a matter in which we must be cautious
    but firm.

4
Speech On Economic Development
March 31
Comrades, first two brief remarks. Comrade Sapronov continued
    to accuse me of forgetfulness, but the question he raised he left
    unexplained. He continued to assure us that the flax
    requisitioning decree is a violation of the decision of the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee. I maintain that you cannot
    hurl unsupported accusations, very serious accusations, at a Party
    Congress in that way. Of course, if the Council of People’s
    Commissars has violated a decision of the All-Russia Central
    Executive Committee it should be put on trial. But how is it that
    from February 10 to this day no complaint has been received that
    this decree is a violation? All we get is an absolutely
    unsupported accusation of the sort that are handed out easily
    enough, but such methods of fighting are not to be taken
    seriously.
Comrade Milyutin says that there are practically no points of
    difference between us, and that therefore it looks as if Lenin
    opposes squabbling and himself provokes this squabble. But Comrade
    Milyutin is distorting things somewhat, which he ought not to
    do. The first draft of the resolution, compiled by Comrade
    Trotsky, was then edited corporately in the Central Committee. We
    sent this draft to Comrades Milyutin and Rykov. They returned it
    with the statement that they would give battle on it. This is what
    actually happened. After we had developed agitation and obtained
    allies, they organised an all-round opposition at the Congress;
    and it was only when they saw that nothing would come of it that
    they began to say they were almost in agreement. That is so, of
    course; but you must carry it through to the end and admit that
    your agreement means that you failed completely after the
    opposition came forward here and tried to consolidate itself on
    the issue of corporate management. Only after Comrade Milyutin had
    spoken for fifteen minutes, and his time was up, did it occur to
    him that it would be well to put the matter on a practical
    footing. He was quite right there. But I am afraid it is too late:
    although Comrade Rykov has still to close the discussion, the
    opposition cannot be saved. If the advocates of corporate
    management had during the past two months practised what they
    preached, if they had given us even a single example—not by
    saying there is a certain director and an assistant, but by an
    inquiry promoting a detailed investigation of the problem,
    comparing corporate management with individual management as was
    decided by the Congress of Economic Councils and by the Central
    Committee—we would have been much the wiser; at the Congress
    we would then have had something more than not very relevant
    discussions of principle, and the advocates of corporate
    management might have furthered matters. Their position would have
    been a strong one if they could have produced even ten factories
    with similar conditions managed on the corporate principle and
    compared them in a practical manner with the state of affairs in
    factories with similar conditions, but managed on the individual
    principle. We could have allowed any speaker an hour for such a
    report, and he would have furthered matters considerably. We might
    perhaps have established practical gradations in this question of
    corporate management. But the whole point is that none of them,
    neither the Economic Council members nor the trade unionists, who
    should have had practical data at their disposal, gave us
    anything, because they had nothing to give. They have nothing,
    absolutely nothing!
Comrade Rykov objected here that I want to remake the French
    Revolution, that I deny that the bourgeoisie grew up within the
    feudal system. That is not what I said. What I said was that when
    the bourgeoisie replaced the feudal system they took the feudal
    lords and learned from them how to administer; and this in no way
    contradicts the fact that the bourgeoisie grew up within the
    feudal system. And as for my thesis that, after it has seized
    power, the working class begins to put its principles into effect,
    nobody, absolutely nobody, has refuted it. After it has seized
    power, the working class maintains it, preserves it and
    consolidates it as every other class does, namely, by a change of
    property relations and by a new constitution. That is my first and
    fundamental thesis; and it is incontrovertible. My second thesis
    that every new class learns from its predecessor and takes over
    administrators from the old class, is also an absolute truth. And,
    lastly, my third thesis is that the working class must increase
    the number of administrators from its own ranks, establish
    schools, and train executives on a nation-wide scale. These three
    theses are indisputable, and they fundamentally contradict the
    theses of the trade unions.
 At the meeting of the group, when we examined their theses,
    and when Comrade Bukharin and I were defeated,[8] I told
    Comrade Tomsky that article 7 in the theses is the result of
    complete theoretical confusion. It says:
 
      “The basic structural principle of the regulation and
      management of industry, the only one that can ensure the
      participation of broad masses of non-party workers through the
      trade unions, is the existing principle of corporate management
      of industry, from the Presidium of the Supreme Economic Council
      down to the factory managements. Only in special cases, and by
      mutual agreement between the Presidiums of the Supreme Economic
      Council and the All-Russia Central Trade Union Council, or the
      Central Committees of the trade unions concerned should one-man
      management be permitted in certain enterprises but only on the
      obligatory condition that control be exercised over the
      administrators by the trade unions and their bodies.”
This is sheer nonsense, because everything—the role of
    the working class in winning state power, the interrelation of
    methods—everything is muddled! Such things cannot be
    tolerated. Such things drag us back theoretically. The same must
    be said of the democratic centralism of Comrades Sapronov,
    Maximovsky and Osinsky. Comrade Osinsky forgets that when he comes
    forward and claims that I call democratic centralism nonsense. You
    cannot distort things in that way! What has the question of
    appointments, of endorsement by local organisations, got to do
    with it? You can have things endorsed by collegiums and you can
    also appoint collegiums. That has nothing to do with the
    case. They say that democratic centralism consists not only in the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee ruling; but in the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee ruling through the local
    organisations. What has corporate management or individual
    management got to do with it?
Comrade Trotsky recalled his report made in 1918 and, reading
    the speech he then made, pointed out that at that time not only
    did we argue about fundamental questions but a definite decision
    was taken by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee. I dug up
    my old pamphlet The Immediate
    Tasks of the Soviet Government, which I had completely
    forgotten, and find that the question of individual management was
    not only raised but even approved in the theses of the All-Russia
    Central Executive Committee. We work in such a way that we forget
    not only what we ourselves have written but even what has been
    decided by the All-Russia Central Executive Committee, and
    subsequently dig up these decisions. Here are some passages from
    this pamphlet.
“Those who deliberately (although most of
    them probably do not realise it) promote petty-bourgeois laxity
    would like to see in this granting of ‘unlimited’
    (i.e., dictatorial) powers to individuals a departure from the
    collegiate principle, from democracy and from the principles of
    Soviet government. Here and there, among Left
    Socialist-Revolutionaries, a positively hooligan agitation, i.e.,
    agitation appealing to the base instincts and to the small
    proprietor’s urge to ‘grab all he can’, has been
    developed against the dictatorship decree. . . .[9]
“Large-scale machine industry—which
    is precisely the material source, the productive source, the
    foundation of socialism—calls for absolute and strict
    unity of will, which directs the joint labours of
    hundreds, thousands and tens of thousands of people. The
    technical, economic and historical necessity of this is obvious,
    and all those who have thought about socialism have always
    regarded it as one of the conditions of socialism”
    . . . this is the only way in which “strict unity of will
    can be ensured. . . .
“But be that as it may, unquestioning
    subordination to a single will is absolutely necessary for
    the success of processes organised on the pattern of large-scale
    machine industry. On the railways it is twice and three times as
    necessary. . . .
 “And our whole task, the task of the
    Communist Party (Bolsheviks), which is the class-conscious vehicle
    of the strivings of the exploited for emancipation, is to
    appreciate this change, to understand that it is necessary, to
    stand at the head of the exhausted people who are wearily seeking
    a way out and lead them along the true path, along the path of
    labour discipline, along the path of co-ordinating the task of
    arguing at mass meetings about the conditions of work
    with the task of unquestioningly obeying the will of the Soviet
    leader, of the dictator, during the work. . . .
“It required precisely the October victory
    of the working people over the exploiters, it required a whole
    historical period in which the working people themselves could
    first of all discuss the new conditions of life and the new tasks,
    in order to make possible the durable transition to superior forms
    of labour discipline, to the conscious appreciation of the
    necessity for the dictatorship of the proletariat, to
    unquestioning obedience to the orders of individual
    representatives of the Soviet government during the
    work. . . .
“We must learn to combine the ‘public
    meeting’ democracy of the working people—turbulent,
    surging, overflowing its banks like a spring nood with
    iron discipline while at work, with unquestioning
    obedience to the will of a single person, the Soviet leader,
    while at work.”
On April 29, 1918, the All-Russia Central Executive Committee
    adopted a resolution fully endorsing the basic propositions set
    forth in this report and instructed its Presidium to recast them
    as theses representing the principal tasks of the Soviet
    government. We are thus reiterating what was approved two years
    ago in an official resolution of the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee! And we are now being dragged back on a matter that was
    decided long ago, a matter which the All-Russia Central Executive
    Committee endorsed and explained, namely, that Soviet socialist
    democracy and individual management and dictatorship are in no way
    contradictory, and that the will of a class may sometimes be
    carried out by a dictator, who sometimes does more alone and is
    frequently more necessary. At any rate, the attitude towards the
    principles of corporate management and individual management was
    not only explained long ago, but was even endorsed by the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee. In this connection our
    Congress is an illustration of the sad truth that instead of
    advancing from the explanation of questions of principle to
    concrete questions, we are advancing backward. Unless we get away
    from this mistake we shall never solve the economic problem.
I should also like to say a few words about certain remarks of
    Comrade Rykov’s. He asserts that the Council of
    People’s Commissars is putting obstacles in the way of the
    amalgamation of the commissariats running the economy. And when
    Comrade Rykov is told that he wants to swallow up Comrade
    Tsyurupa, he replies, “I don’t care if it is Tsyurupa
    that swallows me up, as long as the economic commissariats are
    amalgamated.” I know where this leads, and I must say that
    the attempt of the Supreme Economic Council to form a sort of
    separate bloc of the economic commissariats, separate from the
    Council of Defence and the Council of People’s Commissars,
    did not pass unnoticed by the Central Committee, and met with
    disfavour. The Council of Defence has now been renamed the Council
    of Labour and Defence. You want to separate yourselves from the
    Commissariat of the Army, which is giving its best forces to the
    war and is an institution without which you cannot even carry out
    labour conscription. And we cannot carry out labour conscription
    without the People’s Commissariat of Internal Affairs
    either. Take the post office; we cannot send a letter without the
    Commissariat of Posts and Telegraphs. Take the People’s
    Commissariat of Health. How will you conduct the economy if
    seventy per cent are down with typhus? What it amounts to is that
    every matter must be co-ordinated and referred to an economic
    commissariat. Is not such a plan absolutely absurd? Comrade Rykov
    had no serious argument. That is why it was opposed and the
    Central Committee did not support it.
Further, Comrade Rykov joked about a bloc with Comrade
    Holtzmann, which Comrade Trotsky seems to be forming. I should
    like to say a few words on this. A bloc is always needed between
    Party groups that are in the right. That should always be regarded
    as an essential condition for a correct policy. If Comrade
    Holtzmann, whom, I regret to say, I know very little, but of whom
    I have heard as a representative of a certain trend among the
    metalworkers, a trend that particularly insists on sensible
    methods—which I stress in my theses, too—if it, is on
    these grounds that he insists on individual management, that, of
    course, can only be extremely useful. A bloc with this trend would
    be an exceedingly good thing. If the representation of the trade
    unions on the Central Committee is to be increased, it would be
    useful to have on it representatives of this trend
    too—though it may be wrong on certain points, it is at least
    original and has a definite shade of opinion of its own—side
    by side with the extremist champions of corporate management who
    are battling in the name of democracy but who are mistaken. Let
    them both be represented on the Central Committee—and you
    will have a bloc. Let the Central Committee be so constituted
    that, with the help of a bloc, a field of operation may be found
    that functions all the year round, and not only during the week a
    Party Congress is held. We have always rejected the principle of
    regional representation, because it leads to a lot of regional
    cliquism. When it is a question of closer fusion with the trade
    unions, of being alive to every shade of opinion in the trade
    unions, of maintaining contacts—it is essential for the
    Central Committee to be constituted in such a way as to have a
    transmission belt to the broad masses of the trade unions (we have
    600,000 Party members and 3,000,000 trade union members) to
    connect the Central Committee simultaneously with the united will
    of the 600,000 Party members and the 3,000,000 trade union
    members. We cannot govern without such a transmission belt. The
    more we won back of Siberia, the Kuban area and the Ukraine, with
    their peasant population, the more difficult the problem became,
    and the more laboriously the machine revolved, because in Siberia
    the proletariat is numerically small, and it is weaker in the
    Ukraine too. But we know that the Donets Basin and Nikolayev
    workers have bluntly refused to defend the semi-demagogic
    corporate principle into which Comrade Sapronov has lapsed. There
    can be no question but that the proletarian element in the Ukraine
    differs from the proletarian element in Petrograd, Moscow and
    Ivanovo Voznesensk—not because it is no good, but for purely
    historical reasons. They did not have occasion to become, so
    steeled by hunger, cold and strife as the proletarians of Moscow
    and Petrograd. We therefore need such a bond with the trade
    unions, such a form of organisation of the Central Committee, as
    would enable it to know every shade of opinion, not only among the
    600,000 Party members, but also among the 3,000,000 trade union
    members, so that it may be able at any moment to lead them all as
    one man! Such an organisation is essential. That is the basic
    factor, the political factor without which the dictatorship of the
    proletariat will not be a dictatorship. If we are to have a bloc,
    let it be a real bloc! We should not be afraid of it, but should
    welcome it and practise it more vigorously and more extensively
    right in the central institutions of the Party.

5
Speech On The Co-Operatives[10]
April 3
It was only last night and today that I have had an opportunity
    of partially acquainting myself with the two resolutions. I think
    that the resolution of the minority of the commission is the more
    correct. Comrade Milyutin attacked it with a great battery of
    terrifying words: he discovered half measures in it, even
    quarter-measures; he accused it of opportunism. But it seems to me
    that the devil is not as black as he is painted. If you get down
    to the root of the matter you will see that Comrade Milyutin, who
    tried to give the matter a basis in principle, showed by his own
    arguments that the resolution he advocated was incorrect and
    unsuitable specifically from the standpoint of practice and of
    Marxism. It is incorrect for the following reasons; Milyutin
    stated that his resolution, the resolution of the majority of the
    commission, advocated fusion with the volost executive committees,
    subordination to the volost executive committees, and that is why
    he sees in his resolution directness and decisiveness as compared
    with the insufficiently revolutionary character of the minority
    resolution. During the long course of our revolutionary campaign
    we have seen that whenever we made proper preparations for our
    revolutionary actions they were crowned with success; but that
    when they were merely imbued with revolutionary fervour they ended
    in failure.
What does the resolution of the minority of the commission say?
    The resolution of the minority says: direct your attention to
    intensifying communist work in the consumers’ societies and
    to securing a majority within them; first make ready the organs to
    which you want to hand them over, then you can hand them
    over. Compare this with the line pursued by Milyutin. He says: the
    co-operatives are no good, therefore hand them over to the volost
    executive committees. But have you a communist basis in the
    co-operatives you want to hand over? The essence of the
    matter—preparation—is ignored; only the ultimate
    slogan is given. If this communist work has been done, and organs
    have been set up to take them over and guide them, the transfer is
    quite natural, and there is no need to proclaim it at a Party
    congress. But have you not been threatening the peasants enough?
    Has not the Supreme Economic Council shaken its fist enough at the
    peasants and the co-operatives in the matter of the flax
    procurement? If you recall the practical experience of our work in
    the localities and in the Council of People’s Commissars,
    you will admit that this is a wrong attitude to take, and that the
    right resolution is the one which declares that the work of
    communist education and the training of executives are necessary,
    for otherwise the transfer will be impossible.
The second question of cardinal importance is that of contacts
    with the consumers’ co-operatives. Here Comrade Milyutin
    says something utterly inconsistent. If the consumers’
    co-operatives are not fulfilling all their assignments—which
    is what we have been saying for two years in a number of decrees
    directed against the kulaks—it must be remembered that
    government measures against the kulaks can also be applied against
    the co-operative societies. And this is being done in full. The
    most important thing at the moment is to increase production and
    the quantity of goods. If the consumers’ co-operatives do
    not get this done, they will be punished for it. But if, owing to
    their connection with the producers’ co-operatives, they
    give even a small increase of products, we must welcome it and
    foster the initiative. If the consumers’ co-operatives, in
    spite of their closer, intimate local connections with production,
    do not show an increase, it will mean that they have not fulfilled
    the direct assignment of the Soviet government. If there are even
    two or three energetic comrades in a district who are prepared to
    combat the kulaks and the bourgeoisie, victory is assured. In what
    way was Comrade Chuchin’s initiative thwarted? He did not
    cite a single instance. But the idea that we must link up the
    producers’ co-operatives with the consumers’
    cooperatives and agree to any concession that may increase the
    amount of products in the near future follows logically from our
    experience of the past two years. It in no way hampers either
    communist functionaries or Soviet officials in their war on the
    kulak co-operative, the bourgeois type of co-operative. Far from
    hampering them, it provides them with a new weapon. If you succeed
    in organising anything at all we shall give you a bonus; but if
    you do not fulfil this assignment we shall punish you, not only
    because you are counter-revolutionary-we have the Cheka for that,
    as was rightly pointed out here-no, we shall punish you for not
    fulfilling the assignment of the state, of the Soviet government
    and the proletariat.
Comrade Milyutin has not produced a single sound argument
    against amalgamating the consumers’ co-operativesall ho said
    was that this seemed to him to be opportunism or a
    half-measure. This is strange coming from Comrade Milyutin, who,
    with Comrade Rykov, was prepared to make big strides, hut
    discovered that lie cannot even make a tenth of one stride. From
    this aspect, connections with the consumers’ cooperatives
    will ho an advantage; they will make it possible to tackle
    production immediately. All means are available to prevent
    interference in political matters; and as to obedience in the
    production and economic sphere, that depends entirely on the
    People’s Commissariat of Agriculture and the Supreme
    Economic Council. These means are adequate for you to be able to
    control the co-operatives.
I now come to the third question, the question of
    nationalisation, which Milyu tin advocated in a way that was
    strange to hear. A commission was set up. Comrade K restinsky was
    in a minority on the commission and Comrade Mi. lyutin was the
    victor. But now he says: "On the question of nationalisation I am
    prepared not to argue." Then what was the commission arguing
    about? If your standpoint is the same as Comrade Chuchin’s
    you are wrong in renouncing nationalisation. It has been asked
    here why, if the capitalists have been nationalised, the kulaks
    cannot be nationalised too. It is not surprising that this
    argument evoked hilarity. For however you count the well-to-do
    peasants, those who exploit the labour of others, you will find
    there are no less than half a million, perhaps even something like
    a million. How do you propose to nationalise them? It is
    fantastic. We have not the means for that as yet.
Comrade Chuchin is quite right when he says that there are a
    lot of counter-revolutionaries in the co-operatives. But that is a
    horse of another colour. What was said about the Cheka was quite
    in place here. If you are too shortsighted to expose individual
    leaders of the co-operatives, then just install one Communist to
    detect the counter-revolution; if he is a good Communist—and
    a good Communist has the qualities of a good member of the
    Cheka—he should, when assigned to a consumers’
    society, bag at least two counter-revolutionary co-operators.
That is why Comrade Chuchin is wrong when he advocates
    immediate nationalisation. It would be a good thing, but it is
    impossible, for we are dealing with a class which is least
    susceptible to our influence and which certainly cannot be
    nationalised. We have not even nationalised all the industrial
    enterprises. By the time an order of the chief administrations and
    central boards reaches the localities it becomes absolutely
    ineffective; it is completely lost in a sea of documents, because
    of lack of roads and telegraph, etc. It is therefore impossible to
    speak of the nationalisation of the co-operatives as yet. Comrade
    Milyutin is wrong in principle too. He feels that his position is
    weak and thinks that he can simply withdraw this point. But in
    that case, Comrade Milyutin, you are undermining your own
    resolution, you are issuing a certificate to the effect that the
    resalution of the minority is right; for the spirit of your
    resolution—to subordinate them to the volost executive
    committees (that is exactly what is said ill the first
    clause—"take measures")is a Cheka spirit, wrongly introduced
    into an economic issue. The other resolution says that the first
    thing to do is to increase the number of Communists, to intensify
    communist propaganda and agitation-that a basis must be
    created. There is nothing grandiloquent here, no immediate
    promises of a land flowing with milk and honey. But if there are
    Communists in the localities, they will know what has to be done,
    and there will be no need for Comrade Chillchin to explain where
    counter-revolutionaries should be taken to. Secondly, an organ
    must be created. Create an
      organ and test it in action, check whether production is
    increasing-that is what the resolution of the minority says. First
    of all create a basis, and then-then we shall see. What has to be
    done will follow from this of itself. We have enough decrees
    saying that counter-revolutionaries should he handed over to the
    Choke, and if there is no Cheka, to the Revolutionary
    Committee. We need less of this fist-shaking. We must adopt the
    resolution of the minority, which lays down a basic line of
    policy.

6
Speech Closing The Congress
April 5
Comrades, in making a brief summary of the work of our Congress
    we must, in my opinion, first of all dwell upon the tasks of our
    Party. The Congress has adopted a detailed resolution on the
    question of organisation, and as might have been expected, a very
    important place in that resolution is occupied by the question of
    the education, the training, the organisational deployment of the
    members of our Party. The Credentials Committee has reported that
    over 600,000 members of our Party are represented at this
    Congress. We are all fully aware of the tremendous difficulties
    the Party has had to cope with in these strenuous times, when
    measures had to be taken to prevent the worst elements, the offal
    of the old capitalist system, from seeping into the government
    party, from fastening themselves on to it—it is naturally an
    open party, for it is the government party, and as such opens the
    way to power. One of these measures was the institution of Party
    Weeks. Under such conditions, at such moments, when the Party and
    the movement were in exceptionally trying situations, when Denikin
    stood north of Orel, and Yudenich within fifty versts of
    Petrograd, it was only people who were sincerely devoted to the
    cause of the emancipation of the working people who could have
    joined the Party.
Such conditions will not occur again, at least not in the near
    future, and it must be said that the huge membership (as compared
    with previous congresses) our Party has attained gives rise to a
    certain apprehension. And there is one very real danger, which is
    that the rapid growth of our Party has not always been
    commensurate with the extent to which we have educated this mass
    of people for the performance of the tasks of the moment. We must
    always bear in mind that this army of 600,000 must be the vanguard
    of the working class, and that we should scarcely have been able
    to carry out our tasks during these two years if it had not been
    for iron discipline. The basic condition for the maintenance and
    continuance of strict discipline is loyalty; all the old means and
    sources of discipline have ceased to exist, and we base our
    activities solely on a high degree of understanding and political
    consciousness. This has enabled us to achieve a discipline which
    is superior to that of any other state and which rests on a basis
    different from that of the discipline which is being maintained
    with difficulty, if it can be maintained at all, in capitalist
    society. We must therefore remember that our task in the coming
    year, after the brilliant successes achieved in the war, is not so
    much the growth of the Party as work inside the Party, the
    education of the membership of our Party. It is not for nothing
    that our resolutions on organisation devote as much space as
    possible to this question.
We must spare no effort to make this vanguard of the
    proletariat, this army of 600,000 members, capable of coping with
    the tasks that confront it. And it is confronted by tasks of
    gigantic international and internal importance. As to the
    international tasks, our international position has never been as
    good as it is now. News about the life of the workers abroad
    seldom reaches us, yet every time you receive a couple of letters
    or a few issues of European or American working-class socialist
    newspapers you experience real pleasure, because everywhere, in
    all parts of the world, you see among masses formerly entirely
    untouched by propaganda, or steeped in wretched opportunism, in
    purely parliamentary socialism, a tremendous growth of interest in
    the Soviet power, in the new tasks, a growth much greater than we
    imagine; everywhere you see intense revolutionary movement,
    ferment, and revolution has become a current issue.
I had occasion yesterday to glance through an issue of the
    newspaper of the British Socialist Labour Party. The British
    workers, whose leaders were intellectuals and who for decades were
    distinguished by their contempt for theory, are talking in quite
    definite tones; and the paper shows that the British workers are
    now taking an interest in the question of revolution, that there
    is a growing interest in the fight against revisionism,
    opportunism, and parliamentary socialism, the social-treachery we
    have got to know so well. This struggle is becoming an issue of
    the day. We can say quite definitely that our American Comrade R.,
    who has published a voluminous book containing a number of
    articles by Trotsky and myself, thus giving a summary of the
    history of the Russian revolution, was quite right when he said
    that the French Revolution was victorious on a world-wide scale,
    and that, if it was directly crushed, it was only because it was
    surrounded on the European continent by more backward countries,
    in which a movement of emulation, sympathy and support could not
    immediately arise. The Russian revolution, which, owing to the
    yoke of tsarism and a number of other factors (continuity with
    1905, etc.), started before the others, is surrounded by countries
    which are on a higher level of capitalist development and are
    approaching the revolution more slowly, but more surely, durably
    and firmly. We find that with every year, and even with every
    month, the number of supporters and friends of the Soviet Republic
    is increasing tenfold, a hundredfold, a thousandfold in every
    capitalist country; and it must be said that we have more friends
    and allies than we imagine!
The attempt of world imperialism to crush us by military force
    has collapsed completely. The international situation has now
    given us a much longer and more durable respite than the one we
    had at the beginning of the revolution. But we must remember that
    this is nothing more than a respite. We must remember that the
    whole capitalist world is armed to the teeth and is only waiting
    for the moment, choosing the best strategical conditions, and
    studying the means of attack. We must never under any
    circumstances forget that all the economic power and all the
    military power is still on its side. We are still weak on an
    international scale, but we are rapidly growing and gaining
    strength, wresting one weapon after another from the hands of the
    enemy. But the enemy is lurking in wait for the Soviet Republic at
    every step. International capital has definite designs, a
    calculated plan, now that the blockade has been removed, to unite,
    to fuse, to weld together international food speculation,
    international freedom of trade, with our own internal food
    speculation, and on the basis of this speculation to pave the way
    for a new war against us, to prepare a new series of traps and
    pitfalls.
And this brings us to that fundamental task which constituted
    the chief theme, the chief object of attention of our
    Congress. That is the task of development. In this respect the
    Congress has done a lot. A resolution has been unanimously adopted
    on the principal question, the question of economic development
    and transport. And now, by means of Party education, we shall be
    able to get this resolution carried into effect by the three
    million working-class members of the trade unions, acting as one
    man. We shall ensure that this resolution channels all our
    strength, discipline and energy to the restoration of the
    country’s economic life—first of all to the
    restoration of the railways, and then to the improvement of the
    food situation.
We have now quite a number of subjects for propaganda and every
    item of news we get from abroad and every new dozen members of the
    Party provide us with fresh material. Propaganda must be carried
    on systematically, without the dispersion and division of
    forces. We must bear firmly in mind that we achieved successes and
    performed miracles in the military sphere because we always
    concentrated on the main and fundamental thing, and solved
    problems in a way that capitalist society could not solve
    them. The point is that in capitalist society everything that
    particularly interests the citizens—their economic
    conditions, war and peace—is decided secretly, apart from
    society itself. The most important questions—war, peace,
    diplomatic questions—are decided by a small handful of
    capitalists, who deceive not only the masses, but very often
    parliament itself. No parliament in the world has ever said
    anything of weight on the question of war and peace. In capitalist
    society the major questions affecting the economic life of the
    working people—whether they are to live in starvation or in
    comfort—are decided by the capitalist—who is the lord,
    a god! In all capitalist countries, including the democratic
    republics, the attention of the people is diverted at such times
    by the corrupt bourgeois press, which wears the label of freedom
    of speech, and which will invent and circulate anything to fool
    and deceive the masses. In our country, on the other hand, the
    whole apparatus of state power, the whole attention of the
    class-conscious worker have been entirely and exclusively centred
    on the major and cardinal issue, on the chief task. We have made
    gigantic progress in this way in the military sphere, and we must
    now apply our experience to the economic sphere.
We are effecting the transition to socialism, and the most
    urgent question—bread and work—is not a private
    question, not the private affair of an employer, but the affair of
    the whole of society, and any peasant who thinks at all must
    definitely realise and understand that if the government raises
    the question of the railways in its whole press, in every article,
    in every newspaper issue, it is because it is the common affair of
    all. This work to develop the country will lead the peasant out of
    the blindness and ignorance that doomed him to slavery; it will
    lead him to real liberty, to a state of affairs in which the
    working folk will be aware of all the difficulties that confront
    them and will direct all the forces of public organisation, all
    the forces of the state apparatus, all the forces of agitation to
    the simplest and most essential things, rejecting all the tinsel
    and trimmings, all the playing at resolutions and the artful
    promises which form the subject of the newspaper agitation of all
    capitalist countries. All our forces, all our attention must be
    centred on these simple economic tasks, which are clear to every
    peasant, to which the middle, even the well-to-do, peasant, if he
    is at all honest, cannot object, and which we are always
    absolutely right in raising at every meeting. Even the masses of
    the least politically-conscious workers and peasants will confirm
    that the chief thing at the moment is to restore the economy in a
    way that will prevent it from falling again into the hands of the
    exploiters and will not offer the slightest indulgence to those
    who, having a surplus of grain in a starving country, use it to
    enrich themselves and to make the poor starve. You will not find a
    single man, however ignorant and unenlightened, who does not have
    the feeling that this is unjust, to whom the idea has not
    occurred, vague and unclear perhaps, that the arguments of the
    supporters of the Soviet government fully accord with the
    interests of the working people. 


 It is to these simple tasks, which in the big capitalist
    societies are kept in the background and are regarded as the
    private affair of the bosses, that we must direct the attention of
    the whole army of 600,000 Party members, among whom we must not
    tolerate a single one who does not do his duty; and for the sake
    of this we must get the whole mass of the workers to join us and
    to display the greatest self-sacrifice and devotion. It will be
    difficult to organise this, but since, from the point of view of
    the working people it is just, it has tremendous moral weight and
    immense power of conviction. And so, confident that, thanks to the
    work of the Congress, this task can now be accomplished as
    brilliantly as we accomplished the military task (although again
    at the price of a number of defeats and mistakes), we may say that
    the workers of all European and American countries are now looking
    towards us, looking with expectancy to see whether we shall
    accomplish the more difficult task confronting us—for it is
    more difficult than the achievement of military victory. It cannot
    be accomplished by enthusiasm, by self-sacrifice and heroic
    fervour alone. In this work of organisation, in which we Russians
    have been weaker than others in this work of self-discipline, in
    this work of rejecting the incidental and striving for the main
    thing, nothing can be done in a hurry. And in this sphere of
    requisitioning grain, repairing the railways, restoring the
    economy, where progress is made only inch by inch, where the
    ground is being prepared, and where what is being done is perhaps
    little, but is durable—in this work, the eyes of the workers
    of all countries are upon us, they expect new victories of us. I
    am convinced that, guided by the decisions of our Congress, with
    the 600,000 members of the Party working like one man, and
    establishing closer ties with the economic bodies and the trade
    union bodies, we shall accomplish this task as successfully as we
    accomplished the military task, and shall march swiftly and surely
    towards the victory of the World Socialist Soviet Republic!
    (Applause.) 

Endnotes
[1]
    The Ninth Party Congress was held in Moscow from March 29
    to April 5, 1920. The Congress opened in the Bolshoi Theatre with
    an introductory speech by Lenin. The following meetings of the
    Congress took place in one of the buildings of the
    Kremlin. Present at the Congress were 715 delegates, of whom 553
    had the right to vote and 162 were delegates with voice but no
    vote; they represented 611,973 Party members. At the Congress
    there were delegates from the Party organisations of Central
    Russia, the Ukraine, Urals Siberia and of other districts recently
    liberated by the Red Army. Many delegates came to the Congress
    straight from the front.
 The Congress adopted the following agenda: (1)
    Report of the Central Committee; (2) Immediate tasks of economic
    development; (3) Trade union movement; (4) Organisational
    questions; (5) Tasks of the Communist International, (6) Attitude
    to the co-operatives; (7) Transition to the militia system; (8)
    Election to the Central Committee, (9) Other business.
  Lenin guided the work of the Congress. He
    delivered the report on the political work of the Central
    Committee and closed the debate on the report. He also spoke on
    economic development and on co- operation, and made the speech on
    the closing of the Congress. He submitted a proposal on the list
    of candidates for membership to the C.C.
  In its resolution “The Immediate Tasks
    of Economic Construction” the Congress pointed out that
    “the basic condition of economic rehabilitation of the
    country is steady implementation of the single economic plan for
    the coming historical epoch”.
  The Ninth Congress directives were taken as
    the basis for a plan by the State Commission for the
    Electrification of Russia (GOELRO); the final draft of which was
    approved in December 1920 by the All-Russia Congress of
    Soviets. It was the first long-term scientific plan in history for
    the economic development of a vast country; it was calculated to
    create the production and technical basis of socialism.
  Special attention was devoted to the
    organisation of production management. The resolution on the
    question pointed out the necessity of competent, firm and
    energetic one-man management.
  The Congress emphasised the importance of
    utilising the achievements of science, technology and culture in
    the interests of socialist economy. The Congress put forward the
    task of enlisting specialists into the sphere of production and of
    establishing the atmosphere of comradely co-operation between
    workers and specialists. 
 The factional group of Democratic Centralists
    (Sapronov, Osinsky, V. Smirnov and others) opposed the Party line
    on economic development. Using phrases about democratic
    centralism, this group spoke against the use of specialists,
    against centralised state administration, against one-man
    management and the personal responsibility of managers of
    enterprise’s; they insisted on unlimited corporate
    management. That group was supported at the Congress by Rykov,
    Tomsky, Milyutin, and Lomov, who also spoke against the principle
    of one-man management and claimed that corporate management was
    the only principle of management of industry from the Supreme
    Economic Council down to the management of a single factory.
  The Congress resolutely denounced the
    democratic centralism group and rejected their anti-Party
    proposals. 
  Another important question discussed at the
    Congress was that of trade unions in connection with the
    adaptation of their work for economic tasks. The Congress severely
    criticised syndicalist elements (Shlyapnikov, Lozovsky, Tomsky,
    Lutovinov), who advocated the “independence” of trade
    unions and counterposed them to the Communist Party and the Soviet
    power.   The Congress pointed out that the trade unions, as school
    of communism, should organise the proletarian masses, train them
    in the work of management, raise their cultural and political
    level to the standards of communism, and prepare them for the role
    of active builders of communism. 
  At its closed meeting on April 4, the
    Congress elected a new Central Committee of 19 members and 12
    alternate members. A .A. Andreyev, F. E. Dzerzhinsky,
    M. I. Kalinin, V. I. Lenin, Y. E. Rudzutak, F. A. Sergeyev
    (Artyom) were among the newly elected C.C. members.
[2]
    Lenin refers to the savage terror resorted to by the Finnish
    bourgeoisie to suppress the proletarian revolution in 1918. Over
    90,000 people were imprisoned or sent to concentration camps,
    nearly 18,000 were executed and nearly as many died of hunger or
    tortures. The number of victims of White Terror ten times exceeded
    the number of Finnish workers killed in the battles for the
    revolution.
[3] 
      After the November revolution of 1918 in Germany the Right-wing
      leaders of German Social-Democracy exerted every effort to save
      the capitalist system. The Right Social-Democrats and the
      Independents seized the majority of seats in the
      Arbeiterräte which had sprung up during the
      revolution, and at their First All-Germany Congress, held
      December 16-21, 1918, in Berlin, succeeded in carrying through a
      resolution on handing over power to a government representing
      the interests of the bourgeoisie and on convening a Constituent
      Assembly. This actually meant the end of the
      Arbeiterräte. In January 1919
      counter-revolutionary detachments set up by the War Minister
      Noske, Right Social-Democrat, brutally suppressed the
      revolutionary action of the Berlin proletariat. On January 15,
      armed detachments arrested and brutally murdered the leaders of
      the German working class, Karl Liebknecht and Rosa
      Luxemburg. Having crushed the January uprising and destroyed the
      best leaders of the German working class, the German bourgeoisie
      ensured the victory of the bourgeois parties during the
      elections to the Constituent Assembly on January 19, 1919.
[4]  
      The rout of the foreign interventionists and whiteguards in 1919
      and the consolidation of Soviet Russia’s position in the
      world compelled the bourgeois rulers of Latvia to seek a peace
      treaty with the R.S F.S.R. On March 25, 1920, the Ministry for
      Foreign Affairs of Latvia addressed a proposal to the Soviet
      Government to start peace negotiations. The peace conference of
      R.S.F.S.R. and Latvian representatives opened on April 16 in
      Moscow. The peace treaty was signed in Riga on August 11.
[5]
    By the beginning of 1920 Soviet Russia’s position at home
    and abroad had been consolidated, and the ruling circles of
    Finland had to conclude a peace treaty with the R.S.F.S.R. On
    March 25 the Ministry for Foreign Affairs of Finland proposed to
    the Soviet Government to demarcate the frontier that was
    tantamount to starting negotiations on peace. The peace treaty
    between the R.S.F.S.R. and Finland was signed on October 14, 1920
    in the town of Yuryev (now Tartu). It confirmed the independence
    and sovereignty of Finland granted her by the Soviet Government in
    1917. 
[6]The Polish Government’s agreement to
    start negotiations was merely a manoeuvre to cover war
    preparations against the Soviet Republic. In reply to the Soviet
    Government’s many proposals (De-cember 22, 1919, January 28,
    February 2, March 6 1920), the Polish Government gave its consent
    only on March 2, 1920. But the Polish reactionaries sabotaged the
    negotiations and started hostilities on April 25, 1920. In the
    autumn of 1920, however, as a result of the Red Army’s
    offensive the Polish Government had to agree to sign a peace
    treaty. The Treaty on an Armistice and Preliminary Peace Terms was
    signed in Riga on October 12, and the Peace Treaty between the
    R.S.F.S.R. and the Ukrainian S.S.R. on the one side and Poland on
    the other was signed in Riga on March 18, 1921.
[7]
    Lenin refers to S. I. Gusev’s pamphlet “Immediate
    Problems of Economic Development (On C.C., R.C.P.[B.]
    Theses. Materials for the Ninth Party Congress, Saratov,
    1920)”. The paragraph referred to by Lenin was included in
    the draft resolution with slight alterations. 
In Gusev’s pamphlet this point is worded
    as follows: “All enterprises which are not subsidiary to the
    chief economic task of the period should be developed to the
    extent that they do not interfere with the fulfilment of the main
    task. Subsidiary enterprises should be developed as required by
    the main task. In view of this a single economic plan should not
    be the sum total of production programmes worked out by individual
    industries and local economic councils on the basis of orders
    received from central and local organisations, but, on the
    contrary, such a plan should envisage the volume of production for
    each industry.
[8]
    Lenin refers to the meeting of the group of the All-Russia Central
    Council of Trade Unions on March 15, 1920, at which Tomsky’s
    theses on the “Tasks of the Trade Unions” were
    discussed. Lenin sharply criticised the theses, particularly
    article 7 on corporate management as the main method. But the
    All-Russia C.C.T.U. group took up an incorrect stand, and its
    majority voted for Tomsky’s theses.
[9]
    The Decree of the Council of People’s Commissars “On
    Centralisation of Management, Protection of Roads and Raising
    Their Traffic Capacity”, published in Izvestia
    No. 59, March 28, 1918, was demagogically called the “Decree
    on Dictatorship” by the Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries.
[10]
    The Ninth Congress of the R.C.P.(B.) set up a special committee to
    discuss the co-operative movement. At its meeting of April 2,
    1920, the committee examined several variants of the theses on the
    co-operatives submitted for discussion at the Congress. The
    committee took as the basis the theses by V. P. Milyutin, who
    proposed to subordinate co-operatives to the state. After
    Lenin’s speech against Milyutin’s theses, the Congress
    by a majority vote passed a resolution which Lenin had
    supported.


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## On Compromises











On Compromises



V. I. Lenin
On Compromises[1]


Written:  March-April, 1920
First Published: 1936; Published according to the manuscript
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 491-493
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


In a talk with me, Comrade Lansbury laid particular stress on the following argument of the British opportunist leaders in the labour movement.
The Bolsheviks are compromising with the capitalists, agreeing, in the Peace Treaty with Estonia, for instance, to timber concessions; if that is the case, compromises with capitalists concluded by the moderate leaders of the British labour movement are equally legitimate.
Comrade Lansbury considers this argument, very widespread in Britain, of importance to the workers and urgently requiring examination.
I shall try to meet this desire.

May an advocate of proletarian revolution conclude compromises with capitalists or with the capitalist class?
This, apparently, is the question underlying the above argument. But to present it in this general way shows either the extreme political inexperience and low level of political consciousness of the questioner, or his chicanery in using a sophism to veil his justification of brigandage, plunder and every other sort of capitalist violence.
Indeed, it would obviously be silly to give a negative reply to this general question. Of course, an advocate of proletarian revolution may conclude compromises or agreements with capitalists. It all depends on what kind of agreement is concluded and under what circumstances. Here  and here alone can and must one look for the difference between an agreement that is legitimate from the angle of the proletarian revolution and one that is treasonable, treacherous (from the same angle).
To make this clear I shall first recall the argument of the. founders of Marxism and then add some very simple and obvious examples.
It is not. for nothing that Marx and Engels are considered the founders of scientific socialism. They were ruthless enemies of all phrase-mongering. They taught that problems of socialism (including problems of socialist tactics) must be presented scientifically. In the seventies of last century, when Engels analysed the revolutionary manifesto of the French Blanquists, Commune fugitives, he told them in plain terms that their boastful declaration of "no compromise" was an empty phrase.[2] The idea of compromises must not he renounced. The point is through all the compromises which are sometimes necessarily imposed by force of circumstance upon even the most revolutionary party of even the most revolutionary class, to be able to preserve, strengthen, steel and develop the revolutionary tactics and organisation, the revolutionary consciousness, determination and preparedness of the working class and its organised vanguard, the Communist Party.
Anybody acquainted with. the fundamentals of Marx's teachings must inevitably draw this conclusion from the totality of those teachings. But since in Britain, due to a number of historical causes, Marxism has ever since Chartism" (which in many respects was something preparatory to Marxism, the "last word but one" before Marxism) been pushed into the background by the opportunist, semi-bourgeois leaders of the trade unions and co-operatives, I shall try to explain the truth of the view expounded by means of typical examples drawn from among the universally known facts of ordinary, political, and economic life.
I shall begin with an illustration I gave once before in one of my speeches. Let us suppose the car you are travelling in is attacked by armed bandits. Let us suppose that when a pistol is put to your temple you surrender your car, money and revolver to the bandits, who proceed to use this car, etc., to commit other robberies.
Here is undoubtedly a case of compromising with highwaymen, of agreement with them. The agreement., though unsigned and tacitly concluded, is nevertheless quite a definite and precise one: "I give you, Mr. Robber, my car, weapon and money; you rid me of your pleasant company."
The question arises: do you call the man who concluded such an agreement with highwaymen an accomplice in banditry, an accomplice in a robbers' assault upon third persons despoiled by the bandits with the aid of the car, money and weapon received by them from the person who concluded this agreement?
No, you do not.
The matter is absolutely plain and simple, down to the smallest detail.
And it is likewise clear that under other circumstances the tacit surrender to the highwaymen of the car, money and weapon would be considered by every person of common sense to be complicity in banditry.
The conclusion is clear: it is just as silly to renounce the idea of literally all agreements or compromises with robbers as it is to acquit a person of complicity in banditry on the basis of the abstract proposition that, generally speaking, agreements with robbers are sometimes permissible and necessary.
Let us now take a political illustration ....

Endnotes
[1] The document. “On Compromises” is the beginning of an article which was not finished. The deas set forth in this document wereelucidated in greater detail by Lenin in his book “Left-Wing” Communism, an Infantile Disorder.
The talk with the pacifist Lansbury, ono of the leaders of the British Labour Party, took place in the Kremlin, February 21, 1920. 
[2]See Engels, “Programm des blahquistischen Kommuneflflühtlinge”, Marx/Engels, Werke, Band 18, 5. 532. Dietz Verlag, Berlin, 1958. 


 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 






==========

## Telegram to G. K. Orjoniridze











Telegram To G. K. Orjonikidze



V. I. Lenin
Telegram To G. K. Orjonikidze


Wired:  2 April, 1920
First Published: First published In 1942; Published according to a typewritten copy
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, page 494
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


April 2, 1920

    

      Orjonikidze,

    

      Revolutionary Military Council, Caucasian Front

Again urge you to display caution and maximum good
    will towards the Moslems, especially on advancing into
    Daghestan. Do everything to demonstrate, and in the most emphatic
    manner, our sympathy for the Moslems, their autonomy,
    independence, etc. Give me more precise and more frequent
    information on how things stand.
Lenin

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at the First (Inaugural) All-Russia Congress of Mineworkers











Speech Delivered At The First (Inaugural) All-Russia Congress Of  Mineworkers



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered At The First (Inaugural)
All-Russia Congress Of  Mineworkers[1]


Delivered:  April 1, 1920
First Published: Published in 1920 in the pamphlet Resolutions and Decisions of the First (Inaugural) All-Russia Congress of Mineworkers,; Published according to the pamphlet
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 495-501
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Comrades, allow me first of all to convey the
    greetings of the Council of People’s Commissars to the First
    Congress of Mineworkers.
Comrades, this Congress and this whole branch of industry are
    of the highest importance to the Soviet Republic. You all know, of
    course, that without the coal industry there would be no modern
    industry, no factories. Coal is the veritable bread of industry;
    without it industry comes to a standstill; without it the railways
    are in a sorry state and can never be restored; without it the
    large-scale industry of all countries would collapse, fall to
    pieces and revert to primitive barbarity; today the coal shortage
    and crisis are having the most dire effects even in the victor
    countries, even in countries far more advanced than Russia and
    which have suffered far less in the war. It is, therefore, all the
    more necessary to us that you, comrades, who have assembled to
    form a solid, strong, powerful and class-conscious union of
    mineworkers, should clearly realise the tremendous tasks with
    which the entire Soviet Republic, the workers’ and
    peasants’ government confront this Congress, confront the
    mineworkers. After two years of desperate struggle against the
    whiteguards and capitalists, who were supported b the capitalists
    of the whole world, today, after all the victories we have won, we
    are again faced with a stern struggle, as severe as the previous
    one but a more grateful one—the struggle on the bloodless
    front, on the front of labour.
When, on the bloody front of war, the landowners and
    capitalists tried to break the Soviet power in Russia, itseemed as
    if the cause of the Soviet Republic was hopeless, as if Soviet
    Russia, the weakest, most backward and most devastated of all
    countries, would be unable to hold its own against the capitalists
    of the whole world. The richest powers in the world assisted the
    Russian whiteguards in this struggle, assigned hundreds of
    millions of rubles to help them, supplied them with munitions,
    established special camps abroad for the training of
    officers—and to this day these recruiting bureaus still
    exist abroad, where, with the help of the richest capitalists in
    the world, Russian prisoners of war and volunteers are being
    recruited for the war against Soviet Russia. It naturally looked
    as if this was a hopeless undertaking, as if Russia could not hold
    out against the military powers of the world, who are stronger
    than we are. Nevertheless, this miracle proved possible; Soviet
    Russia performed this miracle in two years.
Soviet Russia proved to be the victor in a war against all the
    richest powers in the world. Why? Not because we were stronger
    from the military standpoint, of course—that is not the
    case—but because in the civilised countries there were
    soldiers who could no longer be deceived, although reams of paper
    were devoted to proving to them that the Bolsheviks were German
    agents, usurpers, traitors and terrorists. As a result of this, we
    find that soldiers returned from Odessa either convinced
    Bolsheviks or declaring that they “would not fight the
    workers’ and peasants’ government”. The chief
    reason for our victory was that the workers of the advanced
    West-European countries understood and sympathised with the
    working class of the world so strongly that, despite the lies of
    the bourgeois press, which in publications issued in millions of
    copies showered disgusting calumnies on the
    Bolsheviks—despite all this, the workers were on our side;
    and this fact determined the issue of our war. Everybody realised
    that if hundreds of thousands of soldiers had fought against us as
    they had fought against Germany, we would not have been able to
    hold on. This was obvious to anybody who knows what war
    means. Nevertheless, a miracle happened: we defeated them, they
    were split owing to their wrangling, and their famous League of
    Nations turned out to resemble a league of mad dogs who are
    snatching each other’s bones and cannot come to terms over a
    single question; however, the number of Bolshevik supporters,
    direct and indirect, conscious and not altogether so, is growing
    daily and hourly in every country.
Everybody who sympathises with socialism knows what happened to
    the Second International: for twentyfive years, from 1889 to 1914,
    it directed the socialist movement in all countries, but when the
    imperialist war broke out the socialists of the Second
    International went over to the side of their governments, each
    defending his own. All those who called themselves republicans,
    Socialist-Revolutionaries or Merisheviks, in every country, took
    the side of their own governments, defended their own fatherland
    and helped to conceal the secret treaties—did not publish
    them. The socialists who were considered the leaders of the
    working class went over to the capitalists, went against the
    Russian working class. The German Government is headed by the
    Scheidemann gang, who to this day call themselves Social-Democrats
    but who are the foulest of butchers; in alliance with the
    land-owners and capitalists, they have murdered the leaders of the
    German working class, Rosa Luxemburg arid Karl Liebknecht, and
    slaughtered fifteen thousand German proletarians. In the period
    since its foundation a year ago, the Third (Communist)
    International has gained a complete victory. The Second
    International has fallen to pieces.
So you see what a strong influence the Soviet power in Russia
    has had on the workers of the whole world, despite all the lies
    and calumnies directed against it. The soldiers and workers hold
    that power should be vested in those who work—he who does
    not work, shall not eat, but he who does work is entitled to a
    voice in the state, he can influence matters of state. That is a
    simple truth, and millions of working-class people have understood
    it.
You are now faced with a difficult task, namely, to follow up
    our military victories by a much more difficult victory. This will
    be all the more difficult because here mere heroism is not enough;
    here results can be achieved only by persistent work, and years of
    intense effort will be required.
All over the world the capitalists are mustering labour-power
    and increasing output. But the workers say in reply, first feed
    the workers, first put a stop to the wrangling for which the
    workers pay with their lives, first put an endto the carnage, for
    millions of people perished in the recent bloodbath to decide
    whether the British or some other predators were to rule. As long
    as power is in the hands of the capitalists we are not thinking of
    increasing production but of overthrowing them.
But now that the capitalists have been overthrown, prove that
      you are able to increase productivity without them; refute the lie
      which the capitalists spread about the class-conscious workers,
      when they say that this is not a revolution, not a new order, but
      sheer destruction, mere revenge on the capitalists; they say the
      workers alone can never organise the country and lead it out of
      economic chaos, that they will only create anarchy. That is the
      lie which the capitalists of all countries are spreading in
      milions of ways, and which non-party people, opponents of the
      Bolsheviks, are conveying in thousands of ways to Russian workers
      too, especially to those who are under-educated, have been most
      corrupted by capitalism or are most ignorant.
      But if, as we have seen, we have been able, in the two years
      of Soviet power, to stand up to the whole world, it has been
      largely due to the heroism of the workers.
We are reproached for having established the dictatorship of
    the proletariat, for the iron, relentless and firm rule of the
    workers, which stops at nothing and which says that whoever is not
    with us is against us, and that the slightest resistance to this
    rule will be crushed. But we are proud of it and say that were it
    not for this iron rule of the workers, of this workers’
    vanguard, we should not have been able to hold out for two months,
    let alone two years. What this dictatorship has given us is
    this—every time a difficult situation arose during the war,
    the Party mobilised Communists, and it was they who were the first
    to perish in the front ranks; they perished in thousands on the
    Yudenich and Kolchak fronts. The finest members of the working
    class perished; they sacrificed themselves, realising that
    although they perished they would save future generations, that
    they would save thousands upon thousands of workers and
    peasants. They ruthlessly pilloried and hounded the
    self-seekers—those who during the war were concerned only
    for their own skins—and shot them without mercy. We are
    proud of this dictatorship, of this iron rule of the
    workers, which said: “We have overthrown the capitalists
    and we will lay down our lives to prevent any attempt of theirs to
    restore their rule.” Nobody during these two years went as
    hungry as the workers of Petrograd, Moscow and
    Ivanovo-Voznesensk. It has now been computed that during these two
    years they received not more than seven poods of bread a year,
    whereas the peasants of the grain-producing gubernias consumed no
    less than seventeen poods. The workers have made great sacrifices,
    they have suffered epidemics, and mortality among them has
    increased. But they will prove that the workers did not rise up
    against the capitalists out of vengeance, but with the inflexible
    determination to create a social system in which there will be no
    land-owners and capitalists. It was for the sake of this that
    these sacrifices were made. It was only because of those
    unparalleled sacrifices that were made consciously and voluntarily
    and, were backed up by the discipline of the Red Army, without
    recourse to old methods of discipline—it was only because of
    these tremendous sacrifices that the advanced workers were able to
    maintain their dictatorship and earned the right to the respect of
    the workers of the whole world. Those who are so eager to slander
    the Bolsheviks should not forget that the dictatorship entailed
    the greatest sacrifice and starvation on the part of the workers
    who were exercising it. During these two years the workers of
    Ivanovo-Voznesensk, Petrograd and Moscow suffered more than
    anybody fighting on the Red fronts did.
This is what should be, first and foremost, borne in mind and
    well remembered by the comrades in the coal industry. You are a
    vanguard. We are continuing the war—not the bloody war,
    that, fortunately, is over, nobody will now dare to attack Soviet
    Russia, because they know that they will he defeated since the
    class-conscious workers cannot be led against us; they will blow
    up ports, as they did in Archangel under the British and also in
    Odessa. This has been proved; this much we have gained. But we are
    continuing the war, we are nevertheless continuing it as an
    economic war. It is the speculators we are now fighting, the
    handful of workers who have been corrupted by the old capitalist
    system and who say to themselves, “I must have higher pay,
    and to hell with the rest.” “Give me double pay, give
    me two or three pounds of bread a day,” they say, heedless
    of the fact that they are working for the defence of the workers
    and peasants, for the defeat of the capitalists. They must be
    combated by means of comradely education, by comradely persuasion,
    and there is nobody to do this except the trade unions. It must be
    explained to such workers that if they side with the speculators
    and profiteers, with the rich peasants who say, “the more
    grain I have the more money I shall make” and “each
    for himself, and God for all”, they will be following the
    precepts of the capitalist gentry and of all who preserve the old
    capitalist traditions; they must be told that we regard all who
    act on the old precepts as apostates and traitors whom the working
    class must brand and put to shame. There are mostly capitalist
    countries surrounding us and all over the world they are uniting
    against us, they are joining forces with our speculators; they
    want to overthrow us by force, and think they are stronger than we
    are. We continue to be a besieged fortress towards which the eyes
    of the world’s workers are turned, for they know that their
    freedom will come from here, and in this besieged fortress we must
    act with military ruthlessness, with military discipline and
    self-sacrifice. In the ranks of the workers we cannot tolerate
    self-seekers who refuse to combine the interests of their group
    with the interests of the workers and peasants in general.
We must, with the help of the trade unions, create the
    comradely discipline which existed in the Red Army, which is being
    worked out by the best of our trade unions, and which I am
    convinced you who have now founded the mineworkers’ union
    will also establish.
Your union will be one of the foremost unions, and it will have
    all the state assistance we can possibly give. And I am sure that
    you too will make similar sacrifices to create a firm labour
    discipline, raise the productivity of labour and foster the spirit
    of self-sacrifice among the workers in the coal industry, among
    those who are engaged in what is probably the hardest, dirtiest
    and most exhausting labour, and which technicians are striving to
    abolish altogether.
But in order to save Soviet power now, industry must be fed,
    that is, provided with coal. Unless this is done, it will be
    impossible to restore the economy and the railways, it will be
    impossible to set the factories going and provide goods to be
    exchanged for the peasants’ grain; the peasants cannot, of
    course, be content with bits of coloured paper, they are granting
    us a loan, because it is their duty to grant a loan to the hungry
    workers. But it is our duty to repay this loan, and production,
    therefore, must be increased ten-fold and all the factories
    started.
That, comrades, is the tremendous task which faces all
    class-conscious workers, i.e., those workers who realise that the
    issue is one of preserving and consolidating Soviet power and
    socialism in order to save all future generations from the yoke of
    the landowners and capitalists for all time. Those who refuse to
    understand this must be driven from the ranks of the workers. The
    trade unions, with their training, influence and propaganda, and
    their deep concern for production and discipline, will see to
    those who do not understand it sufficiently. That is the way to
    strengthen the workers’ and peasants’ government. And
    by this slow but most important work you will achieve, you must
    achieve, victories even more important than those gained by our
    Red Army at the front.

Endnotes
[1]
    The  First (Inaugural)   All-Russia Congress of Mineworkers was
    held in Moscow, April 1-6, 1920. It met at the height of the
    struggle for the rehabilitation of the national economy. It was
    attended by 173 people, of whom 153 were delegates with the right
    to vote and 13 with voice but no vote; 85 were Communists. The
    Congress represented about 200,000 workers in the mining
    industry. Delegates from the oil industry could not attend the
    Congress, because the Caucasus was not yet freed from the
    whiteguards.
The delegates endorsed the following agenda:
    report of the organising bureau, tasks of the trade unions, the
    organisational question, tariffs, the state of the mining
    industry, the state of the coal industry, forms of participation
    of the unions in the organisation and management of industry,
    elections. Lenin, who was elected honorary chairman of the
    Congress, made a speech at one of its meetings. The Congress
    addressed greetings to miners in all countries.
    

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Trade Union Congress











Speech Delivered at theThird All-Russia Trade Union Congress



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at the
Third All-Russia  Trade Union Congress
April 7, 1920[1]


Delivered:  April 7, 1920
First Published: Bulletin of the Third All-Russia Trade Union Congress No. 2, April 8, 1920; Published according to Third All-Russia Trade Union Congress, Verbatim Report, 1921, verified with the text of the Bulletin 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 502-515
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Prolonged, stormy
    applause. Ovation.) Comrades, permit me to begin by conveying
    greetings from the Council of People’s Commissars to the
    Third All-Russia Congress. (Applause.) Comrades, Soviet
    power is now passing through a phase of outstanding importance,
    which in many respects confronts us with the highly complex and
    interesting tasks that belong to a period of change. And it is the
    specific nature of the period that provides the trade unions with
    special tasks and special responsibilities in the work of building
    socialism. 
That is why I should now like to dwell not so much on certain
    decisions of the Party Congress which has just ended (on this
    subject you will receive a more detailed report) as on those
    changes in the conditions of Soviet policy which link up all the
    tasks of socialist construction and the activities of the trade
    unions. The chief feature of the present phase is the transition
    from war tasks, which have hitherto absorbed all the attention and
    effort of the Soviet government, to tasks of peaceful economic
    development. And it should be mentioned right away that this is
    not the first time that the Soviet government and the Soviet
    Republic are passing through such a phase. We are reverting to
    this question once more—this is the second time since the
    dictatorship of the proletariat was established that history has
    brought the work of peaceful construction into the
    foreground. 
The first time was at the beginning of 1918, when, after the
    brief but very impetuous offensive of German imperialism, at a
    time when the old capitalist army had completely  collapsed and
    when we had no army of our own and could not create one rapidly,
    the German imperialist predators forced the Peace of Brest-Litovsk
    upon us. It seemed as if war tasks had receded into the
    background, owing to the weakness of the available forces of the
    Soviet government. It seemed as if we could proceed to the work of
    peaceful construction. I had occasion to make a report to the
    All-Russia Central Executive Committee at that time, too. That was
    on April 29, 1918, nearly two years ago. The Central Committee
    adopted a number of theses based on my report and had them
    published. I remind you of this because even at that time the
    theses enumerated a number of questions—on labour discipline
    and so forth—which are included in the agenda of this
    Congress. There is a similarity between that time and the
    present. I assure you that our attention is again being
    concentrated on the disputes and differences which were aired in
    the trade union movement two years ago. It would be a profound
    mistake to assert that the decisions of the Ninth Congress of the
    Russian Communist Party arose out of the present disputes. Such an
    assertion would only tend to distort the true picture of
    events. And, therefore, in order to understand the true nature of
    the question and to set about its solution in a proper way, it
    would be useful to compare and give some thought to conditions as
    they were at the beginning of 1918 and as they are today. 
At that time, during the brief suspension of the war against
    German imperialism, the tasks of peace-time development assumed
    prominence. It looked as if we might enjoy a long period of
    peaceful constructive work. Civil war had not yet begun. Krasnov
    had, with German aid, only just appeared on the Don. There were no
    hostilities in the Urals and in the North. The Soviet Republic
    included a vast territory—all except what it had been
    deprived of by the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk. Conditions were such
    that we might count upon a long period of peaceful work. And,
    under these conditions, the primary question taken up by the
    Communist Party and stressed in a number of resolutions
    (particularly that of April 29, 1918) was the need for widespread
    propaganda of, and greater insistence on, labour discipline. 
Dictatorial powers and one-man management are not contradictory
    to socialist democracy. This must now be borne in mind, if the
    decisions adopted by the recent Party Congress and the general
    tasks that confront us are to be understood. And this is not an
    answer to questions that have only just arisen; it has its deep
    roots in the very conditions of the period in which we live. Let
    anyone who doubts this compare the situation with what it was two
    years ago, and he will understand that the present phase demands
    that all attention be devoted to labour discipline, to the labour
    armies, although two years ago there was no mention of labour
    armies. Only by comparing the issue as it stands today with the
    way it stood then, can we draw a proper conclusion, ignoring minor
    details and singling out what is general and fundamental. The
    whole attention of the Communist Party and the Soviet government
    is centred on peaceful economic development, on problems of the
    dictatorship and of one-man management. Not only the experience we
    have had in the stubborn civil war of the past two years leads us
    to such a solution of these problems. 
When we tackled them for the first time in 1918, there was no
    civil war and no experience to speak of. 
It was, therefore, not only the experience of the Red Army and
    of the victorious Civil War, but something more profound,
    something bound up with the tasks of the dictatorship of the
    working class in general, that has induced us now, as it did two
    years ago, to concentrate all our attention on labour discipline
    as the crucial factor in the economic development of socialism,
    and as the basis of the dictatorship of the proletariat as we
    understand it. Since capitalism was overthrown, every day of our
    revolution has taken us further and further away from the idea
    about which the old internationalists, who were thoroughly
    petty-bourgeois, made so much ado; they believed that the decision
    of a majority in the democratic institutions of bourgeois
    parliamentarism—with private property in land, the means of
    production and capital still retained—could settle the
    issue, when as a matter of fact it can be decided only by a bitter
    class struggle. The significance of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat in actual practice unfolded before us when, after the
    conquest of power, we set about putting it into practice and saw
    that the struggle between classes had not ceased with this, that
    the victory over the capitalists and landowners had not destroyed
    these classes, that it had only smashed them, but had not
    completely destroyed them; suffice it to mention the international
    ties of capital, which are of much longer standing and more solid
    than the ties of the working class are as yet. 
On an international scale, capital is still stronger, both from
    the military and the economic standpoint, than Soviet power and
    the Soviet system. That is the fundamental premise from which we
    must proceed, and we must never forget it. Forms of the struggle
    against capital change—at one time they acquire an open
    international character, at another they are centred in one
    country. The forms change, but the struggle goes on whether it be
    in the military, the economic, or some other sphere of the social
    system; and our revolution confirms the basic law of the class
    struggle The greater the cohesion achieved by the proletariat in
    over throwing the bourgeois classes, the more it learns. The
    revolution develops in the course of the struggle itself. And the
    struggle does not cease with the overthrow of the
    capitalists. Only after the defeat of the capitalists has been
    consolidated in one country does it acquire practical significance
    for the whole world. At the beginning of the October Revolution
    the capitalists regarded our revolution as a freak—any queer
    thing may happen in those distant parts, they thought. 
For the dictatorship of the proletariat to acquire world
    significance, it had to be consolidated in practice in some one
    country. Only then did the capitalists—not only the Russian
    capitalists, who at once rushed to seek the aid of other
    capitalists, but the capitalists of all other
    countries—become convinced that this matter was acquiring
    international significance. Only then did the resistance of the
    capitalists on a world scale attain the force it did. Only then
    did civil war develop in Russia and all the victorious countries
    do their utmost to assist the Russian capitalists and landowners
    in the Civil War. 
The class struggle in Russia had taken full shape by 1900,
    whereas the socialist revolution became victorious in 1917. Not
    only did the resistance of the overthrown class continue to
    develop after its overthrow, but it acquired a new source of
    strength in the relations between the proletariat and the
    peasantry. This is known to anybody who has made any study of
    Marxism, who has based socialism on the international movement of
    the working class, as its only scientific foundation. Everyone
    knows that Marxism gives the theoretical reason for the abolition
    of classes. What does this mean? For the victory of socialism it
    is not enough to overthrow the capitalists; the difference between
    the proletariat and the peasantry must be abolished. The position
    of the peasantry is this—on the one hand, it is a class of
    working people, who for decades and centuries were oppressed by
    the landowners and capitalists, and it will therefore be a long
    time before they can forget that the workers alone liberated them
    from this oppression. This question could be discussed for
    decades; reams of paper have been filled on the subject, and many
    factional groups have taken shape around it. But we now see that
    these differences have paled before reality. As working people,
    the peasants will not forget for many years to come that it was
    the workers alone who liberated them from the landowners. That
    cannot be contested; but they remain property-owners in a
    commodity-producing economy. Every case of a sale of grain on the
    open market, of speculation and profiteering is the restoration of
    a commodity-producing economy, and hence of capitalism. By
    overthrowing the capitalists we liberated the peasantry, a class
    which in old Russia undoubtedly comprised the majority of the
    population. The peasants have remained property-owners in their
    form of production, and they are continuing to develop new
    capitalist relations after the overthrow of the bourgeoisie. These
    are the basic features of our economic position. Hence the
    absurdity of the talk we hear from those who do not understand the
    state of affairs. The talk of equality, liberty and democracy
    under present conditions is nonsense. We are waging a class
    struggle, and our aim is to abolish classes. As long as workers
    and peasants remain, socialism has not been achieved. And, in
    practice, we find an irreconcilable struggle going on
    everywhere. We must think about how and under what conditions the
    proletariat, wielding so powerful an apparatus of coercion as the
    state, can attract the peasant as a working man and overcome his
    resistance as a property-owner, or render it harmless. 
Here the class struggle is continuing, and this throws new
    light on the significance of the dictatorship of the
    proletariat. It appears before us not only, and not even largely,
    as the employment of the coercive means of the state apparatus for
    the suppression of the resistance of the exploiters. It is, of
    course, right to say that we have done a lot by taking this as the
    basis, but we also have another method, in which the proletariat
    plays the part of an organiser, of one who has been through the
    school of labour and the training and discipline of the capitalist
    factory. We must organise economic life on a new and more perfect
    basis, counting on and utilising all the achievements of
    capitalism. Without this we shall never be able to build socialism
    and communism. This is much more difficult than the war tasks: In
    many respects the war tasks are easier to accomplish. They can be
    accomplished by enthusiasm, energy and self-sacrifice. It was
    easier for the peasant to fight his inveterate enemy, the
    landowner, and more within his understanding. He did not have to
    understand the connection between the power of the workers and the
    necessity to put down freedom of trade. It was easier to beat the
    Russian whiteguards, the landowners and capitalists, and their
    henchmen, the Mensheviks. This victory will cost us more, both in
    time and effort. 
You cannot win in economic matters in the same way as in a
    war. Freedom of trade cannot be defeated by enthusiasm and
    self-sacrifice. Here, prolonged work is required; the ground has
    to be won inch by inch; the organising forces of the proletariat
    are required. Victory may be achieved only it the proletariat
    wields its dictatorship as a great, organised and organising
    force, a force of moral influence on all the working people,
    including the non-proletarian working masses. Now that we have
    been successful—and will continue to be equally
    successful—in carrying out the first and simplest task, the
    suppression of the exploiters who directly attempt to sweep away
    Soviet power, a second and more complex task arises, which is to
    organise the forces of the proletariat, to learn to be good
    organisers. Labour must be organised in a new way; new ways of
    stimulating people to work and to observe labour discipline must
    be devised. Even capitalism took decades to accomplish this. All
    too often the worst mistakes are made in this field. Many of our
    opponents show a complete failure to understand this
    question. They said we were utopians when we maintained that power
    could be seized. On the other hand, they expect us to complete the
    organisation of labour in a few months and to show results that
    require several years to produce. That is absurd. Given the
    political conditions, power can be retained by the sheer
    enthusiasm of the workers, perhaps even in the face of the whole
    world. That we have proved. But the creation of new forms of
    social discipline requires decades. Even capitalism required many
    decades to transform the old system of organisation. From the
    theoretical standpoint it is sheer nonsense to expect that we can
    reconstruct the organisation of labour in short order, and to
    instil this idea into the minds of the, workers and peasants. 
And not only is it nonsense, it is extremely harmful, because
    it prevents the workers from clearly understanding the difference
    between the new tasks and the old. The new task is to organise
    industry, and first of all our own forces—and as far as
    organisation is concerned, we are weak, weaker than any of the
    advanced nations. The ability to do this is developed by
    large-scale machine industry, and it has never, in all history,
    had any other material basis than the productive labour of
    millions employing large-scale machine industry in accordance with
    a previously established plan. And here the interests of the
    proletariat and the peasantry do not coincide. A difficult period
    of struggle begins—a struggle against the peasantry. We
    must, however, make it clear to the peasants that they have no
    other course; they must either march with the workers, they must
    help the proletariat, or again succumb to the rule of the
    landowners. There is no middle course; the Mensheviks have a
    middle course, but it is a thoroughly rotten one and is failing
    everywhere, including Germany. The peasant masses cannot get an
    understanding of this by theory or by observing the Second and
    Third Internationals. The peasant masses—comprising tens of
    millions of people—can get an understanding of this only
    from their own experience, from their daily practical life. The
    peasants could understand the victory over Kolchak and
    Denikin. They were able to compare in practice Kolchak and Denikin
    with the dictatorship of the working class which the Mensheviks
    and Socialist-Revolutionaries had tried very hard and are still
    trying to scare the peasants with. But actually the peasants could
    never study theory, and cannot now. The peasant masses see that
    the Mensheviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries are all lying; and
    they see the struggle we are waging against profiteering. It must
    be confessed that the Mensheviks too have made some progress in
    propaganda, having learned something from our political
    departments in the army. The peasants saw a banner on which was
    inscribed, not dictatorship of the proletariat, but Constituent
    Assembly, the power of the people; they did not see the word
    “dictatorship”, they did not even understand the
    word. But experience has taught them that Soviet government is
    better. 
And we are now faced with a second task, that of bringing moral
    influence to bear on the peasantry. Coercive methods towards the
    peasantry will help us little. It is the economic differentiation
    of the peasantry that is involved here. Since the overthrow of the
    capitalists, the struggle has drawn the workers close together;
    they have been cemented by two years of civil war. The peasantry,
    on the other hand, is splitting up more and more. The peasants
    cannot forget the landowners and capitalists; they remember
    them. Nevertheless, the peasantry of today are disunited; the
    interests of one section clash with those of another. The
    peasantry are not united. For one thing, not every peasant has
    food surpluses. There is no such equality. It is nonsense to say
    there is. To divide the peasantry and win over the non-kulak
    elements will require a lot of time. It will involve a long
    struggle, in which we shall employ all our forces, every means at
    our disposal. But force alone cannot ensure victory; moral means
    must be employed too. And from this follow all the questions of
    dictatorial power and individual authority which to many, or to
    some at any rate, it may be safely said, appear to have arisen
    only out of our recent disputes. But that is a mistake. Compare
    the situation with that of 1918. There were no disputes then. 
When, after the peace with Germany, the question arose as to
    what should be the basis of power, we Communists replied—it
    must he made clear that democracy under the Soviet system does not
    contradict dictatorship. This was not to the liking of many
    leaders of the old International. Even Kautsky cursed me.
The peasants are half labourers and half property-owners, and
    in order to win them over to us there must be unity of will, all
    must act in unison on every practical issue. Unity of will must
    not be a catchword, a symbol. We demand it in practice. This is
    how unity of will was expressed during the war—anybody who
    placed his own interests (or the interests of his village or
    group) above the common interests, was branded as a self-seeker
    and was shot; this was justified by the moral consciousness of the
    working class that it must achieve victory. We spoke about these
    shootings openly; we said that we made no secret of coercion,
    because we realised that we could not emerge from the old society
    without resorting to compulsion as far as the backward section of
    the proletariat was concerned. That is the way unity of will was
    expressed, and it was maintained in practice by punishing every
    deserter; in every battle and every campaign it was maintained by
    the Communists marching in the forefront and setting an
    example. The present task is to try to apply this unity of will to
    industry and agriculture. We have a territory stretching thousands
    of versts and huge numbers of factories. You must realise,
    therefore, that we cannot achieve our purpose by force alone; you
    must realise what a colossal task confronts us and what unity of
    will means today. It is not only a slogan. It must be given
    thought, careful thought. It is a slogan that entails prolonged,
    day-to-day effort. Take 1918, when there were no such disputes;
    even then I pointed to the necessity for individual authority, to
    the need to recognise the dictatorial authority of individuals in
    order to carry out the Soviet idea. All talk about equality of
    rights is nonsense. We are not waging the class struggle on the
    basis of equality of rights, nor can we if the proletariat is to
    prevail. Prevail it can, because we have hundreds of thousands of
    disciplined people expressing a single will; and it can prevail
    over the peasantry, which have been dispersed economically, and
    which have no common basis such as welds together the proletariat
    in the factories and the cities. The peasants are economically
    disunited. They are partly property-owners and partly
    labourers. Property drags them towards capitalism: “The more
    profitably I sell, the better.
    If they’re starving, I’ll sell at a higher
    price.” But, as a working man, the peasant knows that he
    suffered oppression at the hands of the landowner, from which he
    was liberated by the worker. Here we have a conflict of two souls,
    resulting from the economic status of the peasantry. These two
    souls must be separated one from the other. And we shall win only
    when we pursue a firm policy. All working people will always be
    working people to us; but as for the peasant proprietors, we have
    to fight them. Not only are they always at each other’s
    throats, but they are ignorant into the bargain. The gentlemen at
    the League of Nations, thank God, are not ignorant; they are
    probably better educated than our Mensheviks and
    Socialist-Revolutionaries. But what do we find? Japan glorifies
    the League of Nations, yet tries to trip up America, and so
    on.
They are all at loggerheads, whereas we are united. And that is
    why workers in all countries are joining us. Since we have been
    able to defeat such enlightened gentlemen as the directors of
    international policy, who have so much experience, so much wealth,
    and a hundred guns and battleships for every one of ours, it is
    absurd to think that we cannot solve the peasant problem. It is
    discipline, loyalty, and united will that will win here. The will
    of tens and hundreds of thousands of people can be expressed by
    one person. This composite will is achieved in the Soviet way. In
    no other country have there been so many congresses of peasants
    and workers as in ours. That is the way we develop an enlightened
    attitude. What the Soviet Constitution gives us no other state has
    been able to give in two hundred years. (Applause.) To
    take only the number of congresses—no other state has
    summoned so many in a century of democracy. In this way we arrive
    at common decisions and mould a common will. 
This is the broad way in which our Soviet Constitution, our
    Soviet form of government are to he understood. Its effect is that
    the decisions of the Soviet government have power of authority
    without parallel in the world, the power of the workers and
    peasants. But that is not enough for us. We are materialists, and
    you cannot satisfy us with power of authority, so please take the
    trouble to put it into effect. And here we find the old bourgeois
    instinct gaining the upper  hand, and we must frankly admit that
    it is stronger than we are. The old petty-bourgeois habit of
    conducting enterprises on individual lines and trying to
    strengthen freedom of trade is stronger than we are. 

      The trade unions arose out of capitalism as a means developing
      the new class. Class is a concept which is evolved in struggle
      and development. There is no wall dividing one class from
      another. The workers and peasants are not separated by a Chinese
      Wall. How did man learn to form associations? First through the
      guild, and then according to different trades. Having become a
      class, the proletariat grew so strong that it took over the
      whole state machine, proclaimed war on the whole world and
      emerged victorious. The guilds and craft unions have now become
      backward institutions. Time was when the proletarians, under
      capitalism amalgamated along the lines of guild and craft. This
      was progressive at that time because the proletariat could not
      have amalgamated in any other way. It is absurd to say that the
      proletariat could have amalgamated to form a class at once. Such
      amalgamation requires decades. Marx, more than anybody, fought
      such sectarian and short-sighted views. The class grows under
      capitalist conditions, and when the suitable moment for
      revolution arrives, it takes state power into its own hands. And
      then all the guilds and craft unions become obsolete, they play
      a backward role, they are retrograde, not because they are run
      by bad people, but because bad people and enemies of communism
      find in them fertile soil for their propaganda. We are
      surrounded by the petty bourgeoisie who are reviving freedom of
      trade and capitalism. Karl Marx fought vigorously against the
      old utopian socialism and advocated the scientific view, which
      shows that the class struggle fosters the growth of the class,
      and the class must be helped to mature. Marx also fought the
      working class leaders who went astray. In the Federal Council,
      in 1872, a vote of censure was passed on Marx for saying that
      the British leaders had been bribed by the bourgeoisie. Of
      course, Marx did not mean this in the sense that certain people
      were traitors. That is nonsense. He spoke about a bloc of a
      certain section of the workers with the bourgeoisie. The
      bourgeoisie supports this section of the workers directly and
      indirectly. That is the way in which it bribes them.
  As far as getting its representatives elected to parliament
    is concerned, the British bourgeoisie has worked miracles, and
    excels all others. Marx and Engels exposed the bourgeoisie over a
    period of forty years, from 1852 to 1892, and the bourgeoisie acts
    in the same way in all countries. The fact that throughout the
    world trade unions have passed from the role of slaves to the role
    of builders marks a turning-point. We have existed for two years
    and what do we see? We see today that the working class has
    suffered most from hunger. In 1918 and 1919 the country’s
    industrial workers received only seven poods of bread each,
    whereas the peasants of the grain-producing gubernias each had
    seventeen poods. Under the tsar the peasant used to get sixteen
    poods of bread at the best, whereas under our rule he gets
    seventeen poods. There is statistical evidence of this. The
    proletariat has been hungry for two years but this hunger has
    shown that the worker is capable of sacrificing not only his craft
    interests, but even his life. The proletariat was able to stand
    famine for two years because it had the moral support of all the
    labouring folk, and it bore these sacrifices for the sake of the
    victory of the workers’ and peasants’ government. It
    is true that the division of workers according to trade continues,
    and that many of these trades were necessary to the capitalist but
    are not necessary to us. And we know that the workers in these
    trades are suffering more severely from hunger than others. And it
    cannot be otherwise. Capitalism has been smashed, but socialism
    has not yet been built; and it will take a long time to
    build. Here we come up against all sorts of misunderstandings,
    which are not fortuitous, but are the result of the difference in
    the historical role of the trade unions as an instrument of craft
    amalgamation under capitalism and the trade unions as an
    instrument of the class amalgamation of the workers after they
    have taken over the state power. The workers are prepared to make
    any sacrifice; they create the discipline which compels people to
    say and feel, perhaps vaguely, that class interests are higher
    than craft interests. Workers who are incapable of making such
    sacrifices we regard as self-seekers, and we drive them out of the
    proletarian fold. 
Such was the fundamental question of labour discipline, of
    one-man management in a general sense, as discussed by the Party
    Congress. That is the gist of the decisions of the Party Congress,
    which you are all familiar with and which will be spoken of in
    greater detail in special reports. Their meaning is that the
    working class has grown and matured; it has taken over the power
    and is fighting the whole bourgeois world; and this struggle is
    becoming more and more difficult. It was easier to fight in the
    war. What is now required is organisation and moral
    education. Numerically the proletariat in Russia is at present not
    very strong. Its ranks have grown thinner during the war and our
    very victories have made it harder for us to govern the
    country. Both the trade unionists and the masses of the workers
    must realise this. When we talk about dictatorship, it is not the
    whim of centralists. The regions we have won have greatly enlarged
    the territory of Soviet Russia. We have won Siberia, the Don and
    the Kuban areas. There the percentage of proletarians is very
    small, smaller than it is here. We must go straight to the worker
    and tell him frankly that conditions of work have grown more
    complicated. We need more discipline, more individual authority
    and more dictatorship. Without that, we cannot even dream of a
    bigger victory. We have an organised army of three million
    members. The 600,000 Communists, the members of the Party, must
    act as its vanguard. 
But it must be realised that we have no other army with which
    to gain a victory than the 600,000 Communists and the three
    million trade union members. The acquisition of territories with a
    peasant-kulak population demands a new exertion of proletarian
    effort. We are faced with a new ratio of proletarian to
    non-proletarian masses, of their social and class
    interests. Nothing can be done here by force alone, organisation
    and moral authority are all that is needed. Hence our absolute
    conviction, which was expressed by our Party Congress and which I
    deem it my duty to uphold. Our chief slogan is—let us have
    more one-man management, let get closer to one-man management, let
    us have more labour discipline, let us pull ourselves together and
    work with military determination, staunchness and loyalty,
    brushing aside all group and craft interests, sacrificing all
    private interests. We cannot succeed otherwise. But if we carry
    out this decision of the Party, carry it out to a man among the
    three million workers, and then among the tens of millions of
    peasants, who will feel the moral authority and strength of the
    people who have sacrificed themselves for the victory of
    socialism, we shall be absolutely and completely
    invincible. (Stormy applause.)

Endnotes
[1]
    The Third All-Russia Trade Union Congress was held in
    Moscow April 6-13, 1920, in the House of Trade Unions. It was
    attended by nearly 1,600 delegates, who represented over 4 million
    trade union members. The Bolsheviks constituted a majority at the
    Congress 1,180 delegates were Bolsheviks and their supporters, 57
    were Mensheviks, and 69 represented other parties.
The Congress based its work on the programme of
    economic development mapped out by the Ninth Party Congress. The
    agenda included the following items: report on the activities of
    the All-Russia Central Council of Trade Unions, report on the
    activities of the People’s Commissariat of Labour, the tasks
    of the trade unions, organisational question, tariff policy, the
    supply of goods for workers, the role of the trade unions in the
    national economy, the international trade union movement, cultural
    and educational activities. 
 At the second plenary meeting of the Congress
    on April 7 Lenin delivered a speech in the name of the Council of
    People’s Commissars. He was greeted with an ovation and the
    audience sang the Internationale. He defined the tasks of
    the Soviet Republic in peace time and drew attention to the work
    of the trade unions in economic development. After Lenin’s
    speech the Congress adopted a decision to issue an appeal to the
    workers and to all working people generally calling upon them to
    combat economic chaos by their joint efforts, to introduce strict
    discipline immediately in all trade union organisations and to
    intensify the work of drawing the masses in the building of
    communism through the medium of the trade unions and under the
    guidance of the Communist Party.
The Third All-Russia Congress of Trade Unions
    fully approved of the decisions of the Ninth Congress of the
    R.C.P.(B.) in the sphere of economic development. The Congress
    condemned the Mensheviks who advocated the independence of the
    trade unions and attempted to oppose them to the Communist
    Party. 

Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## From the Destruction of the Old Social System to the Creation of the New











From The Destruction Of The Old Social System To The Creation Of The New



V. I. Lenin
From the Destruction of the Old Social System
 To the Creation of the New


Delivered: April 11, 1920
First Published: Kommunistichesky Subbotnik, April 11, 1920; Published according to the newspaper text
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 515-h18
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


Our newspaper[1] is devoted to the
    problem of communist labour. 
This is the paramount problem in the building of
    socialism. First of all, we must make it quite clear to ourselves
    that this question could be raised in a practical way only after
    the proletariat had captured political power, only after the
    landowners and capitalists had been expropriated, only after the
    proletariat, having captured state power, had achieved decisive
    victories over the exploiters who put up a desperate resistance
    and organised counter-revolutionary rebellions and civil war. 
It seemed that the time had arrived early in 1918—and it
    had indeed arrived after the February (1918) military campaign of
    German imperialism against Russia. But on that occasion the period
    was so short-lived, a new and more powerful wave of
    counter-revolutionary rebellions and invasions swept over us so
    quickly, that the Soviet government had no opportunity, to devote
    itself at all closely and persistently to problems of peaceful
    development. 
We have now passed through two years of unprecedented and
    incredible difficulties, two years of famine, privation, and
    distress, accompanied by the unprecedented victories of the Red
    Army over the hordes of international capitalist reaction. 
Today there are serious grounds for hoping (if the French
    capitalists do not incite Poland to make war on us) that we shall
    get a more durable and lasting peace. 
 
    

      During these two years we have acquired some experience in
      organisation on the basis of socialism. That is why we can, and
      should, get right down to the problem of communist labour, or
      rather, it would be more correct to say, not communist, but
      socialist labour; for we are dealing not with the higher, but
      the lower, the primary stage of development of the new social
      system that is growing out of capitalism. 
Communist labour in the narrower and stricter sense of the term
    is labour performed gratis for the benefit of society, labour
    performed not as a definite duty, not for the purpose of obtaining
    a right to certain products, not according to previously
    established and legally fixed quotas, but voluntary labour,
    irrespective of quotas; it is labour performed without expectation
    of reward, without reward as a condition, labour performed because
    it has become a habit to work for the common good, and because of
    a conscious realisation (that has become a habit) of the necessity
    of working for the common good—labour as the requirement of
    a healthy organism. 
It must be clear to everybody that we, i.e., our society, our
    social system, are still a very long way from the application of
    this form of labour on a broad, really mass scale. 
But the very fact that this question has been raised, and
    raised both by the whole of the advanced proletariat (the
    Communist Party and the trade unions) and by the state
    authorities, is a step in this direction. 
To achieve big things we must start with little things. 
On the other hand, after the "big things", after the revolution
    which overthrew capitalist ownership and placed the proletariat in
    power, the organisation of economic life on the new basis
    can only start from little things. 
Subbotniks, labour armies, labour conscription—these are
    the practical realisation of socialist and communist labour in
    various forms. 
This practical realisation still suffers from numerous
    defects. Only people who are totally incapable of thinking, if we
    leave aside the champions of capitalism, can laugh scornfully (or
    rage) at them. 
Defects, mistakes, blunders in such a new, difficult and great
    undertaking are inevitable. Those who are afraid of the
    difficulties of building socialism, those who allow themselves to
    be scared by them, those who give way to despair or cowardly
    dismay, are no socialists. 
It will take many years, decades, to create a new labour
    discipline, new forms of social ties between people, and new forms
    and methods of drawing people into labour. 
It is a most gratifying and noble work. 
It is our good fortune that, by overthrowing the bourgeoisie
    and suppressing its resistance, we have been able to win the
    ground on which this work has become possible. 
And we will set about this work with all our
    might. Perseverance, persistence, willingness, determination and
    ability to test things a hundred times, to correct them a hundred
    times, but to achieve the goal come what may—these are
    qualities which the proletariat acquired in the course of the ten,
    fifteen or twenty years that preceded the October Revolution, and
    which it has acquired in the two years that have passed since this
    revolution, years of unprecedented privation, hunger, ruin and
    destitution. These qualities of the proletariat are a guarantee
    that the proletariat will conquer.

April 8, 1920

Endnotes
[1]
    This refers to the newspaper Kommunistichesky Subbotnik
    issued on one occasion only on the initiative of the Moscow
    Committee of the R.C.P.(B.). It was prepared by the editors of and
    contributors to the Moscow newspapers Pravda,
    Izvestia, Bednota, Ekonomicheskaya
    Zhizn, Kommunistichesky Trud and the ROSTA telegraph
    agency during the subbotnik of April 10, 1920. The initiative was
    supported by printers who participated with great enthusiasm in
    the first "newspaper" subbotnik. The newspaper was set and printed
    in the printing-shop of the All-Russia C.E.C. and circulated on
    April 11. Among its contributors were Lenin, Yaroslavsky,
    Kollontai, Demyan Bedny, Serafimovich and Timiryazev. 


Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at the Third
  All-Russia Congress of Textile Workers











Speech Delivered at the Third All-Russia Congress of Textile 



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at the
 Third All-Russia Congress of 
      Textile[1]
April 19, 1920


Delivered: April 19, 1920
First Published: Published according to the pamphlet Minutes of the Third All-Russia Congress of the Textile Workers’ Union, Moscow,  1920, verified with the verbatim report Pravda No. 83, April 20, 1920
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 519-525
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Stormy applause. Ovation ) Comrades, permit me to
    thank you for your welcome and to convey to you the greetings of
    the Council of People’s Commissars.
The Party Congress just concluded and the resolutions it has
    passed are still fresh in our minds. And you are all aware, too,
    of the important tasks which the Party Congress has set before the
    workers, the peasants and the working people of the Soviet
    Republic generally. The sum and substance of these tasks is to
    create a united labour front.
It is fortunate for the Russian proletariat that the Civil War
    has been brought to a successful close; now that there only
    remains the menace of Poland, directed by the zeal of the
    imperialists of Western Europe, we have to make an incredibly
    difficult transition, we have to start building up our internal
    life.
In order to explain the tremendous change, in order to explain
    the difficulties that are now confronting the working class, I
    shall outline the chief stages in the development towards the
    communist system through which the Russian proletariat has
    passed.
Ignorant and unenlightened peasants, finding themselves for the
    first time in a factory, well equipped and supplied with wonderful
    modern machinery, used to be filled with amazement, overwhelmed by
    its unaccustomed magnificence. The peasant, in his ignorance,
    would regard the factory-owner as his benefactor and provider, who
    furnished him with work, and without whom the working man could
    not subsist.The helpless worker, coming from the stagnant, rustic
    life of the village into the seething cauldron of the factory,
    where he secured more bearable conditions of life, and the chance
    of making some kind of a living, would fall under the oppres-sive
    yoke of capitalist exploitation. Everybody knows what the workers
    of Russia and other countries experienced during this painful
    period. But then we see that the worker gradual-ly sheds his
    backward and crushed peasant manner and begins to rise to a higher
    level of development; we see him making the first attempts to
    combat the oppressors by means of strikes, the attempts of the
    disunited proletarian masses to organise in trade unions; we see
    the worker beginning to show signs of a new strength within him;
    we see that any strike, no matter how insignificant its results,
    always created something invaluable, something new, important and
    sig-nificant. Strikes taught the worker to realise that there is
    strength only in union with other workers, a powerful force
    capable of bringing the machines to a standstill and trans-forming
    the slave into a free man able to take advantage of the goods
    which belong by right to their producer. We are all familiar with
    the picture of development of the strike movement during the past
    few decades, its gradual progres-sion from small, disunited local
    strikes to wide organised actions. In 1905, a mighty strike wave
    swept over Russia. With the growth of the organised strike
    struggle against the capitalists, the worker acquired a hitherto
    unknown strength. The trade unions played a foremost part in
    this. The workers came to realise that all the achievements of
    technology, all the machines and implements of production, which
    the capi-talists used in their own interests and to the detriment
    of the proletariat, could and should become the property of the
    proletariat.That was a new phase, a phase of organised resist-ance
    to the capitalists through the trade unions; it was a new step
    forward in the development of the proletariat’s
    consciousness of its existence as a class. The worker was no
    longer a meek and helpless tool in the hands of the
    oppressors. His whole environment led him to the conviction that a
    constant, tireless and unyielding struggle was essential. The
    worker fought to secure a certain improvement in his economic
    condition, an increase of wages, a reduction of hours. At this
    stage of the trade union movement his hopes and dreams were
    directed to securing at least the elements of a decent life.
But although the proletariat’s consciousness of itself as
    a class even to this extent had at one time represented a
    tremendous step forward, there came a time when it, too, became
    inadequate. Conditions demanded a new advance.
The capitalists of the world had grown more insolent and after
    suppressing the working masses they held them fast in the grip of
    a world war, engineered in order both to continue oppressing the
    proletariat, which was struggling for emancipation, and to rob
    each other of territory. The imperialist predators, armed to the
    teeth, fell upon each other. They tried to persuade the workers
    that the war was being waged in the great cause of human
    emancipation. But the workers did not remain blind for long. The
    Peace of Brest-Litovsk, the Peace of Versailles, the seizure of
    all the colonies by Great Britain and France opened their eyes
    sufficiently for them to realise the true state of affairs. It
    became known that during the world war ten million people had been
    killed and twenty million maimed, and all this only for the
    further enrichment of the predators.
Once their eyes had been opened the workers rose against the
    yoke of capital; the social revolution broke out, started by the
    October events. Our duty now is not merely to be members of our
    trade unions-that is not enough. The workers must rise to a higher
    level, to develop from an op-pressed class into a ruling class. We
    cannot count on the peas-ants as yet. They are disunited and
    helpless, and it will be some time before they emerge from their
    state of ignorance. The peasants can be brought out of the slough
    of ignorance only by the class which itself sprang from the
    peasantry, , which has learned to understand the power of
    organisation and has been able to secure a better life-and not
    only under capitalism, for that was secured by the workers of
    Western Europe, but it did not save them from war. The workers
    must understand that they are facing a new and far more difficult
    task, namely, to take the entire administra-tion of the state into
    their own hand. The workers must say to themselves that as long as
    private property remains, as long as capitalism is not smashed, no
    one who lives at the expense of others should be allowed to wield
    power. 
That is the object of the Soviet governments activities, a
    government for which the world proletariat is showing a rapidly
    developing sympathy. When it created the ne’w proletarian
    state, the working class assumed a tremendous burden. The workers
    can destroy the exploiting classes and bring about socialism only
    by going hand in hand with the peasants. The peasants are still
    working each for himself, selling their surplus in the open market
    and thereby helping a handful of robbers to become still
    richer. They do not do this wittingly; it is because they live
    under conditions entirely different from those of the workers. But
    freedom of trade means a return to capitalist slavery. In order to
    avoid it, labour must be organised in a new way, and there is
    nobody to do it but the proletariat. 
The worker is now not only a member of his trade union
    organisation. Such a view would imply a return to the past. The
    fight against capital is not yet over. Capitalism is still
    impeding the measures of the Soviet government; it is doing so by
    profiteering, Sukharevka Market, [2] and so on. This force
    can be countered only by the force of workers’ organisations
    built on new principles, based, not on their narrow production
    interests, but on the interests of the whole state. Only when the
    whole working class, irrespective of trade or craft, succeeds in
    uniting as a ruling class and creating a united army of labour,
    will it win the respect of the world. 
The peasants, convinced that Kolchak and Denikin have been
    smashed by the strength of the proletariat, are now feeling the
    firm hand of a good manager. But they will gain complete
    confidence in the proletariat only when attempts to restore
    capitalism will no longer be possible. Only then will the peasant
    understand that. there is no place for kulaks and parasites in a
    proletarian country. But the peasant does not as yet believe in
    his heart of hearts that the proletariat can cope with its great
    task. 
The unparalleled privations of the past two years, con-sciously
    shouldered by the proletariat of Russia fighting in the front
    ranks of the Red Army, are not yet over. New pri-vations and new
    tasks face us, which will be the more diffi-cult the greater the
    number of victories we win on the Red front. Extensive territories
    have been won in Siberia and the Ukraine, where there is no
    proletariat like that of Moscow, Petrograd and Ivanovo-Voznesensk,
    which has shown in practice that it will defend the gains of the
    revolution at any price. Class-conscious workers must penetrate
    every pore of the state; they must know how to approach the
    peas-ants and organise them in the cause of the class which has
    flung off the yoke of the landowners and is building up a state
    without capitalists. Devotion and iron discipline are
    required. The entire proletariat, like one man, must achieve
    unparalleled miracles on the labour front like those achieved on
    the war front. Many at first thought that the revolution was a
    hopeless cause. The army in a state of complete col-lapse, mass
    desertions from the front, lack of ammunition -that is what we
    inherited from Kerensky. The Russian pro-letariat succeeded in
    rallying and knitting together scat-tered forces and in creating a
    united and stalwart Red Army. The Red Army worked miracles in
    repulsing the onslaught of the capitalists, who were supported by
    the capitalists of the whole world. The tasks of the labour front
    are even more difficult, immeasurably so. But while for the Red
    Army only men were required, we must now throw into the labour
    front all the able-bodied forces of the country-men, women, and
    even adolescents. We need iron discipline, and that is a weak
    point with us Russians. We must display determina-tion, endurance,
    firmness and unanimity. We must stop at nothing. Everybody and
    everything must be used to save the rule of the workers and
    peasants, to save communism. 
The war is not over, it is continuing on the bloodless
    front. Here the enemy is still stronger than we are; that must be
    admitted. The petty producers, who sell their prod-ucts in the
    open market, are being assisted by world capi-tal, which with one
    hand is prepared to re-establish trade relations, and with the
    other is prepared to crush the prole-tariat and Soviet
    Russia. 
All the four millions of our proletariat must be prepared for
    new sacrifices, new privations and new hardships, no smaller than
    those of the war. Only thus can we hope to smash the enemy for
    good. The peasant, who is still temporis-ing and vacillating, will
    then finally become convinced of the strength of the
    proletariat. The memory of the landown-ers, of Denikin and Koichak
    is still fresh in the mind of the peasants peasant; but he also
    sees laziness and idleness around him, and he says: “Yes, it
    may be a good thing, but not for the likes of us.”
The peasants must be shown something else. Let the work-ing
    class organise production as it organised the Red Army. Let every
    worker realise that he is ruling the country. The fewer we are the
    greater the demands made on us. Russia must be transformed into a
    vast army of labour heroically conscious that everything must be
    sacrificed for the common cause-the emancipation of the working
    people. 
Everybody knows that the textile industry is at a complete
    standstill because today we have no cotton-it has to be
    imported-owing to the fact that Western Europe, too, is suffering
    from an acute shortage of raw materials. Our one source of supply
    is Turkestan, which has recently been won from the whiteguards,
    but the transport system has not yet been properly organised. 
One means of salvation at the present time is to extract and
    prepare peat as quickly as possible, which will enable us to start
    all the power stations at full capacity and save us from being
    completely dependent on coal regions remote from Central
    Russia. 
To rely on wood fuel in the present state of disorganisation is
    out of the question. The peat deposits are situated mainly in the
    textile districts. And one of the chief duties of the textile
    workers must be to organise peat extraction. I know that this is
    extremely arduous work: you have to stand up to your knees in
    water, arid, what with the shortage of boots and living quarters,
    the difficulties are immense. But did the Red Army have everything
    it needed? How many sacrifices, how many hardships the men of the
    Red Army bore when for two months they marched up to their waists
    in water, capturing tanks from the British! The capitalists are
    hoping that the workers, exhausted and starving, will not be able
    to hold out. The capitalists are waiting to pounce on the
    workers’ state, and their one hope is that the prole-tariat
    will be unable to cope with the task of creating a united labour
    front and will restore them to power. 
I am very far from thinking that the work that faces us is
      easy, but all difficulties must and can be overcome. Every worker
      must help to organise labour, he must show
      the peasants that he is an organiser, and that work must be
      regarded as the
      only means of maintaining the rule of the workers and
      peasants. When Kerensky was still in power, the capitalists,
      realising even then that they would be unable to retain the
      factories, began to do damage to production, to conclude
      agreements with the capitalists of other countries for the
      destruction of Russian industry so as not to surrender it to the
      workers, and endeavoured to exhaust the proletariat by civil
      war. 
The working class is facing a very severe test, and- every
    working man and woman must achieve even greater miracles than the
    Red Army soldiers achieved at the front. A victory on the labour
    front, devotion under the drab workaday condi-tions, are
    immeasurably more difficult, but are a hundred times more valuable
    than sacrificing one’s life. 
Away with the old isolation! Only the worker who has proved
    worth his salt as a member of the Red Army of labour is worthy of
    being a trade union member. Even though we commit hundreds of
    mistakes, even though we suffer thou-sands of defeats, that will
    not daunt us. We must realise that only the persistent onslaught
    of the proletariat can secure victory. 
For two years now the proletariat has been defending the rule
    of the workers and peasants. All over the world the social
    revolution is maturing. If we want to prove that we can cope with
    the task confronting us, we must, however dif-ficult the situation
    may be, maintain all our energy and assurance, all our proletarian
    enthusiasm, and achieve on the peaceful front of labour miracles
    as great as those of the Red Army on the bloody front of struggle
    against the imperialists and their henchmen. (Stormy
    applause )

Endnotes
[1]
    The Third All-Russia Congress of Textile Workers was held
    in Moscow, April 16-20, 1920. It was attended by 358 delegates, of
    whom 148 were Communists and 23 Communist supporters. The agenda
    of the Congress included the following: report of the Central
    Committee of the Union, the tasks of the trade unions, raw
    materials supplies, the state of the flax and woollen industries,
    the tasks
of the Union in rehabilitating transport, the food question, and safety regulations.
Lenin made a speech at its plenary meeting on
    April 19. On behalf of the Congress participants the Presidium
    congratulated Lenin on his fiftieth birthday, the delegates
    greeted him with loud applause. The Congress sent greetings to the
    Red Army and the Communist International.
[2] 
Sukharevka Market was a street market on Sukharevskaya (now Kolkhoznaya) Square, it was situated around the Sukharev tower built by Peter the First in 1692. During the years of foreign military intervention and the Civil War it was the centre of speculation. The name became the synonym for profiteering. In 1932 the Sukharevka Market was finally abolished and in 1934 the Sukharev tower was demolished because it interfered with traffic.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 







==========

## Speech Delivered at a Meeting
  Organised By The Moscow Committee Of The Rc.P.(B.) In Honour
  Of Lenin’s Fiftieth Birthday











Speech Delivered at a Meeting Organised by the Moscow Committee of  the R. C. P. (B. ) In Honour of Lenin’s Fiftieth Birthday 



V. I. Lenin
Speech Delivered at a Meeting Organised by the Moscow Committee of the R. C. P. (B. )[1]
In Honour of Lenin’s Fiftieth Birthday
April 23, 1920


Delivered: April 23, 1920
First Published: Published in brief in Pravda No. 87, April 24, 1920; Published in full in October 1920 in the pamphlet Fiftieth Birthday of Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov-Lenin (1870-April 23-1920); Published according to the pamphlet 
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th English Edition, Progress Publishers, Moscow, 1965, Volume 30, pages 526-528
Translated: George Hanna
Transcription/HTML Markup: David Walters & Robert Cymbala
Copyleft: V. I. Lenin Internet Archive (www.marx.org) 2002. Permission is granted to copy and/or distribute this document under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License


(Stormy applause ) Comrades, I must naturally begin by
    thanking you for two things: firstly, for the congratula-tions
    addressed to me today, and secondly, even more for having spared
    me congratulatory speeches (Applause. ) I think that
    perhaps in this va we may gradually, not all at once, of course,
    devise a more suitable method of celebrat-ing anniversaries than
    the one hitherto in vogue, which has sometimes formed the subject
    of remarkably good car-toons. Here is one such cartoon drawn by a
    prominent artist in celebration of such a jubilee. I received it
    today with an extremely cordial letter. And as the comrades have
    been kind enough to spare me congratulatory speeches, I will hand
    this cartoon round for all to see, so as to save us in future from
    such jubilee celebrations altogether. [2] 
Next, I would like to say a few words about the present status
    of the Bolshevik Party. What brought these thoughts to my mind was
    some lines written by a certain writer eight-een years ago, in
    1902. This writer is Karl Kautsky, with whom we have now had to
    part ways very definitely, and whom we have to fight, but who in
    the struggle against German opportunism used lobe one of the
    leaders of the proletarian party, and with whom we at one time
    collaborated. There were no Bolsheviks then, but all the future
    Bolsheviks who collaborated with him appraised him very
    highly. Here is what this writer wrote in 1902:
“At the present time [in contrast to 18481 it would seem
    that not only have the Slays entered the ranks of the
    revolutionary nations, but that the centre of revolutionary
    thought and revolutionary action is shifting more and more to the
    Slays. The revolutionary centre is shifting from the West to the
    East. In the first half of the nineteenth century it was located
    in France, at times in England. In 1848 Germany too joined the
    ranks of the revolutionary nations. . . . The new century opens
    with events which induce us to think that we are approaching a
    further shift of the revolutionary centre. , namely, to
    Russia . . . .  Russia, who has borrowed so much
    revolutionary initiative from the West, is now perhaps herself
    ready to serve as a source of revolutionary energy for the
    West. The Russian revolutionary movement that is now flaring up
    will perhaps prove to he a most potent means of exorcising that
    spirit of flabby philistinism and temperate politics which is
    beginning to spread in our midst, and it may cause the thirst for
    battle and the passionate devotion to our great ideals to flare up
    in bright flames again. Russia has long ceased to be merely a
    bulwark of reaction and absolutism in Wemem Europe. It might be
    said that today the very opposite is the case. Western Europe is
    becoming a bulwark of reaction and absolutism in Russia
    . . . . The Russian revolutionaries might perhaps have settled
    with the tsar long ago had they not been compelled at the same
    time to fight his ally, European capital. Let us hope that this
    time they will succeed in settling with both enemies, and that the
    new ’Holy Alliance’ will collapse more quickly than
    its predecessors. But no matter how the present struggle in Russia
    ends, the blood and happiness of the martyrs, whom, unfortunately,
    she is producing in too great numbers, will not have been
    sacrificed in vain. They will nourish the shoots of social
    revolution throughout the civilised world and cause them to grow
    more luxuriantly and rapidly. In 1848 the Slays were a black frost
    which blighted the flowers of the peoples’ spring. Perhaps
    they are now destined to be the storm that will break the ice of
    reaction and will irresistibly bring a new and happy spring for
    the nations.” (K. Kautsky, “The Slays and
    Revolution”, Iskra No. 18, March 10, 1902. )
That is what a prominent socialist, with whom we have now had
    to break so drastically, wrote about the revolutionary movement in
    Russia eighteen years ago. These words lead me to think that our
    Party may now find itself in a very dangerous position—the
    position of a man with a swelled head. It is a very stupid,
    shameful and ridiculous position. We know that the failure and
    decline of political parties have very often been preceded by a
    state of affairs in which a swelled head is possible. And, indeed,
    what was expected of the Russian revolution by the man I have
    quoted and who is now our bitterest enemy, was immense beyond
    measure. But after all, the brilliant successes and brilliant
    victories we have gained so far were gained at a time when it was
    still impossible to grapple with our main difficulties. It was a
    time when we were confronted by war tasks, the tasks of waging a
    most profound and most energetic struggle against the landowner
    and tsarist reactionaries, and against reactionary generals. And
    so, the tasks that are the substance of the socialist revolution
    had to be postponed in order to grapple with the task of
    organising the struggle against the common, everyday
    manifestations of petty-bourgeois instincts, division and
    disunity, that is, against everything that would drag us back to
    capitalism. These tasks were postponed both in the economic and
    political spheres; we were unable to tackle them properly. And
    therefore the danger suggested to us by the words I have quoted
    should be seriously borne in mind by all Bolsheviks both severally
    and as an integral political party. We must realise that the
    decisions of our last Party Congress must he carried out at all
    costs, and this means that a tremendous job faces us, and that a
    far greater exertion of effort will be demanded than
    hitherto. 
Let me conclude with the hope that under no circumstances will
    we allow our Party to contract swelled head. (Applause

Endnotes
[1] 
On April 23, 1920 the Moscow Committee of the R.C.P.(B.) organised a meeting in honour of Lenin's fiftieth birthday. It was attended by Moscow Party functionaries. People who knew Lenin well, who had worked with him before the October Revolution, spoke at the meeting, Gorky, Lunacharsky, Olminsky and the proletarian poets Kirillov and Alexandrovsky spoke of Lenin with great warmth and deep respect. Lenin was given an ovation when he appeared.

    
[2]
    Lenin refers to a cartoon by the well-known artist Karrik who drew
    it in 1900 on the birthday of the Narodnik
    N. K. Mikhailovsky. Yelena Stasova sent the cartoon to Lenin on
    his fiftieth birthday. The drawing depicted Marxists as children
    who came to congratulate Mikhailovsky. Stasova wrote on the
    cartoon that at the time of Mikhailovsky's birthday the Party had
    been in its childhood, had few members, whereas it had since
    grown, “and this is the result of your work, this is thanks
    to your mind and talent”.

 Collected Works Volume 30 
Collected Works Table of Contents 
Lenin Works Archive
 
 
 





