# Volume 13

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 13







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 13




 
Lenin Collected Works: 

    Volume 13
June 1907--April 1908



Preface



1907


Against Boycott
    
Notes of a
    Social-Democratic Publicist

   

  ¶ I
   

  ¶ II
   

  ¶ III
   

  ¶ IV
   

  ¶ V
   

  ¶ VI
   

  ¶ VII

118k


In Memory of Count Heyden
    
What Are
    Our Non-Party “Democrats”
    Teaching the People?

27k


Theses of a Report Made at the St. Petersburg City Conference of July 8 on the Attitude of the Social-Democratic Labour Party to the Third Duma

8k


The Third Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (Second All-Russian)

Draft Resolution on Participation in the Elections to
      the Third Duma
Outline of a Draft Resolution on the All-Russian
      Congress of Trade Unions


11k


Notes of a Publicist

42k


The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (Proletary)

22k


The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908)

36k


Preface to the Collection Twelve Years

71k


Revolution and Counter-Revolution

26k


The Third Duma

30k


On Plekhanov’s Article

7k


Conference of the St. Petersburg Organisation of the R.S.D.L.P.
From a Newspaper Report

Report on the Third State Duma
Resolution on the Third State Duma
Report on the Participation of Social-Democrats in
      the Bourgeois Press


19k


The Fourth Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (“Third All-Russian”)
    
From a Newspaper Report

Report on the Tactics of the Social-Democratic Group
      in the Third State Duma
Resolution on the Tactics of the Social-Democratic
      Group in the Third State Duma


19k


The Preparation of a “Disgusting Orgy”

18k


But Who Are the Judges?

24k


Preface to the Pamphlet by Voinov (A. V. Lunacharsky) on the Attitude of the Party Towards the Trade Unions

29k


The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”

X. The
      “Work” of the German Bulgakov, E. David
XI. Livestock in
      Small and Large Farms
XII. The
      “Ideal Country” from the Standpoint
      of the Opponents of Marxism on the Agrarian Question


146k


The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907

Chapter I. The Economic Basis and Nature of the
      Agrarian Revolution In Russia

      
Landownership in
  European Russia
What Is the
    Struggle About?
The Cadet
    Writers Obscure the Nature of the
  Struggle
The Economic
    Nature of the Agrarian Revolution
  and its Ideological Cloaks
Two Types of Bourgeois Agrarian
    Evolution
Two Lines of Agrarian
    Programmes in the Revolution 
Russia's Land
    Area. The Question of the Colonisation
Summary of the
    Economic Deductions of Chapter I


Chapter II. The Agrarian Programmes of the
      R.S.D.L.P. and Their Test in the First Revolution

      
What Was the Mistake in the Previous Agrarian
    Programmes of Russian Social-Democracy?
The Present
    Agrarian Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.
The Chief
    Argument of the Municipalisers Tested by
  Events
The Agrarian
    Programme of the Peasantry
Medieval
    Landownership and the Bourgeois
  Revolution
Why Had the Small
    Proprietors
    in Russia to Declare in Favour of
    Nationalisation?
The Peasants and the Narodniks on the
  Nationalisation
    of Allotment Land
The Mistake Made by M. Shanin and Other Advocates
    of Division


Chapter III. The Theoretical Basis of
      Nationalisation and of Municipalisation

      
What Is
    Nationalisation of the Land?
Pyotr Maslov
    Corrects Karl Marx's Rough Notes
Is it
    Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute
  the Narodniks?
Is the
    Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected
    with the Programme of Municipalisation?
Criticism of
    Private Landownership from the
  Standpoint of the Development of Capitalism
The Nationalisation of the Land and
  “Money”
    Rent
Under What
    Conditions Can Nationalisation Be
    Brought About?
Does
    Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?


Chapter IV. Political and Tactical
      Considerations in Questions of the Agrarian Programme

      
“A
    Guarantee Against Restoration”
Local
    Self-Government as a “Bulwark
  Against Reaction”
The Central
    Authority and the Consolidation of
  the Bourgeois State
The Scope of the
    Political and of the Agrarian
    Revolutions
A Peasant
    Revolution Without the Conquest of
    Power by the Peasantry?
Is Land
    Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible
    Method?
Municipalisation of
    the Land and Municipal Socialism
Some Examples of the Muddle Caused by
    Municipalisation



Chapter V. Classes and Parties in the Debate on
      the Agrarian Question in the Second Duma

      
The Rights and
    the Octobrists
The
    Cadets
The Right
    Peasants
The Non-Party
    Peasants
The Narodnik
    Intellectuals
The Trudovik
    Peasants (Narodniks)
The
    Socialist-Revolutionaries
The
    “Nationals”
The
    Social-Democrats


Conclusion


17k




Postscript

6k


1908


The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers

22k


Postscript to the Article “The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers”

6k


Political Notes

19k


Statement of the Editors of Proletary

4k


A Letter to A. M. Gorky

18k


The New Agrarian Policy

14k


Trade-Union Neutrality

35k


The Happening to the King of Portugal

14k


Lessons of the Commune

14k


A Police-Patriotic Demonstration Made to Order

18k


Deception of the People by the Liberals

14k


An Estimate of Marx by International Liberalism

14k


 



      Volume 13 Transcription/Mark-up:

    Who? (“Preface to the Collection Twelve Years”;
    source?). 

     •  R. Cymbala (all documents except the one
    above), 2004.
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Preface







LCW: 13: Preface by Progress Publishers







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 13: Preface by Progress Publishers




Lenin Collected Works: 
Volume 13

Preface by Progress Publishers

    Volume Thirteen contains works written by Lenin between June 1907
    and April 1908.
  

    The articles “Against Boycott”, “Notes of a
    Publicist”, “Revolution and Counter-Revolution”,
    “The Third Duma”, “Political Notes”, and
    “The New Agrarian Policy” are devoted to an analysis and
    appraisal of the political situation in Russia after the defeat of
    the first revolution and to defining the tasks of the Party
    organisations during the period of reaction. In these articles, as
    well as in the speeches delivered at the St. Petersburg and
    All-Russian conferences of the R.S.D.L.P., which are published in
    this volume, Lenin also formulated the aims of the Duma tactics of
    the Bolsheviks at that new stage.
  

    The volume includes such important works of Lenin on the agrarian
    question as The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of
      Marx” (Chapters X-XII) and The Agrarian Programme of
      Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution 1905-1907.
  

    Included in the volume is the Preface to the first, three- volume
    collection of Lenin's writings, entitled Twelve Years,
    which was not published in full owing to persecution by the
    censorship. The Preface is a short review of the history of Lenin's
    struggle for revolutionary Marxism against liberalism ·and
    opportunism.
  

    The volume contains the article “Trade-Union Neutrality”
    in which Lenin criticises the opportunism of Plekhanov and the
    Mensheviks, who attempted to make the labour movement in Russia take
    the path of trade-unionism.
  

    Two articles under the same title “The International Socialist
    Congress in Stuttgart” reflect the struggle waged

    by Lenin and the Bolsheviks against opportunism in the international
    labour movement. The articles expose the deviations of the German
    Social-Democrats from the positions of revolutionary Marxism.
  

    For the first time in any collection of Lenin's works, this volume
    contains the draft resolution of the Third Conference of the
    R.S.D.L.P. ("Second All-Russian") on the question of
    participation in the elections to the Third Duma, “Outline of
    a Draft Resolution on the All-Russian Congress of Trade
    Unions”, the note “On Plekhanov's Article”, and
    “Statement of the Editors of Proletary”.
  

    In the “Preface to the Pamphlet by Voinov (A. V. Lunacharsky)
    on the Attitude of the Party Towards the Trade Unions”, also
    included for the first time in Lenin's Collect ed Works,
    Lenin opposes the slogan of “neutrality” of the trade
    unions and urges the necessity of close alignment of the trade
    unions with the Party with a view to developing the socialist
    consciousness of the proletariat and educating the latter in the
    spirit of revolutionary Social-Democracy.

  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 









==========

## Against Boycott









Lenin: Against Boycott








V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist[1]




Written: Written on June 26 (July 9), 1907 

Published:

      Published in 1907 in the pamphlet Concerning the Boycott of the Third Duma, Moscow. Signed: N. Lenin.

      Published according to the pamphlet text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 15-49.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents






I
  18



II
  24



III
  27



IV
  33



V
  36



VI
  44



VII
  48

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

The article “Against Boycott” was published at the
end of July 1907 in a pamphlet entitled Concerning the Boycott of the
Third Duma, printed by the illegal Social-Democratic press in
St. Petersburg. Its cover bore the fictitious inscription: “Moscow,
1907, Gorizontov Press, 40, Tverskaya”. The pamphlet was confiscated
in September 1907.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## I









Lenin: 1907/boycott: I







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

 

The recent Teachers’ Congress,[3]

in which the majority was influenced by the

Socialist-Revolutionaries,[4]

adopted a resolution calling for a boycott of the Third Duma. The
resolution was adopted with the direct participation of a prominent
representative of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party. The Social-Democratic
teachers and the representative of the R.S.D.L.P. abstained from voting, as
they considered that this question should be decided by a Party congress or
conference, and not by a non-Party professional and political association.


The question of boycotting the Third Duma thus arises as a current
question of revolutionary tactics. Judging by the speech of its spokesman
at the Congress, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party had already decided that
question, although we do not yet have any official decisions of the Party
or any literary documents from among its members. Among the
Social-Democrats this question has been raised and is being debated.


What arguments do the Socialist-Revolutionaries use to support their
decision? The resolution of the Teachers Congress speaks, in effect, about
the utter uselessness of the Third Duma, about the reactionary and
counter-revolutionary nature of the government that effected the coup
d’état of June 3,[5]

about the new electoral law being weighted in favour of the landlords, etc.,

 etc.[1]

The case is presented

    

in such a manner as if the ultra-reactionary nature of the Third Duma by itself
makes such a method of struggle or such a slogan as the boycott necessary and
legitimate. The impropriety of such an argument is absolutely clear to any
Social-Democrat, since there is no attempt here whatever to examine the
historical conditions of the boycott’s applicability. The Social-Democrat
who takes a Marxist stand draws his conclusions about the boycott not from the
degree of reactionariness of one or another institution, but from the existence
of those special conditions of struggle that, as the experience of the Russian
revolution has now shown, make it possible to apply the specific method known
as boycott. If anyone were to start discussing the boycott without taking into
consideration the two years’ experience of our revolution, without studying that
experience, we would have to say of him that he had forgotten a lot and learned
nothing. In dealing with the question of boycott we shall start with an attempt
to analyse that experience.

I

The most important experience of our revolution in making use of the boycott
was, undoubtedly, the boycott of the Bulygin

Duma.[6] What is more, that boycott was crowned with complete and
immediate success. Therefore, our first task should be to examine the
historical conditions under which the boycott of the Bulygin Duma took
place.


Two circumstances at once become apparent when examining this question. First,
the boycott of the Bulygin Duma was a fight to prevent our revolution from going
over (even temporarily) to the path of a monarchist constitution.

    

Secondly, this boycott took place under conditions of a sweeping, universal,
powerful, and rapid upswing of the revolution.


Let us examine the first circumstance. All boycott is a struggle, not within the
framework of a given institution, but against its emergence, or, to put it more
broadly, against it becoming operative. Therefore, those who, like Plekhanov
and many other Mensheviks, opposed the boycott on the general grounds that it
was necessary for a Marxist to make use of representative institutions, thereby
only revealed absurd doctrinairism. To argue like that meant evading the real
issue by repeating self-evident truths. Unquestionably, a Marxist should make
use of representative institutions. Does that imply that a Marxist cannot,
under certain conditions, stand for a struggle not within the framework of a
given institution but against that institution being brought into existence? No,
it does not, because this general argument applies only to those cases where
there is no room for a struggle to prevent such an institution from coming into
being. The boycott is a controversial question precisely because it is a
question of whether there is room for a struggle to prevent the emergence of
such institutions. By their arguments against the boycott Plekhanov and
Co. showed that they failed to understand what the question was about.


Further. If all boycott is a struggle not within the frame work of a given
institution, but to prevent it from coming into existence, then the boycott of
the Bulygin Duma, apart from everything else, was a struggle to prevent a whole
system of institutions of a monarchist-constitutional type from coming into
existence. The year 1905 clearly showed the possibility of direct mass struggle
in the shape of general strikes (the strike wave after the Ninth of
January[7])

and mutinies

(Potemkin[8]).  The direct revolutionary struggle of the masses
was, therefore, a fact. No less a fact, on the other hand, was the law of
August 6, which attempted to switch the movement from the revolutionary (in
the most direct and narrow sense of the word) path to the path of a
monarchist constitution. It was objectively inevitable that these paths
should come into conflict with each other. There was to be, so to speak, a
choice of paths
    

for the immediate development of the revolution, a choice that was to be
determined, of course, not by the will of one or another group, but by the
relative strength of the revolutionary and counter-revolutionary
classes. And this strength could only be gauged and tested in the
struggle. The slogan of boycotting the Bulygin Duma was, there fore, a
slogan of the struggle for the path of direct revolutionary
struggle and against the constitutional-monarchist path. Even on the latter
path, of course, a struggle was possible, and not only possible but
inevitable. Even on the basis of a monarchist constitution it was possible
to continue the revolution and prepare for its new upswing; even on the
basis of a monarchist constitution it was possible and obligatory for the
Social-Democrats to carry on the struggle. This truism, which Axelrod and
Plekhanov tried so hard and irrelevantly to prove in 1905, remains
true. But the issue raised by history was a different one:

Axelrod and Plekhanov were arguing “beside the point”, or in other
words, they side-stepped the issue which events put to the conflicting
forces. by introducing a question taken from the latest edition of the German
Social-Democratic textbook. The impending struggle for the choice of
a path of struggle was historically inevitable in the immediate
future. The alternatives were these: was the old authority to convene
Russia’s first representative institution and thereby for a time (perhaps
a very brief, perhaps a fairly long time) switch the revolution to the
monarchist-constitutional path, or were the people by a direct assault to sweep
away—at the worst, to shake—the old regime, prevent it from
switching the revolution to the monarchist-constitutional path and guarantee
(also for a more or less lengthy period) the path of direct revolutionary
struggle of the masses? That was the issue historically confronting the
revolutionary classes of Russia in the autumn of 1905 which Axelrod and
Plekhanov at the time failed to notice. The Social-Democrats’ advocacy of active
boycott was itself a way of raising the issue, a way of consciously raising it
by the party of the proletariat, a slogan of the struggle for the choice of
a path of struggle.


The advocates of active boycott, the Bolsheviks, correctly interpreted the
question objectively posed by history.

    

The October-December struggle of 1905 was really a struggle for the choice
of a path of struggle. This struggle was waged with varying fortune: at first
the revolutionary people got the upper hand, wrested from the old regime a
chance to immediately switch the revolution on to monarchist-constitutional
lines and set up representative institutions of a purely
revolutionary type—Soviets of Workers’ Deputies, etc., in place of the
representative institutions of the police-liberal, type. The October-December
period was one of maximum freedom, maximum independent activity of the masses,
maximum breadth and momentum of the workers’ movement on ground cleared of
monarchist-constitutional institutions, laws and snags by the assault of the
people, on a ground of “interregnum”, when the old authority was
already undermined, and the new revolutionary power of the people (the
Soviets of Workers’, Peasants’, and Soldiers’ Deputies, etc.) was not
yet strong enough to completely replace it. The December struggle decided
the question in a different direction: the old regime won by repulsing the
assault of the people and holding
its positions. But, of course, at that time there were no
grounds as yet for considering this a decisive victory. The December uprising of
1905 had its continuation in a number of sporadic and partial mutinies and
strikes in the summer of 1906. The slogan of boycott of the

Witte Duma[9] was a
slogan of struggle for the concentration and generalisation of these uprisings.


Thus, the first conclusion to be drawn from an analysis of the experience of the
Russian revolution in boycotting the Bulygin Duma is that, in the objective
guise of the boycott, history placed on the order of the day a struggle for the
form of the immediate path of development, a struggle over whether the old
authority or the new self-established people’s power would be called upon
to convene Russia’s first representative assembly, a struggle for a
directly revolutionary path or (for a time) for the path of a monarchist
constitution.


In this connection there arises a question, which has often cropped up in the
literature, and which constantly crops up when this subject is discussed,
namely, that of the simplicity, clarity, and “directness” of the
boycott

    

slogan, as well as the question of a straight or zigzag path of development. The
      direct overthrow or, at the worst, the weakening and undermining of the
      old regime, the direct establishment of new government agencies, by the
      people—all this, undoubtedly, is the most direct path, the
    most advantageous as far as the people are concerned, but one that requires
    the maximum force. Given an overwhelming preponderance of force it is
    possible to win by a direct frontal attack. Lacking this, one may have to
    resort to roundabout ways, to marking time, to zigzags, retreats, etc.,
    etc. Of course, the path of a monarchist constitution does not, by any
    means, exclude revolution, the elements of which are prepared and developed
    by this path as well in an indirect manner, but this path is a
    longer, more zigzag one.


Running through all Menshevik literature, especially that of 1905 (up to
October), is the accusation that the Bolsheviks are “bigoted” and
also exhortations to them on the need for taking into consideration the zigzag
path of history. In this feature of Menshevik literature we have another
specimen of the kind of reasoning which tells us that horses eat oats and that
the Volga flows into the Caspian Sea, reasoning which befogs the essence of a
disputable question by reiterating what is indisputable. That history usually
follows a zigzag path and that a Marxist should be able to make allowance for
the most complicated and fantastic zigzags of history is indisputable. But this
reiteration of the indisputable has nothing to do with the question of what a
Marxist should do when that same history confronts the contending forces with
the choice of a straight or a zigzag path. To dismiss the matter at such
moments, or at such periods, when this happens by arguing about the usual zigzag
course of history is to take after the “man in the

muffler”[10] and become absorbed in contemplation of the truth that
horses eat oats. As it happens, revolutionary periods are mainly such
periods in history when the clash of contending social forces, in a
comparatively short space of time, decides the question of the
country’s choice of a direct or a zigzag path of development for a
comparatively very long time. The need for reckoning with the zigzag path
does not in the least do away with the fact that

    

Marxists should be able to explain to the masses during the decisive moments of
their history that the direct path is preferable, should be able to help the
masses in the struggle for the choice of the direct path, to advance slogans
for that struggle, and so on. And only hopeless philistines and the most obtuse
pedants, after the decisive historical battles which determined the zigzag path
instead of the direct one were over, could sneer at those who had
fought to the end for the direct path. It would be like the sneers of German
police-minded official historians such as Treitschke at the revolutionary
slogans and the revolutionary directness of Marx in 1848.


Marxism’s attitude towards the zigzag path of history is essentially the
same as its attitude towards compromise. Every zigzag turn in history is a
compromise, a compromise between the old, which is no longer strong enough to
completely negate the new, and the new, which is not yet strong enough to
completely overthrow the old. Marxism does not altogether reject
compromises. Marxism considers it necessary to make use of them, but that does
not in the least prevent Marxism, as a living and operating historical force,
from fighting energetically against compromises. Not to understand this seeming
contradiction is not to know the rudiments of Marxism.


Engels once expressed the Marxist attitude to compromises very vividly,
clearly, and concisely in an article on the manifesto of the Blanquist fugitives
of the Commune

       (1874).[2]

These Blanquists wrote in their manifesto that they
accepted no compromises whatever. Engels ridiculed this manifesto. It was not,
he said, a question of rejecting compromises to which circumstances condemn
us (or to which circumstances compel us—I must beg the
reader’s pardon for being obliged to quote from memory, as I am unable to
check with the original text). It was a question of clearly realising the true
revolutionary aims of the proletariat and of being able to pursue them through
all and every circumstances, zigzags, and

compromises.[11]

 

Only from this angle can we appreciate the simplicity, directness, and clarity
      of the boycott as a slogan appealing to the masses. All these virtues of
      the slogan are good not in themselves, but only in so far as the
      conditions of struggle for the choice of a direct or zigzag path of
      development are present in the objective situation in which the slogan is
      used. During the period of the Bulygin Duma this slogan was the correct
      and the only revolutionary slogan of the workers’ party not because it was
      the simplest, most forth right, and clearest, but because the historical
      conditions at the time set the workers’ party the task of taking part in
      the struggle for a simple and direct revolutionary path against the zigzag
      path of the monarchist constitution.


The question arises, by what criterion are we to judge whether those special
historical conditions existed at the time? What is that distinctive feature in
the objective state of affairs which made a simple, forthright, and clear slogan
not a mere phrase but the only slogan that fitted the actual struggle? We shall
take up this question now.

 

Notes
 

[1]
Here is the text of this resolution: “Whereas:

  (1) the new electoral law on the basis of which the Third Duma is being
  convened deprives the working masses of that modest share of electoral
  rights which they had hitherto enjoyed and the winning of which had cost
  them so dear;

  (2) this law glaringly and grossly falsifies the will of the people for
  the benefit of the most reactionary and privileged strata of the
  population;

  (3) the Third Duma, by the manner of its election

   

and by its make-up, is the product of a reactionary coup;

(4) the government will take advantage of the participation of the popular
masses in the Duma elections in order to interpret that participation as a
popular sanction of the coup d’etat—the Fourth Delegate Congress of
the All-Russian Union of Teachers and Educational Workers resolves:

(1) that it shall have no dealings whatever with the Third Duma or any of
its bodies;

(2) that it shall take no part as an organisation, either directly or
indirectly, in the elections;

(3) that it shall, as an organisation, disseminate the view on the Third
State Duma and the elections to it as expressed in the present resolution.”
—Lenin

[2]
This article was included In the German volume of collected articles
Internationales aus dem “Volksstaat”.The title of the Russian
translation is Articles from “Volksstaat”,published by
Znaniye.  —Lenin
 



[3]
This refers to the Fourth Delegate Congress of the All-Russian
Teachers’ Union, held June 19-24 (July 2-7), 1907, in Finland. It was
attended by 50 Socialist-Revolutionary, 23 Social-Democrat, and IS
non-party delegates, representing nearly two thousand organised teachers of
Russia. The following questions were on the agenda: adoption of the Union
Rules, elections to the Third Duma, attitude towards other trade unions,
attitude towards the modern Zemstvo, boycott of discharged teachers’ posts,
mutual benefit societies, and other items. The Congress was held in an
atmosphere of tense ideological struggle between the Social-Democrats and
the Socialist-Revolutionaries.  

In calling the Teachers’ Union a “professional and
political” union, Lenin had in mind that under Clause 1 of the Rules
it fought for a free school while at the same time endeavouring to improve
the material conditions of the teachers; it was, at one and the same time,
a teachers’ trade union and a political league of struggle for a free
school.

 



[4]
Socialist-Revolutionaries (S.R.’s)— a petty-bourgeois
party formed in Russia at the end of 1901 and beginning of 1902 through the
amalgamation of various Narodnik groups and circles (The “Union of
Socialist-Revolutionaries”, “Party of
Socialist-Revolutionaries”, and others). Its official organs were the
newspaper Revolutsionnaya Rossiya (Revolutionary Russia)
(1900-05) and the magazines Vestnik Russkoi Revolutsii (Herald
of the Russian Revolution) (1901-05) and Znamya Truda
(Banner of Labour) (1907-14). The S.R.’s failed to perceive the
class distinctions between the proletariat and petty proprietors; they
glossed over the class differentiation and antagonisms within the
peasantry, and rejected the leading role of the proletariat in the
revolution. The views of the S.R.’s were an eclectic medley of Narodism and
revisionism; they tried, as Lenin put it, to “patch up the rents in the
Narodnik ideas with bits of fashionable opportunist ‘criticism’ of
Marxism”

   

(see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 310). The tactics of individual terrorism
which the S.R.’s advocated as the principal method of struggle against the
autocracy caused great harm to the revolutionary movement, since it made it
difficult to organise the masses for the revolutionary struggle.  

The agrarian programme of the S.R.’s envisaged the abolition of private
ownership of the land and its transfer to the village communes on the basis
of the “labour principle” and “equalised” land
tenure, as well as the development of co-operatives of all kinds. The S.R.’s
called this programme “socialisation of the land”, but there
was nothing socialist about it. Lenin’s analysis of it showed that
the preservation of commodity production and private farming on the common
land does not eliminate the domination of capital, does not save the
toiling peasants from exploitation and ruin nor can co operation be a
saving remedy for the small peasants under capitalism, since it serves to
enrich the rural bourgeoisie. At the same time Lenin pointed out that the
demand for equalised land tenure, while not socialist, was of a
historically progressive revolutionary-democratic nature, since it was
aimed against reactionary landlordism.  

The Bolshevik Party exposed the S.R.’s attempts to masquerade as
socialists, waged an unremitting struggle against the S.R.’s for influence
on the peasantry, and revealed the harm their tactics of individual
terrorism were causing the labour movement. At the same time the Bolsheviks
were prepared, on definite terms, to come to temporary agreements with the
S.R.’s in the struggle against tsarism.  

The heterogeneous class character of the peasantry determined the
political and ideological instability and organisational disunity of the
S.R. Party, and its members’ continual vacillation between the liberal
bourgeoisie and the proletariat. Already during the first Russian
revolution of 1905-07 its Right wing split away from the party and formed
the legal “Trudovik Popular Socialist Party” (Popular
Socialists), whose views were close to those of the
Constitutional-Democrats; the Left wing organised itself into the
semi-anarchist League of “Maximalists”. During the Stolypin
reaction the S.R. Party was in a state of complete collapse ideologically
and organisationally. The First World War found most of the S.R.’s taking
a social-chauvinist stand.  

After the victory of the bourgeois-democratic revolution of February
1917, the S.R.’s, together with the Mensheviks and Cadets, were the
mainstay of the counter-revolutionary Provisional Government of the
bourgeoisie and landlords, and the leaders of the party (Kerensky,
Avksentyev, Chernov) were members of that government. The S.R. Party
refused to support the peasants’ demands for the abolition of landlordism
and stood for private ownership of the land; the 5. 11. ministers in the
Provisional Government sent punitive expeditions against the peasants who
had seized the landlords’ estates.  

At the end of November 1917 the Left wing of the party founded a
separate Left Socialist-Revolutionary Party. In an endeavour to

   

maintain their influence among the peasant masses, the Left S.R.’s
formally recognised the Soviet government and entered into an agreement
with the Bolsheviks, but very soon turned against the Soviet power.  

During the years of foreign military intervention and civil war the
S.R.’s engaged in counter-revolutionary subversive activities, zealously
supported the interventionists and whiteguard generals, took part in
counter-revolutionary plots, and organised terrorist acts against leaders
of the Soviet state and Communist Party. After the civil war they continued
their anti-Soviet activities within the country and as whiteguard
émigrés abroad.

 



[5]
Coup d’état of June 3(16), 1907—a
counter-revolutionary act by which the. government dissolved the Second
Duma and altered the electoral law. On the basis of a trumped-up charge
framed by the Okhranka (the secret police) against the Social-Democratic
members of the Duma, accusing them of being connected with a military
organisation and, preparing an armed uprising, Stolypin, on June 1, 1907,
demanded that these members be banned from taking part in the Duma
sittings; sixteen members of the Social-Democratic group in the Duma were
to be. arrested. A committee was set up bye Duma to verify the
charge. Without waiting for the results of this committee’s
investigations, the government, on the night of June 3(16) had the
Social-Democratic group arrested. On June 3, the tsar’s
manifesto dissolved the Duma and announced modifications in the electoral
law, which greatly increased representation of the landlords and the
commercial and industrial bourgeoisie in the Duma and considerably reduced
the already meagre representation of the workers and peasants. This was a
gross violation of the Manifesto of October 17, 1905 and the Fundamental
Law of 1906 under which no laws could be issued by the government without
the approval of the Duma.  

Under the new electoral law one elector was elected to the landowners’
curia from 230 people, to the urban curia of the first degree from 1,000
people, to the urban curia of the second degree from 15,000 people, to the
peasants’ curia from 60,000 people, and to the workers’ curia from 125,000
people. The landlords and bourgeoisie were able to elect 65 per cent of all
the electors, the peasants 22 per cent (formerly 42 per cent), and the
workers 2 per cent (formerly 4 per cent). The law deprived the

indigeneous 

population of Asia tic Russia and the Turkic peoples of the Astrakhan and
Stavropol gubernias of the franchise, and reduced the number of deputies re
turned by Poland and the Caucasus by half. All persons throughout Russia
who did not know the Russian language were deprived of the franchise. The
Third Duma elected on the basis of this law, which assembled on November 1,
1907, was a Duma of Black-Hundred and Octobrist deputies.  

The coup d’état of June 3 was, in Lenin’s words, “a
turning-point in the history of our revolution” (see present edition,
Vol. 15, “The Straight Road”), which ushered in the period of
Stolypin reaction.

 



[6]
The Bulygin Duma—the consultative “representative
body” which the tsarist government had promised to convene in
1905. The tsar’s manifesto, the law providing for the establishment
of the Duma, and regulations governing elections to it were promulgated on
August 6(19), 1905. It came to be known as the Bulygin Duma because the
Bill inaugurating it was drafted on the tsar’s instructions by
A. G. Bulygin, the Minister of the Interior. Electoral rights were granted
only to the landlords, the big capitalists, and a small number of peasant
householders. The peasants were given only 51 out of the 412 seats
established by the law. The majority of the population—the workers,
poor peasants, farm-labourers, and democratic intelligentsia—were
deprived of the franchise. Women, servicemen, students, persons under
twenty-five, and a number of subject nationalities were not allowed to
vote. The Duma had no right to pass laws and could merely discuss certain
questions in the capacity of a consultative body under the tsar. Lenin
described the Bulygin Duma as “the most barefaced mockery of ‘popular
representation’\thinspace" (see present edition, Vol. 9, p. 194).  

The Bolsheviks called upon the workers and peasants to actively boycott
the Bulygin Duma, and concentrated their agitational campaign around the
slogans of an armed uprising, a revolutionary army, and a provisional
revolutionary government. The Mensheviks considered it possible to take
part in the elections to the Duma and stood for co-operation with the
liberal bourgeoisie.  

The Bulygin Duma boycott campaign was used by the Bolsheviks to rally
all the revolutionary forces, to organise mass political strikes, and to
prepare for an armed uprising. The elections to the Bulygin Duma did not
take place, and the government failed to convene it. It was swept away by
the mounting wave of revolution and the All-Russian political strike of
October 1905. On the subject of the Bulygin Duma, see Lenin’s
articles “The Constitutional Market-Place”, “The Boycott
of the Bulygin Duma, and Insurrection”, “Oneness of the Tsar
and the People, and of the People and the Tsar”, “In the Wake
of the Monarchist Bourgeoisie, Or in the Van of the Revolutionary
Proletariat and Peasantry?” and others (see present edition, Vol. 8,
pp. 351-55; Vol. 9, pp. 179-87, 191-99, 212-23).

 



[7]
The Ninth of January 1905—“Bloody Sunday”, the day
on which, by order of the tsar, a peaceful procession of St. Petersburg
workers was shot down. The workers were marching to the Winter Palace to
present a petition to the tsar.  

This cold-blooded massacre of unarmed workers started a wave of mass
political strikes and demonstrations all over Russia under the slogan of
“Down with the Autocracy I”. The events of January 9
precipitated the revolution of 1905-07.

 



[8]
Potemkin—armoured cruiser of the Russian Black Sea Fleet the crew
of which mutinied on June 14-24, 1905. The revolutionary outbreak on the
Potemkin was of great political importance, since

   

it was the first time that any big tsarist military unit had joined the
revolution.

 



[9]
The Witte Duma—Russia’s First Duma, convened on
April 27 (May 10), 1906 on a franchise drafted by the Prime Minister
Witte. Although the electoral law governing elections to the First Duma was
anti-democratic, the tsar did not succeed in convening a wholly docile
Duma. The majority in the Duma were Cadets, who tried to win the confidence
of the peasantry with false promises of re forms, including an agrarian
reform.  

The tsarist government dissolved the Duma on July 8 (21), 1906.





[10]
The man in the muffler—the chief character in
Chekhov’s story of the same name, typifying the narrow-minded
philistine, who fights shy of all innovations and display of
initiative.

 



[11]
See Friedrich Engels, Flüchtlingsliteratur, Internationales
aus dem Volksstaat, Berlin, 1957.

 

 
  


|

II

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## II









Lenin: 1907/boycott: II







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

II

Looking back at a struggle that is already over (at least, in its direct and
immediate form), there is nothing easier, of course, than to assess the total
result of the different, contradictory signs and symptoms of the epoch. The out
come of the struggle settles everything at once and removes all doubts in
a. very simple way. But what we have to do now is to determine such symptoms as
would help us grasp the state of affairs prior to the struggle, since
we wish to apply the lessons of historical experience to the Third Duma. We have
already pointed out above that the condition for the success of the boycott
of 1905 was a sweeping, universal, powerful, and rapid upswing of the
revolution. We must now examine, in the first place, what bearing a specially
powerful upswing of the struggle has on the boycott, and, secondly, what the
characteristic and distinctive features of a specially powerful upswing are.


Boycott, as we have already stated, is a struggle not within the framework of a
given institution, but against

    

its emergence. Any given institution can be derived only from the already
existing, i. e., the old, regime. Consequently, the boycott is a means of
struggle aimed directly at overthrowing the old regime, or, at the worst, i. e.,
when the assault is not strong enough for overthrow, at weakening it to such an
extent that it would be unable to set up that institution, unable to make it

       operate.[1]

Consequently, to be successful the boycott requires a direct struggle
against the old regime, an uprising against it and mass disobedience to it in a
large number of cases (such mass disobedience is one of the conditions for
preparing an upris ing). Boycott is a refusal to recognise the old regime, a
refusal, of course, not in words, but in deeds, i. e., it is something that
finds expression not only in cries or the slogans of organisations, but in a
definite movement of the mass of the people, who systematically defy
the laws of the old regime, systematically set up new institutions, which,
though unlawful, actually exist, and so on and so forth. The connection between
boycott and the broad revolutionary upswing is thus obvious: boycott is the
most decisive means of struggle, which rejects not the form of organisation
of the given institution, but its very existence. Boycott is a
declaration of open war against the old regime, a direct attack upon it. Unless
there is a broad revolutionary up swing, unless there is mass unrest which
overflows, as it were, the bounds of the old legality, there can be no question
of the boycott succeeding.


Passing to the question of the nature and symptoms of the upswing of the autumn
of 1905 we shall easily see that what was happening at the time was an incessant
mass offensive of the revolution, which systematically attacked and
held the enemy in check. Repression expanded the movement instead of reducing
it. In the wake of January 9 came a gigantic strike wave, the barricades in
Lodz, the

    

    mutiny of the Potemkin. In the sphere of the press, the unions, and
    education the legal bounds prescribed by the old regime were everywhere
    systematically broken, and by no means by the “revolutionaries”
    alone, but by the man-in-the-street, for the old authority was really
    weakened, was really letting the reins slip from its senile hands. A
    singularly striking and unerring indication of the force of the
    upswing (from the point of view of the revolutionary organisations) was the
    fact that the slogans of the revolutionaries not only evoked a response but
    actually lagged behind the march of events. January 9 and the mass
    strikes that followed it, and the Potemkin were all events which
    were in advance of the direct appeals of the revolutionaries. In 1906,
      there was no appeal of theirs which the masses would have met
    passively, by silence, or by abandoning the struggle. The boycott under such
    conditions was a natural supplement to the electrically charged
    atmosphere. That slogan did not “invent” anything at the time,
    it merely formulated accurately and truly the upswing which was going
    steadily forward towards a direct assault. On the contrary, the
    “inventors” were our Mensheviks, who kept aloof from the
    revolutionary upswing, fell for the empty promise of the tsar in the shape
    of the manifesto or the law of August 6 and seriously believed in the
    promised change over to a constitutional monarchy. The Mensheviks
    (and Parvus) at that time based their tactics not on the fact of the
    sweeping, powerful, and rapid revolutionary upswing, but on the
    tsar’s
    promise of a change to a constitutional monarchy! No wonder such tactics
    turned out to be ridiculous and abject opportunism. No wonder that in all
    the Menshevik arguments about the boycott an analysis of the boycott of the
    Bulygin Duma, i. e., the revolution’s greatest experience of the
    boycott, is now carefully discarded. But it is not enough to recognise this
    mistake of the Mensheviks, perhaps their biggest mistake in revolutionary
    tactics. One must clearly realise that the source of this mistake was
    failure to understand the objective state of affairs, which made
    the revolutionary upswing a reality and the change to a constitutional
    monarchy an empty police promise. The Mensheviks were wrong not because they
    approached the question in a mood devoid of subjective revolutionary

    

spirit, but because the ideas of these pseudo-revolutionaries fell short of the
objectively revolutionary situation. It is easy to confuse these reasons for the
Mensheviks’ mistakes, but it is impermissible for a Marxist to confuse them.

 

Notes
 

[1]
Reference everywhere in the text is to active boycott, that is, not
just a refusal to take part in the institutions of the old regime, but an
attack upon this regime. Headers who are not familiar with
Social-Democratic literature of the period of the Bulygin Duma boycott
should be reminded that the Social-Democrats spoke openly at the time about
active boycott, sharply contrasting it to passive boycott, And
even linking it with an armed uprising.  —Lenin
 

 
  

I

|

III

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## III









Lenin: 1907/boycott: III







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

III

The connection between the boycott and the historical conditions characteristic
of a definite period of the Russian revolution should be examined from still
another angle. What was the political content of the Social-Democratic boycott
campaign of the autumn of 1905 and the spring of 1906? Its content did not, of
course, consist in repeating the word boycott or calling on the people not to
take part in the elections. Nor was its content confined to appeals for a direct
assault that ignored the roundabout and zigzag paths proposed by the
autocracy. In addition to and not even alongside this theme, but rather at the
centre of the whole boycott campaign, was the fight against constitutional
illusions. This fight was, in truth, the living spirit of the
boycott. Recall the speeches of the boycottists and their whole agitation, look
at the principal resolutions of the boycottists and you will see how true this
is.


The Mensheviks were never able to understand this aspect of the boycott. They
always believed that to fight constitutional illusions in a period of nascent
constitutionalism was nonsense, absurdity, “anarchism”. This point
of view of the Mensheviks was also forcibly expressed in their speeches at the
Stockholm Congress,[1]

especially— I remember—in the speeches of
Plekhanov, not to mention Menshevik literature.


At first sight the position of the Mensheviks on this question would really seem
to be as impregnable as that of a man who smugly instructs his friends that
horses eat oats. In a period of nascent constitutionalism to proclaim a fight
against constitutional illusions! Is it not anarchism? Is it not gibberish?


The vulgarisation of this question effected by means of a specious allusion to
the plain common sense of such arguments is based on the fact that the special
period of

    

the Russian revolution is passed over in silence, that the boycott of the
      Bulygin Duma is forgotten, and that the concrete stages
    of the course taken by our revolution are replaced by a general designation
    of the whole of our revolution, both past and future, as a revolution that
    begets constitutionalism. This is a specimen of the violation of the method
    of dialectical materialism by people, who, like Plekhanov, spoke about this
    method with the utmost eloquence.


Yes, our bourgeois revolution as a whole, like every bourgeois revolution, is,
in the long run, a process of building up a constitutional system and nothing
more. That is the truth. It is a useful truth for exposing the quasi-socialist
pretensions of one or another bourgeois-democratic programme, theory, tactics,
and so forth. But would you be able to derive any benefit from this truth on the
question as to what kind of constitutionalism the workers’ party is to
lead the country to in the epoch of bourgeois revolution? Or on the question as
to how exactly the workers’ party should fight for a definite (and,
precisely, a republican) constitutionalism during definite periods of the
revolution? You would not. This favourite truth of Axelrod’s and
Plekhanov’s would no more enlighten you on these questions than the
conviction that a horse eats oats would enable you to choose a suitable animal
and ride it.


The fight against constitutional illusions, the Bolsheviks said in 1905 and at
the beginning of 1906, should become the slogan of the moment, because it was
at that period that the objective state of affairs faced the struggling social
forces with having to decide the issue whether the straight path of direct
revolutionary struggle and of representative institutions created directly by
the revolution on the basis of complete democratism, or the roundabout zigzag
path of a monarchist constitution and police-“constitutional” (in inverted
commas!) institutions of the “Duma” type would triumph in the
immediate future.


Did the objective state of affairs really raise this issue, or was it
“invented” by the Bolsheviks because of their theoretical
mischievousness? That question has now been answered by the history of the
Russian revolution.

 

The October struggle of 1905 was indeed a struggle to prevent the revolution
from being switched to monarchist-constitutional lines. The October-December
period was indeed a period which saw the realisation of a proletarian, truly
democratic, broad, bold, and free constitutionalism that really expressed the
will of the people as opposed to the pseudo-constitutionalism of the Dubasov and
Stolypin[2]

constitution. The revolutionary struggle for a truly democratic
constitutionalism (that is, one built on ground completely cleared of
the old regime and all the abominations associated with it) called for the most
determined fight against the police-monarchist constitution being used as a bait
for the people. This simple thing the Social-Democratic opponents of the boycott
absolutely failed to understand.


Two phases in the development of the Russian revolution now stand out before us
in all their clarity: the phase of upswing (1905) and the phase of decline
(1906-07). The phase of maximum development of the people’s activity, of
free and broad organisations of all classes of the population, the phase of
maximum freedom of the press and maximum ignoring by the people of the old
authority, its institutions and commands—and all this without any
constitutionalism bureaucratically endorsed and expressed in formal rules
and regulations. And after that the phase of least development and steady decline of
popular activity, organisation, freedom of the press, etc., under a (God
forgive us!) “constitution” concocted, sanctioned, and safeguarded
by the Dubasovs and Stolypins.


Now, when everything behind looks so plain and clear,
you would hardly find a single pedant who would dare to deny. the
legitimacy and necessity of the revolutionary struggle of the proletariat
to prevent events from taking a constitutional-monarchist turn, the
legitimacy and necessity of the fight against constitutional illusions.


Now you will hardly find a sensible historian worthy of the name who would not
divide the course of the Russian revolution between 1905 and the autumn of 1907
into these two periods: the “anti-constitutional” period (if I may
be allowed that expression) of upswing and the period of
“constitutional” decline, the period of conquest and achievement of
freedom by the people without police (monarchist)

    

      constitutionalism and the period of oppression and suppression of
      popular freedom by means of the monarchist “constitution”.


Now the period of constitutional illusions, the period of the First and Second
Dumas is quite clear to us, and it is no longer difficult to grasp the
importance of the fight which the revolutionary Social-Democrats waged at
that time against constitutional illusions. But at that time,
in 1905 and the beginning of 1906, neither the liberals in the bourgeois camp
nor the Mensheviks in the proletarian camp understood this.


Yet the period of the First and Second Dumas was in every sense and all respects
a period of constitutional illusions. The solemn pledge that “no law shall
become effective without the approval of the Duma” was not vie lated at
that period. Thus, the constitution existed on paper, never ceasing to warm the
cockles of all the slavish hearts of the Russian

Cadets.[3] Both Dubasov and
Stolypin at that period put the Russian constitution to the test of practice,
tried it and verified it in an effort to adjust and fit it to the old
autocracy. They, Dubasov and Stolypin, appeared to he the most powerful men of
the time, and they worked hard to make the “illusion” a reality. The
illusion proved to be an illusion. History has fully endorsed the correctness of
the slogan of the revolutionary Social-Democrats. But it was not only the
Dubasovs and Stolypins who tried to put the “constitution” into
effect, it was not only the servile Cadets who praised it to the skies and like
flunkeys (à la Mr. Rodichev in the First Duma) exerted themselves to
prove that the monarch was blameless and that it would be presumptuous to hold
him responsible for the pogroms. No. During this period the broad masses of the
people as well undoubtedly still believed to a greater or lesser extent in the
“constitution”, believed in the Duma despite the warnings of the
Social-Democrats.


The period of constitutional illusions in the Russian revolution may be said to
have been a period of nation wide infatuation with a bourgeois fetish, just as
whole nations in Western Europe sometimes become infatuated with the fetish of
bourgeois nationalism, anti-semitism, chauvinism, etc. It is to the credit of
the Social-Democrats

    

that they alone were not taken in by the bourgeois hoax, that they alone in
the epoch of constitutional illusions always kept unfurled the banner of
struggle against constitutional illusions.



Why then, the question now arises, was the boycott a specific means of struggle
against constitutional illusions?


There is a feature about the boycott which, at first sight, involuntarily repels
every Marxist. Boycott of elections is a renunciation of parliamentarism,
something that looks very much like passive rejection, abstention, evasion. So
Parvus regarded it (he only had German models to go by) when, in the autumn of
1905, he stormed and raged, angrily but unsuccessfully, attempting to prove that
active boycott was all the same a bad thing because it was still a
boycott.... And so also is it regarded by Martov, who to this day has
learned nothing from the revolution and is more and more turning into a
liberal. By his last article in

Tovarishch[4] he has shown that he is unable even to raise the
problem in a way that befits a revolutionary Social-Democrat.


But this most objectionable, so to speak, feature of the boycott as far as a
Marxist is concerned is fully explained by the specific features of the period
that gave rise to such a method of struggle. The First monarchist Duma, the
Bulygin Duma, was a bait designed to draw the people away from the
revolution. The bait was a dummy clothed in a dress of constitutionalism. One
and all were tempted to swallow the bait. Some through selfish class interests,
others through ignorance, were inclined to snatch at the dummy of the Bulygin
Duma, and later at that of the Witte Duma. Everyone was enthusiastic, everyone
sincerely believed in it. Participation in the elections was not just a
matter-of-fact, simple performance of one’s usual civic duties: It was the
solemn inauguration of a monarchist constitution. It was a turn from, the direct
revolutionary path to the monarchist-constitutional path.


The Social-Democrats were bound at such a time to unfurl their banner
of protest and warning with the utmost vigour, with the utmost
demonstrativeness. And that meant refusing to take part, abstaining oneself and
holding the

    

    people back, issuing a call for an assault on the old regime instead of
    working within the framework of an institution set up by that regime. The
    nation-wide enthusiasm for the bourgeois-police fetish of a
    “constitutional” monarchy demanded of the Social-Democrats, as
    the party of the proletariat, an equally nation-wide demonstration of their
    views protesting against and exposing this fetish, demanded a fight with the
    utmost vigour against the establishment of institutions that embodied that
    fetishism.


There you have the full historical justification not only for the boycott of the
Bulygin Duma, which met with immediate success, but for the boycott of the
Witte Duma, which, to all appearances, was a failure. We now see why it
was only an apparent failure, why the Social-Democrats had to maintain
their protest against the constitutional-monarchist turn of our revolution
to the very last. This turn in fact proved to be a turn
into a blind alley. The illusions about a monarchist constitution
proved to be merely a prelude or a signboard, an adornment, diverting attention
from preparations for the annulment of this “constitution” by the
old regime....


We said that the Social-Democrats had to maintain their protest against the
suppression of liberty by means of the “constitution” to the very
last. What do we mean by “to the very last”? We mean until the
institution against which the Social-Democrats were fighting had
become an accomplished fact despite the Social-Democrats, until the
monarchist-constitutional turn of the Russian revolution, which inevitably
meant (for a certain time) the decline of the revolution, tile
defeat of tile revolution, had become an accomplished fact despite the
Social-Democrats. The period of constitutional illusions was an attempt at
compromise. We fought and had to fight against it with all oar
might. We had to go into the Second Duma, we had to reckon with compromise once
the circumstances forced it upon us against our will, despite our
efforts, and at the cost of the defeat of our struggle. For how long we have to
reckon with it is another matter, of course.


What inference is to be drawn from all this as regards the boycott of the
Third Duma? Is it, perhaps, that the boycott, which is necessary at the
beginning of the period

    

of constitutional illusions, is also necessary at the end of this period? That
would he a “bright idea” in the vein of “analogical
sociology” and not a serious conclusion. Boycott cannot now have
the same meaning that it had at the beginning of the Russian
revolution. Today we can neither warn the people against constitutional
illusions nor fight to prevent the revolution from being turned into the
constitutional-monarchist blind alley. Boycott cannot have its former vital
spark. If there should be a boycott, it will in any case have a
different significance, it will be filled in any case with a
different political content.


Moreover, our analysis of the historical peculiarity of the boycott provides one
consideration against a boycott of the Third Duma. In the period at the
beginning of the constitutional turn the attention of the whole nation was
inevitably focused on the Duma. By means of the boycott we fought and were bound
to fight against this focusing of attention on the trend towards the blind
alley, to fight against an infatuation that was due to ignorance,
unenlightenment, weakness, or selfish counter-revolutionary activity. Today
not only any
nation-wide, but even any at all widespread enthusiasm for the Duma in general
or for the Third Duma in particular is completely ruled out. There is no need
for any boycott here.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Fourth (Unity) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P
was held in Stockholm, April 10-25 (April 23-May 8), 1906.  

It was attended by 112 delegates with the right to vote,representing 57
local organisations, and 22 consultative delegates. In addition, there were
representatives from the non-Russian Social-Democratic parties: three each
from those of Poland and Lithuania, the Bund, the Lettish Social-Democratic
Labour Party, and one each from the Ukrainian Social-Democratic Labour
Party and the Labour Party of Finland, and a representative of the
Bulgarian Social-Democratic Labour Party. The Bolshevik delegates included
F. A. Artyom (Sergeyev), M. F. Frunze, M. I. Kalinin, V. I. Lenin,
S. G. Shaumyan, and V. V. Vorovsky. The Congress discussed the agrarian
question, the current situation and the class tasks of the proletariat, the
attitude towards the Duma, and organisational questions. There was a sharp
struggle between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks on all issues. Lenin
delivered reports and made speeches at the Congress on the agrarian
question, on the current situation, on the tactics to be assumed in regard
to the elections to the Duma, on the armed uprising, and other questions.


The Mensheviks’ numerical preponderance at the Congress, though slight,
determined the character of the Congress decisions. On a number of quest
ions the Congress adopted Menshevik resolutions the agrarian programme, the
attitude towards the Duma, etc.). The Congress adopted Lenin’s
formulation of Paragraph One of the Party Rules. The Congress admitted into
the R.S.D.L.P. the non-Russian Social-Democratic organisations: the
Social-Democratic Party of Poland and Lithuania, an4 the Lettish
Social-Democratic Labour Party and adopted a draft laying down the
conditions on which the Bund could join the R.S.D.L.P.  

The Central Committee elected at the Congress consisted of three
Bolsheviks and seven Mensheviks. Only Mensheviks were elected to the
Editorial Board of the Central Organ.  


An analysis of the Congress is given in Lenin’s pamphlet
Report on the Unity Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. (See
present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 317-82.)

 



[2]
Dubasov—the Governor-General of Moscow who suppressed
the Moscow armed uprising in December 1905.  Stolypin—
Russian Prime Minister.

 



[3]
Cadets— (abbreviated) members of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party, the chief, party of the liberal-monarchist
bourgeoisie in Russia. Founded in October 1905, its membership was made up
of representatives of the bourgeoisie, Zemstvo leaders of the landowning
class, and bourgeois intellectuals. Leading personalities of the party were
P. N. Milyukov, S. A. Muromtsev, V. A. Maklakov, A. I. Shingarev,
P. B. Struve, and F. I. Rodichev, among others. To hoodwink the working
people the Cadets called themselves the “Party of People’s
Freedom”. Actually, they did not go beyond the demand for a
constitutional monarchy. They considered it their chief aim to combat the
revolutionary movement, and sought to share the power with the tsar and the
feudal landlords. During the First World War the Cadets actively supported
the tsarist government’s aggressive foreign policy. During the
bourgeois-democratic revolution of February 1917 they tried their hardest
to save the monarchy. They used their key positions in the bourgeois
Provisional Government to pursue a counter-revolutionary policy opposed to
the interests of the people, but favouring the U.S., British, and French
imperialists. After the victory of the October Revolution the Cadets came
out as implacable enemies of the Soviet power. They took part in all the
counter-revolutionary armed actions and campaigns of the
interventionists. Living abroad as émigrés after the defeat
of the interventionists and whiteguards, the Cadets did not cease their
anti-Soviet counter-revolutionary activities.

 



[4]
Tovarishch (The Comrade)—a bourgeois daily
published in St. Petersburg from March 15(28), 1906 to December 30, 1907
(January 12, 1908). Though formally not the organ of any particular party
it was in fact the mouthpiece of the Left Cadets. Active contributors were
S. N. Prokopovich and Y. D. Kuskova. The newspaper also published
contributions from Mensheviks.

 

 
  

II

|

IV

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## IV









Lenin: 1907/boycott: IV







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

IV

And so the conditions for the applicability of a boycott should he sought,
undoubtedly, in the objective state of affairs at the given moment. Comparing,
from this point of view, the autumn of 1907 with that of 1905, we cannot help
coming to the conclusion that we have no grounds today for proclaiming
a boycott. From the standpoint of the relation between the direct revolutionary
path and the constitutional-monarchist “zigzag”, from the standpoint
of mass upswing, and from the standpoint of the specific aims of the fight
against constitutional illusions, the present state of affairs differs sharply
from that of two years ago.


At that time the monarchist-constitutional turn of his tory was nothing more
than a police promise. Now it is

    

a fact. Not to acknowledge this fact would be a ridiculous fear of the
      truth. And it would be a mistake to infer from the acknowledgement of this
      fact that the Russian revolution is over. No, there are no grounds
      whatever for drawing such a conclusion. A Marxist is bound to fight for
      the direct revolutionary path of development when such a fight is
      prescribed by the objective state of affairs, but this, we repeat, does
      not mean that we do not have to reckon with the zigzag turn which has in
      fact already taken definite shape. In this respect the course of the
      Russian revolution has already become quite definite. At the beginning of
      the revolution we see a line of short, but extraordinarily broad and
      amazingly rapid upswing. Next we have a line of extremely slow but steady
      decline, beginning with the December uprising of 1905. First a period of
      direct revolutionary struggle by the masses, then a period of
      monarchist-constitutional turn.


Does this mean that this latter turn is a final one? That the revolution is over
and a “constitutional” period has set in? That there are no grounds
either for expecting a new upswing or for preparing for it? That the
republican character of our programme must be scrapped?


Not at all. Only liberal vulgarians like our Cadets, who are ready to use any
argument to justify servility and toadyism, can draw such conclusions. No, it
only means that in upholding, at all points, the whole of our programme
and all our revolutionary views, we must bring our direct appeals into
line with the objective state of affairs at the given moment. While proclaiming
the inevitability of revolution, while systematically and steadily accumulating
inflammatory material in every way, while, for this purpose, carefully guarding
the revolutionary traditions of our revolution’s best epoch, cultivating
them and purging them of liberal parasites, we nevertheless do not refuse to do
the humdrum daily work on the humdrum monarchist-constitutional turn. That is
all. We must work for a new, broad upswing, but we have no ground whatever for
butting in blindly with the slogan of boycott.


As we have said, the only boycott that can have any meaning in Russia at the
present time is active boycott. This implies not passively avoiding
participation in the

    

elections, but ignoring the elections for the sake of the aim of a direct
assault. The boycott, in this sense, inevitably amounts to, a call for
the most energetic and decisive offensive. Does such a broad and general upswing
exist at the present moment, an upswing without which such a call would be
meaningless? Of course not.


Generally speaking, as far as “calls” are concerned, the difference
in this respect between the present state of affairs and that of the autumn of
1905 is a very striking one. At that time, as we have already pointed out, there
were no calls throughout the previous year to which the masses would not have
responded. The impetus of the mass offensive took place in advance of the calls
of the organisations. Now we are at a period of a lull in the revolution when
a whole series of calls systematically met with no response among
the masses. That is what happened with the call to sweep away the Witte
Duma (at the beginning of 1906), with the call for an uprising after the
dissolution of the First Duma (in the summer of 1906), with the call for
struggle in answer to the dissolution of the Second Duma and the coup
d’état of June 3,1907. Take the leaflet of our Central Committee on these last

acts.[1] You will find there a direct call to struggle in the form possible
under local conditions (demonstrations, strikes, and an open struggle against
the armed force of absolutism). It was a verbal appeal. The mutinies of June
1907 in Kiev and the Black Sea Fleet were calls through action. Neither of these
calls evoked a mass response. If the most striking and direct manifestations of
reactionary assault upon the revolution—the dissolution of the two Dumas
and the coup d’etat—evoked no upswing at the time, what ground is there
for immediately repeating the call in the form of proclaiming a boycott? Is it
not clear that the objective state of affairs is such that the
“proclamation” is in danger of being just an empty shout? When the
struggle is oil, when it is spreading, growing, coming up from all sides, then
such a “proclamation” is legitimate and necessary; then it is the
duty of the revolutionary proletariat to sound such a war-cry. But it is
impossible to invent that struggle or to call it into being merely by a
war-cry. And when a whole series of fighting calls, tested by us on more direct
occasions, has proved to be unavailing,

    

it is only natural that we should seek to have serious grounds for
      “proclaiming” a slogan which is meaningless unless the
      conditions exist which make fighting calls feasible.


If anyone wants to persuade the Social-Democratic proletariat that the
slogan of boycott is a correct one, he must not allow himself to be carried
away by the mere sound of words that in their time played a great and glorious
revolutionary role. He must weigh the objective conditions for applying such a
slogan and realise that to launch it assumes indirectly the existence of
conditions making for a sweeping, universal, powerful, and rapid revolutionary
upswing. But in periods such as we are now living in, in periods of a temporary
lull in the revolution, such a condition can in no circumstances be indirectly
assumed. it must be directly and distinctly realised and made clear both to
oneself and to the whole working class. Otherwise one runs the risk of finding
oneself in the position of a person who uses big words without understanding
their true meaning or who hesitates to speak plainly and call a spade a spade.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Leaflet of the C.C.— “Letter to Party
Organisations” No. I written in connection with the coup
d’état of June 3. “The proletariat and its
spokesman—revolutionary Social-Democracy,” the letter states,
“cannot leave the government’s act of violence unanswered and
unprotested. Social-Democracy does not give up the idea of continuing and
developing the revolution.” Without calling for immediate action, the
C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. appealed to the Party organisations to
“support and go the whole way in developing mass movements as they
arise, and in cases where the active and decisive support of the broad
masses can be counted on, to immediately take upon themselves the
initiative in the movement and notify the C.C. about it”.

 

 
  

III

|

V

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## V









Lenin: 1907/boycott: V







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

V

The boycott is one of the finest revolutionary traditions of the most eventful
and heroic period of the Russian revolution. We said above that it is one of
our tasks to care fully guard these traditions in general, to cultivate them,
and to purge them of liberal (and opportunist) parasites. We must dwell a little
on the analysis of this task in order correctly to define what it implies and to
avoid misinterpretations and misunderstandings that might easily arise.


Marxism differs from all other socialist theories in the remarkable way it
combines complete scientific sobriety in the analysis of the objective
state of affairs and the objective course of evolution with the most
emphatic recognition of the importance of the revolutionary energy,
revolutionary creative genius, and revolutionary initiative of the
masses—and also, of course, of individuals, groups, organisations,
and parties that are able to discover and achieve contact with one or
another class. A high appraisal

    

of the revolutionary periods in the development of humanity follows
logically from the totality of Marx’s views on history. It is in such,
periods that the numerous contradictions which slowly accumulate during periods
of so-called peaceful development become resolved. It is in such periods that
the direct role of the different classes in determining the forms of social
life is manifested with the greatest force, and that the foundations are laid
for the political “superstructure”, which then persists for a long
time on the basis of the new relations of production. And, unlike the
theoreticians of the liberal bourgeoisie, Marx did not regard
these periods as deviations from the “normal” path, as
manifestations of “social disease”, as the deplorable results of
excesses and mistakes, but as the most vital, the most important, essential,
and decisive moments in the history of human societies. In the activities of
Marx and Engels themselves, the period of their participation in the mass
revolutionary struggle of 1848-49 stands out as the central point. This was
their point of departure when determining the future pattern of the workers’
movement and democracy in different countries. It was to this point that they
always returned in order to determine the essential nature of the different
classes and their tendencies in the most striking and purest form. It was from
the stand point of the revolutionary period of that time that they always judged
the later, lesser, political formations and organisations, political aims and
political conflicts. No wonder the ideological leaders of liberalism, men like
Sombart, whole-heartedly hate this feature of Marx’s activities and
writings and ascribe it to the “bitterness of an exile”. It is
indeed typical of the bugs of police-ridden bourgeois university science to
ascribe an inseparable component of Marx’s and Engels’s
revolutionary outlook to personal bitterness, to the personal hardships of life
in exile!


In one of his letters, I think it was to Kugelmann, Marx in passing threw out a
highly characteristic remark, which is particularly interesting in the light of
the question we are discussing. He says that the reaction in Germany had almost
succeeded in blotting out the memory and traditions of the revolutionary epoch
of 1848 from the minds of the

people.[3] Here we have the aims of reaction and the aims

    

    of the party of the proletariat in relation to the revolutionary traditions of
      a given country strikingly contrasted. The aim of reaction is to blot out
      these traditions, to represent the revolution as “elemental
      madness”—Struve’s translation of the German das tolle
      Jahr (“the mad year”— the term applied by the German
    police-minded bourgeois historians, and even more widely by German
    university-professorial historiography, to the year 1848). The aim of
    reaction is to make the people forget the forms of struggle, the forms of
    organisation, and the ideas and slogans which the revolutionary period begot
    in such profusion and variety. Just as those obtuse eulogists of English
    philistinism, the Webbs, try to represent Chartism, the revolutionary period
    of the English labour movement, as pure childishness, as “sowing wild
    oats”, as a piece of naïveté unworthy of serious
      attention, as an
    accidental and abnormal deviation, so too the German bourgeois historians
    treat the year 1848 in Germany. Such also is the attitude of the
      reactionaries to the Great French Revolution, which, by the fierce
      hatred it still
    inspires, demonstrates to this day the vitality and force of its influence
    on humanity. And in the same way our heroes of counter-revolution,
    particularly “democrats” of yesterday like Struve, Milyukov,
    Kiesewetter, and tutti quanti vie with one another in scurrilously
    slandering the revolutionary traditions of the Russian revolution. Although
    it is barely two years since the direct mass struggle of the proletariat won
    that particle of freedom which sends the liberal lackeys of the old regime
    into such raptures, a vast trend calling itself liberal (!!) has
    already arisen in our publicist literature. This trend is fostered by the
    Cadet press and is wholly devoted to depicting our revolution, revolutionary
    methods of struggle, revolutionary slogans, and revolutionary traditions as
    something base, primitive, naïve, elemental, mad, etc. ... even criminal
    ... from Milyukov to Kamyshansky il n’y a qu’un

      pas![1]

On the other hand, the successes of reaction, which first drove the people
from the Soviets of Workers’ and Peasants Deputies into the
Dubasov-Stolypin Dumas, and is now

    

driving it into the Octobrist Duma, are depicted by the heroes of Russian
liberalism as “the process of growth of constitutional
consciousness in Russia


It is undoubtedly the duty of Russian Social-Democrats to study our revolution
most carefully and thoroughly, to acquaint the masses with its forms of
struggle, forms of organisation, etc., to strengthen the revolutionary
traditions among the people, to convince the masses that improvements of
any importance and permanence can be achieved solely and exclusively through
revolutionary struggle, and to systematically expose the utter baseness of those
smug liberals who pollute the social atmosphere with the miasma of
“constitutional” servility, treachery, and Molchalinism. In the
history of the struggle for liberty a single day of the October strike or of the
December uprising is a hundred times more significant than months of
Cadet flunkey speeches in the Duma on the subject of the blameless monarch and
constitutional monarchy. We must see to it—for if we do not no one else
will—that the people know much more thoroughly and in more detail, those
spirited, eventful, and momentous days than those months of
“constitutional” asphyxia and

Balalaikin-Molchalin[4] prosperity so zealously announced to the world
by our liberal-party and non-party “democratic” (ugh! ugh!)
press with the amiable acquiescence of Stolypin and his retinue of
gendarme censors.


There is no doubt that, in many cases, sympathy for the boycott is created
precisely by these praiseworthy efforts of revolutionaries to foster tradition
of the finest period of the revolutionary past, to light up the cheerless slough
of the drab workaday present by a spark of bold, open, and
resolute struggle. But it is just because we cherish this concern for
revolutionary traditions that we must vigorously protest against the view that
by using one of the slogans of a particular historical period the essential
conditions of that period can be restored. It is one thing to preserve the
traditions of the revolution, to know how to use them for constant propaganda
and agitation and for acquainting the masses with the conditions of a direct and
aggressive struggle against the old regime, but quite another thing to repeat a
slogan divorced from the sum total of the

    

conditions which gave rise to it and which ensured its success and to apply it
      to essentially different conditions.


Marx himself, who so highly valued revolutionary traditions and unsparingly
castigated a renegade or philistine attitude towards them, at the same time
demanded that revolutionaries should be able to think, should be able
to analyse the conditions under which old methods of struggle could be
used, and not simply to repeat certain slogans. The “national”
traditions of 1792 in France will perhaps for ever remain a model of
certain revolutionary methods of struggle; but this did not prevent Marx in 1870
in the famous Address of the International from warning the French proletariat
against the mistake of applying those traditions to the conditions of a
different

period.[5]


This holds good for Russia as well. We must study the conditions for the
application of the boycott; we must instil in the masses the idea that the
boycott is a quite legitimate and sometimes essential method at moments when the
revolution is on the upswing (whatever the pedants who take the name of Marx in
vain may say). But whether revolution is really on the upswing—and this is
the fundamental condition for proclaiming a boycott—is a question which
one must be able to raise independently and to decide on the basis of a serious
analysis of the facts. It is our duty to prepare the way for such an upswing, as
far as it lies within our power, and not to reject the boycott at the proper
moment; but to regard the boycott slogan as being generally applicable to every
bad or very bad representative institution would be an absolute mistake.


Take the reasoning that was used to defend and support the boycott in the
“days of freedom”, and you will see at once that it is impossible
simply to apply such arguments to present-day conditions.


When advocating the boycott in 1905 and the beginning of 1906 we said that
participation in the elections would tend to lower the temper, to surrender the
position to the enemy, to lead the revolutionary people astray, to make
it easier for tsarism to come to an agreement with the
counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie, and so on. What was the fundamental
premise
underlying these arguments, a premise not always specified but always assumed as
something

    

which in those days was self-evident. This premise was the rich
revolutionary energy of the masses, which sought and found direct
outlets apart from any “constitutional” channels. This premise was
the continuous offensive of the revolution against reaction, an
offensive which it would have been criminal to weaken by occupying and defending
a position that was deliberately yielded up by the enemy in order to weaken the
general assault. Try to repeat these arguments apart from the
conditions of this fundamental premise and you will immediately feel that all
your “music” is off-key, that your fundamental tone is false.


It would be just as hopeless to attempt to justify the boycott by drawing a
distinction between the Second and the Third Dumas. To regard the difference
between the Cadets (who in the Second Duma completely betrayed the people to the
Black

Hundreds[6])

and the

Octobrists[7] as a serious and
fundamental difference, to attach any real significance to the notorious
“constitution” which was torn up by the coup d’état of June 3, is
something that in general corresponds much more to the spirit of vulgar
democracy than that of revolutionary Social-Democracy. We have always said,
maintained, and repeated that the “constitution” of the First and
Second Dumas was only an illusion, that the Cadets’ talk was only a blind to
screen their Octobrist nature, and that the Duma was a totally unsuitable
instrument for satisfying the demands of the proletariat and the peasantry. For
us June 3, 1907 is a natural and inevitable result of the defeat of December
1905. We were never “captivated” by the charms of the
“Duma” constitution, and so we cannot be greatly disappointed by
the transition from reaction embellished and glossed over by Rodichev’s
phrase-mongering to naked, open, and crude reaction. The latter may even be a
more effective means of sobering the ranting liberal simpletons or the sections
of the population they have led astray....


Compare the Menshevik Stockholm resolution with the Bolshevik London resolution
on the State Duma. You will find that the former is pompous, wordy, full of
high-flown phrases about the significance of the Duma arid puffed up by a sense
of the grandeur of work in the Duma. The latter is simple, concise, sober, arid
modest. The first resolution

    

is imbued with a spirit of philistine jubilation over the marriage of
Social-Democracy and constitutionalism (“the new power from the midst
of the people”, and so on and so forth in this same spirit of
official falsehood). The second resolution can be paraphrased approximately
as follows:

since the accursed counter-revolution has driven us into this accursed pigsty,
we shall work there too for the benefit of the revolution, without whining, but
also without boasting.


By defending the Duma against boycott when we were still in the period of direct
revolutionary struggle, the Mensheviks, so to speak, gave their pledge to the
people that the Duma would be something in the nature of a weapon of
revolution. And they completely failed to honour this pledge. But if we
Bolsheviks gave any pledge at all, it was only by our assurance that the Duma
was the spawn of counter-revolution and that no real good could be expect ed
from it. Our view has been borne out splendidly so far, and it can safely be
said that it will be borne out by. future events as well. Unless the
October-December strategy is “corrected” and repeated on the basis
of the new data, there will never be freedom in Russia.


Therefore, when I am told that the Third Duma cannot be utilised as the Second
Duma was, that the masses cannot be made to understand that it is necessary to
take part in it, I would reply: if by “utilise” is meant some
Menshevik bombast about it being a weapon of the revolution, etc., then it
certainly cannot. But then even the first two Dumas proved in fact to be only
steps to the Octobrist Duma, yet we utilised them for the simple and

modest[2]

purpose (propaganda and agitation, criticism and explaining to the masses what
is taking place) for which we shall always

    

contrive to utilise even the worst representative institutions. A speech in
the Duma will not cause any “revolution”, and propaganda in
connection with the Duma is not distinguished by any particular
merits; but the advantage that Social-Democracy can derive from the one and
the other is not less, and sometimes even greater, than that derived from a
printed speech or a speech delivered at some other gathering.  

And we must explain to the masses our participation in the Octobrist Duma just
as simply. Owing to the defeat of December 1905 and the failure of the attempts
of 1906-07 to “repair” this defeat, reaction inevitably drove us and
will continue to drive us constantly into worse and worse
quasi-constitutional institutions. Always and everywhere we shall uphold our
convictions and advocate our views, always insisting that no good can be
expected as long as the old regime remains, as long as it is not wholly
eradicated. We shall prepare the conditions for a new upswing, and until it
takes
place, and in order that it may take place, we shall work still harder and not
launch slogans which have meaning only when the revolution is on the upswing.


It would be just as wrong to regard the boycott as a line of tactics
counterposing the proletariat and part of the revolutionary bourgeois democracy
to liberalism and reaction. The boycott is not a line of tactics, but a
special means of struggle suitable under special conditions. To confuse
Bolshevism with “boycottism” would be as bad as confusing it with

“boyevism”.[8]

The difference between the Bolshevik and Menshevik
lines of tactics is now quite clear and has taken shape in the
fundamentally different resolutions adopted in the spring of 1905 at the
Bolshevik Third Congress in London and the Menshevik Conference in
Geneva. There was no talk then either of boycott or of “boyevism”,
nor could there have been. As everyone knows, our line of tactics
differed essentially from the Menshevik line both in the elections to the Second
Duma, when we were not boycottists, and in the Second Duma itself. The
lines of tactics diverge in every field of the struggle
whatever its means and methods may be, without any special methods of struggle
peculiar to either line being created. And

    

    if a boycott of the Third Duma were to be justified or caused by the collapse of
    revolutionary expectations in regard to the First or the Second
      Dumas, by the collapse of a “lawful”,
    “strong”, “stable”, and “genuine”
    constitution, it would be Menshevism of the worst kind.

 

Notes
 

[1]
There is only one step.—Ed.  

[2]
Cf. the article in Proletary (Geneva),

1905,[9] “The Boycott of the Bulygin Duma” (see present
edition, Vol. 9, pp. 179-87.—Ed.), where it was pointed out
that we do not renounce the use of the Duma generally, but that we are
now dealing with another issue confronting us, namely, that of
fighting for a direct revolutionary path. See also the article in
Proletary (Russian issue),

1906,[10] No. 1, “The Boycott” (see present edition, Vol. 11,
pp. 141-49.—Ed.), where stress is laid on the modest
extent of the benefits to be derived from work in the Duma.  —Lenin
 



[3]
See Marx’s letter to Kugelmann of March 3, 1869. (K. Marx and
F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow, p. 263).

 



[4]
Balalaikin—a character in Saltykov-Shchedrin’s
Modern Idyll; a liberal windbag, adventurer, and humbug, who
places his selfish interests above all else.  

Molchalin—a character in Griboyedov’s play Wit
Works Woe typifying an unprincipled climber and toady.

 



[5]
K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, 1958,
p. 497.

 



[6]
Black Hundreds—monarchist gangs formed by the tsarist
police to combat the revolutionary movement. They assassinated
revolutionaries, assaulted progressive intellectuals, and organised
anti-Jewish pogroms.

 



[7]
Octobrists—members of the Octobrist party (or Union of
October Seventeenth), founded in Russia after the promulgation of the
tsar’s Manifesto of October 17(30), 1905. It was a
counter-revolutionary party representing and defending the interests of the
big bourgeoisie and landlords who engaged in capitalist farming. Its
leaders were the well-known industrialist and Moscow houseowner
A. I. Guchkov and the big landowner M. V. Rodzyanko. The Octobrists
unreservedly supported the home and foreign policies of the tsarist
government.

 



[9]
Proletary (The Proletarian) (Geneva issue)—an
illegal Bolshevik weekly, central organ of the R.S.D.L.P., founded in
accordance with a resolution of the Third Congress of the Party. By a
decision of a plenary meeting of the Party’s Central Committee on
April 27 (May 10), 1905, Lenin was appointed Editor-in-Chief of the
paper. It was published in Geneva from May 14 (27) to November 12 (25),
1905. Altogether twenty-six issues were brought out. Proletary
followed the line of the old, Lenin Iskra, and maintained full
continuity of policy with the Bolshevik newspaper Vperyod.  

Lenin wrote about 90 articles and items for Proletary, whose
political character, ideological content, and Bolshevik angle they
determined. Lenin performed a tremendous job as the paper’s manager
and editor. V. V. Vorovsky, A. V. Lunacharsky. and
M. S. Olminsky regularly took part in time work of the editorial
board. Important work was also done by N. K. Krupskaya,
V. M. Velichkina, and V. A. Karpinsky. The paper had close ties
with the labour movement in Russia, publishing articles and items written
by workers who participated directly in the revolutionary movement. The
collection of correspondence locally and its delivery to Geneva were
organised by V. D. Bonch-Bruyevich, S. I. Gusev,and
Al. Ulyanova-Yelizarova. The editors’ correspondence with the local Party
organisations and readers was handled by N. K. Krupskaya and
L. A. Fotieva.  

Proletary reacted immediately to all important events in the Russian
and international labour movement and waged an irreconcilable struggle against
the Mensheviks and other opportunist

   

revisionist elements. The newspaper carried out a great deal of work in
propaganda for the decisions of the Third Congress of the Party and played
an important part in organising and ideologically uniting the
Bolsheviks. It consistently defended revolutionary Marxism and worked out
all the fundamental issues of the revolution which was developing in
Russia. By highlighting the events of 1905, Proletary helped to
rouse the broad masses of the working people to the struggle for the
victory of the revolution.  

Proletary exercised great influence on the local
Social-Democratic organisations. Some of Lenin’s articles in the
paper were reprinted in local Bolshevik papers and circulated in leaflet
form. Publication of Proletary was discontinued shortly after
Lenin’s departure for Russia at the beginning of November 1905. The
last two issues (Nos. 25 and 26) were edited by V. V. Vorovsky, but for
them too Lenin wrote several articles, which were published after his
departure from Geneva. p 42 



[10]
Proletary (The Proletarian) (Russian issue)—an
illegal Bolshevik newspaper published from August 21 (September 3), 1906 to
November 28 (December 11), 1909 under the editorship of Lenin. Altogether
50 issues were put out. An active part in the work of the Editorial Board
was taken by M.F. Vladimirsky, V.V. Vorovsky, A.V. Lunacharsky, and
I.F. Dubrovinsky. The technical work was handled by Y.S. Schlichter,
A.G. Schlichter, and others. The first twenty issues were prepared for the
press and set up in Vyborg (printing from the matrices sent was organised
in St. Petersburg; for purposes of secrecy the newspaper carried the
statement that it was published in Moscow). Eventually, owing to the
extremely difficult conditions created for the publication of an illegal
organ in Russia, the Editorial Board of Proletary, in accordance
with a decision of the St. Petersburg and Moscow committees of the
R.S.D.L.P., arranged to have the paper published abroad (Nos. 21-40 were
issued in Geneva, and Nos. 41-50 in Paris).  

Proletary was in fact the Central Organ of the Bolsheviks. The
bulk of the work on the Editorial Board was done by Lenin. Most of the
issues carried several articles by him. Altogether over 100 articles and
items by Lenin on all vital issues of the revolutionary struggle of the
working class were published in Proletary. The paper devoted a
good deal of space to tactical and general political questions, and
published reports on the activities the C.C.. of the R.S.D.L.P., the
decisions of conferences and C.C. plenary meetings, C.C. letters on various
questions of Party activity, and a number of other documents. The paper was
in close touch with the local Party organisations.  

During the years of the Stolypin reaction Proletary played an
important role in preserving and strengthening the Bolshevik organisations
and combating the liquidators, otzovists, ultimatists, and god-builders. At
the plenary meeting of the Party’s. Central Committee in January 1910 the
Mensheviks, with the help of the conciliators, succeeded in obtaining a
decision to close down the paper on the pretext of fighting
factionalism.

 
a



[8]
Boyevism—from the Russian word boyevik, a
member of the revolutionary fighting squads, who, during the revolutionary
struggle, used the tactics of armed action, helped political prisoners to
escape, expropriated state-owned funds for the needs of the revolution,
removed spies and agent provocateurs, etc. During the revolution
of 1905-07 the Bolsheviks had special fighting squads.

 

 
  

IV

|

VI

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VI









Lenin: 1907/boycott: VI







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

VI

We have left an examination of the strongest and the only Marxist arguments in
favour of a boycott to the last. Active boycott has no meaning apart from a
broad revolutionary upswing. Granted. But a broad upswing evolves from one that
is not broad. Signs of a certain upswing are in evidence. The boycott slogan
ought to be launched by us, since that slogan supports, develops, and expands
the incipient upswing.


Such, in my opinion, is the basic argument which, in a more or less
clear form, determines the tendency towards boycott among
Social-Democrats. Moreover, the comrades who stand closest to direct proletarian
work proceed not from any argumentation “constructed” according to a
certain type, but from a sum total of impressions derived from their contact
with the working-class masses.


One of the few questions on which so far it seems there are not, or were not,
disagreements between the two factions of the Social-Democrats, is that of the
reason for the protracted lull in the development of our revolution. “The
proletariat has not recovered”—that is the reason. Indeed, the brunt of
the October-December struggle was borne by the proletariat alone. The
proletariat alone fought in a systematic, organised, and unremitting way for the
whole nation. No wonder that in a country with the smallest percentage of
proletarian population (by European standards), the proletariat should have
found itself utterly exhausted by such a struggle. Besides, ever since December
the combined forces of governmental and bourgeois reaction have been striking
their hardest all the time at the proletariat. Police persecutions and
executions have decimated the ranks of the proletariat in the course of
eighteen months, while systematic lock-outs, beginning with

    

the “punitive” closing down of state-owned factories and ending with
capitalist conspiracies against the workers, have increased poverty among the
mass of the working class to an unprecedented extent. And now, some
Social-Democratic functionaries say, there are signs of a rising challenge
among the
masses, a mustering of strength by the proletariat. This rather vague and
indefinite impression is supported by a stronger argument, namely, indubitable
evidence of a business revival in certain branches of industry. The growing
demand for workers should inevitably intensify the strike movement. The workers
will be bound to attempt to make up for at least some of the tremendous losses
they sustained in the period of repression and lock-outs. Finally, the third
and most powerful argument is the one that points not to a problematical or
generally expected strike movement, but to a single great strike already decided
upon by the workers’ organisations. At the beginning of 1907, the
representatives of 10,000 textile workers discussed their position and outlined
steps for strengthening the trade unions in that industry. The delegates have
met again, this time representing 20,000 workers, and they resolved to call a
general strike of the textile workers in July 1907. This movement may
involve up to 400,000 workers. It originates in the Moscow region, i.e., the
biggest centre of the labour movement in Russia and the biggest trade and
industrial centre. It is in Moscow, and only in Moscow, that the mass workers’
movement is most likely to develop into a wide popular movement of decisive
political importance. As for the textile workers, they are the worst paid and
least developed element of the total of the working class, who participated
least of all in previous movements and who have the closest connections with the
peasantry. The initiative of such workers may be an indication that the
movement will embrace much wider strata of the proletariat than before. As
regards the connection between the strike movement and the revolutionary
upswing of the masses, this has already been demonstrated repeatedly in the
history of the Russian revolution.


It is the bounden duty of the Social-Democrats to concentrate supreme attention
and special efforts on this movement.

    

Work in this field should certainly be given precedence over the
      elections to the Octobrist Duma. The masses should be made to see the
      necessity of converting this strike movement into a general and
      broad attack on the autocracy. That is just what the boycott slogan
      means—a shifting of attention from the Duma to the direct mass
      struggle. The boycott slogan means imbuing the new movement  with a
      political and revolutionary content.


Such, roughly, is the train of thought which has led certain Social-Democrats
to the conviction that the Third Duma must be boycotted. This argument in favour
of the boycott is undoubtedly a Marxist one, and has nothing in common with the
bare repetition of a slogan dissociated from specific historical conditions.


But strong as this argument is, it is not enough, in my opinion, to make us
accept the boycott slogan straightaway. This argument emphasises what
no Russian Social-Democrat who ponders the lessons of our revolution should
have any doubts about, namely, that we cannot renounce boycott, that we must be
prepared to put that slogan forward at the proper time, and that our way of
stating the boycott issue has nothing in common with the liberal, wretchedly
philistine way—to keep clear of it or not to keep clear of

 it?[1]

–which

is devoid of all revolutionary content.


Let us take it for granted that everything the Social-Democratic adherents of
the boycott say about the changed temper of the workers, about the industrial
revival, and about the July strike of the textile workers is wholly in accord
with the facts.


What follows from all this? We have before us the beginning  of a partial
upswing of revolutionary

       import.[2]
    

Must we make every effort to support and develop it, and try to convert it into
a general revolutionary upswing, and
then into a movement, of an aggressive type? Undoubtedly. There can be no two
opinions about this among the Social-Democrats (except, perhaps, those
contributing to Tovarishch). But do we need the boycott slogan for
developing the movement at this very moment, at the beginning of this
partial upswing, before it has definitely passed into a general upswing? Is this
slogan capable of promoting the movement today? This is a different question,
one which, in our opinion, would have to be answered in the negative.


A general upswing can and should be developed from a partial upswing by direct
and immediate arguments and slogans without any relation to the Third Duma. The
en tire course of events after December fully confirms the Social-Democratic
view on the role of the monarchist constitution, on the necessity of direct
struggle. Citizens, we shall say, if you do not want to see the cause of
democracy in, Russia going steadily faster and faster downhill as it did after
December 1905 during the hegemony of the Cadet gentlemen over the democratic
movement, then support the incipient workers’ movement, support the direct mass
struggle. Without it there can be no guarantee of freedom in Russia.


Agitation of this type would undoubtedly be a perfectly consistent
revolutionary-Social-Democratic agitation. Would we necessarily have to add to
it: Don’t believe in the Third Duma, citizens, and look at us,
Social-Democrats, who are boycotting it as proof of our protest!


Such an addition under prevailing conditions is not only unnecessary, but sounds
rather odd, sounds almost like mockery. In any case, no one believes in the
Third Duma, i. e., among the strata of the population that are capable of
sustaining the democratic movement there is not and cannot be any of that
enthusiasm for the constitutional institution of the Third Duma that
undoubtedly existed among the public at large for the First Duma, for
the first attempts in Russia to set up any kind of
institutions provided they were constitutional.

 

Widespread public interest in 1905 and the beginning of 1906 was focused on the
    first representative institution, even though it was based on a
    monarchist constitution. That is a fact. That is what the Social-Democrats
    had to fight against and show up as clearly as possible.


Not so today. It is not enthusiasm for the first
“parliament” that forms a characteristic feature of the moment,
not belief in the Duma, but unbelief in an upswing.


Under these conditions we shall not be strengthening the movement by prematurely
putting forward the boycott slogan, we shall not be paralysing the real
obstacles to that movement. Moreover, by doing so we even risk weakening the
force of our agitation, for the boycott is a slogan associated with an upswing
that has taken definite shape, but the trouble now is that wide circles of the
population do not believe in the upswing, do not see its strength.


We must first of all see to it that the strength of this upswing is demonstrated
in actual fact, and we shall always have time afterwards to put forward
the slogan which in directly expresses that strength. Even so it is a question
whether a revolutionary movement of an aggressive character requires a special
slogan diverting attention from ...
the Third Duma. Possibly not. In order to pass by some thing that is
important and really capable of rousing the enthusiasm of the inexperienced
crowd who have never seen a parliament before, it may be necessary to
boycott. the thing that should be passed by. But in order to pass by an
institution that is absolutely incapable of rousing the enthusiasm of the
democratic or semi-democratic crowd of today it is not necessary to proclaim a
boycott. The crux of the matter now is not in a boycott, but in direct and
immediate efforts to convert the partial upswing into a general upswing,
the trade-union movement into a revolutionary movement, the defence against
lock-outs into an offensive against reaction.

 

Notes
 

[1]
See Tovarishch for a specimen of liberal
argumentation by L. Martov, a former contributor to Social-Democratic
publications and now a contributor to liberal newspapers.  —Lenin

[2]
Some hold that the textile strike is a movement of a new type which
sets the trade-union movement apart from the revolutionary movement. But we
pass over this view, first because to read a pessimistic meaning into all
symptoms of phenomena of a complex type is generally a dangerous practice
which often muddles many Social-Democrats who are not quite “firm in the
saddle”. Secondly, if the textile strike was found to have these
characteristics we Social-Democrats would have to fight against them in the
most energetic manner.

   

Consequently, in the event of the success of our struggle the question
would be just as we have stated it.  —Lenin
 

 
  

V

|

VII

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## VII









Lenin: 1907/boycott: VII







V. I.  

      Lenin
Against Boycott
Notes of a Social-Democratic Publicist



    

VII

To sum up. The boycott slogan was the product of a special historical
period. In 1905 and the beginning of 1906, the objective state of affairs
confronted the contending

    

social forces with the immediate choice between the path of direct revolution or
that of a turn to a monarchist constitution. The purpose of the campaign for a
boycott was mainly to combat constitutional illusions. The success of the
boycott depended on a sweeping, universal, rapid, and powerful upswing of the
revolution.


In all these respects the state of affairs now, towards the autumn of 1907, does
not call for such a slogan and does not justify it.


While continuing our day-to-day work of preparing for the elections, and while
not refusing beforehand to take part in representative institutions, however
reactionary, we must direct all our propaganda and agitation towards explaining
to the people the connection between the December defeat and the whole
subsequent decline of liberty and desecration of the constitution. We must
instil in the masses the firm conviction that unless there is a direct mass
struggle such desecration will inevitably continue and grow worse.


While not renouncing the use of the boycott slogan at times of rising
revolution, when the need for such a slogan may seriously arise, we must at the
present moment exert every effort in an endeavour by our direct and immediate
influence to convert one or another upswing of the working-class movement into
a sweeping, universal, revolutionary, and aggressive movement against reaction
as a whole, against its foundations.

June 26, 1907

 
Notes
 
 

 
  

VI

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## In Memory of Count Heyden









Lenin: In Memory of Count Heyden







V. I.  

      Lenin
In Memory of Count Heyden
What Are Our Non-Party Democrats Teaching the People?[3]




Written: June 1907 

Published:

      Published in 1907 in the first symposium Voice of Life, St. Petersburg. Signed: N. L..

      Published according to the book text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 50-57.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

“The progressive press was unanimous in expressing its profound condolence
over the heavy loss sustained by Russia in the death of Count P. A. Heyden. The
fine personality of Pyotr Alexandrovich attracted all decent people
irrespective of party or trend. A rare, and happy lot!” There follows a
lengthy quotation from the Right Cadet Russkiye

Vedomosti[4] containing a sentimental effusion on the life and
activities of that “wonderful man” by Prince P. D. Dolgorukov, one
of that Dolgorukov breed whose spokesmen bluntly confessed the roots of their
democracy: better come to terms with the peasants peacefully, than wait until
they seize the land themselves!... “We deeply share the feelings of
grief evoked by the death of Count Heyden in all who are accustomed to value
the man irrespective of the party guise in which he may be
invested. And the late Heyden was above all a man.”


So writes the newspaper Tovarishch, No. 296, Tuesday, June 19, 1907.


The journalists of Tovarishch are not only the most ardent democrats
of our legal press, but also consider themselves socialists—critical
socialists, of course. They are the nearest thing to Social-Democrats; and the
Mensheviks— Plekhanov, Martov, Smirnov, Pereyaslavsky, Dan, etc.,
etc.—are offered the most cordial hospitality in a paper whose columns
are adorned with the signatures of Prokopovich, Kuskova, Portugalov, and other
“former Marxists”. In a word, there is not the slightest doubt that
the journalists of Tovarishch are the most “Left” spokesmen
of our

    

“enlightened”, “democratic”, etc., society, to which
narrow illegal activities are alien.


And when you come across lines like those quoted above it is difficult to
refrain from exclaiming to these gentlemen: How fortunate it is that we, the
Bolsheviks, obviously did not belong to Tovarishch s circle of
decent people!


Gentlemen, “decent people” of Russian enlightened democracy, you
are drugging the minds of the Russian people and infecting them with the miasma
of toadyism and servility a hundred times worse than those notorious members of
the Black Hundred—Purishkevich, Krushevan, and Dubrovin, against whom you
are waging such a zealous, such a liberal, such a cheap, such a, for you,
profitable, and safe war. You shrug your shoulders and turn to all the
“decent people” of your society with a scornful smile at the idea of
such “absurd paradoxes”? Yes, we know perfectly well that nothing on earth
can shake you out of your vulgar liberal complacency. And that is why we rejoice
that we have succeeded in all our activities in setting up a solid wall between
ourselves and the circle of decent people of Russian educated society.


Can one give any instance of the Black-Hundreds having corrupted and misled any
considerable section of the population? One cannot.


Neither their press nor their league, neither their meetings nor the elections
to the First and Second Dumas could provide any such instances. The outrages and
atrocities of the Black Hundreds, in which the police and the soldiery take
part, enrage the people. The frauds, dirty tricks, and bribes of the Black
Hundreds arouse hatred and contempt. With the help of government funds the
Black Hundreds organise gangs and bands of drunkards who can act only with the
permission and at the instigation of the police. In all this there is not a
trace of any dangerous ideological influence on any considerable sections of
the population.


On the other hand, it is just as unquestionable that such an influence is
exerted by our legal, liberal, and “democratic” press. The
elections to the First and Second Dumas, meetings, associations, and educational
affairs all go to prove this. And Tovarishch’s utterance in
connection with

    

the death of Heyden clearly shows what kind of ideological influence this is.



   “...A heavy loss ... fine personality ... happy lot ... was above all a
   man.”  


Count Heyden, the landlord, magnanimously played the liberal prior to the
October

revolution.[5] After the first victory of the people on October 17,
1905, he immediately, without the slightest hesitation, went over to the
counter revolutionary camp, to the Octobrist Party, the party of the
landlords and big capitalists, who were incensed with the peasants and
democracy. In the First Duma this noble character defended the government,
and after the dissolution of the First Duma negotiated, but without
reaching agreement, for a place in the Ministry. Such are the principal
stages in the career of this typical counter-revolutionary landlord.


And along come well-dressed, enlightened, and educated gentlemen, mouthing
phrases about liberalism, democracy, and socialism, and making speeches of
sympathy for the cause of liberty, the cause of the peasants’ struggle against
the landlords for land—gentlemen who possess a virtual monopoly of the
legal opposition in the press, in the associations, and at meetings and
elections—and, lifting up their eyes to heaven, preach to the people:
“Rare and happy lot!... The late Count was above all a man.”


Yes, Heyden was not only a man; he was also a citizen, able to understand the
common interests of his class and to defend those interests very skilfully. And
you, gentlemen, the enlightened democrats, you are just tearful simpletons,
concealing under a cloak of liberal idiocy your inability to be anything but
cultured lackeys of this landlord class.


There is no need to fear the landlords’ influence on the people. They will never
succeed in fooling any considerable number of workers or even peasants for any
lengthy period. But the influence of the intelligentsia, who take no
direct part in exploitation, who have been trained to use general phrases and
concepts, who seize on every “good” idea and who sometimes from
sincere stupidity elevate their inter-class position to a principle of
non-class parties and non-class

    

politics—the influence of this bourgeois intelligentsia on the
people is dangerous. Here, and here alone, do we find a contamination of the
masses that is capable of doing real harm and that calls for the utmost exertion
of all the forces of socialism to counteract this poison.


“Heyden was an educated, cultured, humane, and tolerant
man”—ecstatically exclaim the liberal and democratic droolers, imagining
that they have raised themselves above all “partisanship” to the
standpoint “common to all mankind”.


You are mistaken, most worthy sirs. This is not a stand point common to all
mankind but a common servile stand point. The slave who is aware of his slavish
condition and fights it is a revolutionary. The slave who is not aware of his
slavish condition and vegetates in silent, unenlightened, and wordless slavery,
is just a slave. The slave who drools when smugly describing the delights of
slavish existence and who goes into ecstasies over his good and kind master is a
grovelling boor. And you, gentlemen of Tovarishch, are just such
boors. With disgusting complacency you wax sentimental over the fact that a
counter-revolutionary landlord, who supported the counter-revolutionary
government, was an educated and humane man. You do not realise that instead of
turning the slave into a revolutionary you are turning slaves into
grovellers. All your talk about freedom and democracy is sheer claptrap, parrot
phrases, fashionable twaddle, or hypocrisy. It is just a painted signboard. And
you yourselves are whited sepulchres. You are mean-spirited boors, and your
education, culture, and enlightenment are only a species of thoroughgoing
prostitution. For you are selling your souls, and you are selling them not
through need, but for “love of the thing”.


Heyden was a convinced constitutionalist, you say sentimentally. You are lying,
or else you have been completely hoodwinked by the Heydens. Publicly, before
the people, to call a man a convinced constitutionalist when that man is known
to have founded a party which supported the government of Witte, Dubasov,
Goremykin, and Stolypin, is like calling a cardinal a convinced opponent of the
pope. Instead of giving the people a correct idea of the constitution you, the
democrats, treat the constitution

    

in your writings as something in the nature of salmon mayonnaise. For there
can be no doubt that for the counter-revolutionary landlord the
constitution is a sort of salmon mayonnaise, a means of perfecting the
method of plundering and subjugating the muzhik and the masses of the
people. If Heyden was a convinced constitutionalist, then Dubasov and
Stolypin as well were convinced constitutionalists, for in
practice Heyden supported their policy. Dubasov and Stolypin
could not have been what they were and could not have pursued their policy
without the support of the Octobrists, Heyden among them. By what tokens
then, 0 ye sage democrats from among “decent” people, are we to
judge the political physiognomy of a man (a
“constitutionalist”) by his speeches, by the fact that he beats
his breast and sheds crocodile tears? Or by his actual deeds in the social
arena?  

What is characteristic and typical of Heyden’s political
activities? Is it that he could not reach agreement with Stolypin about joining
the Ministry after the dissolution of the First Duma? Or is it that after such
an act he proceeded to negotiate with Stolypin at all? Is it that
formerly, at one time or another, he uttered some kind of liberal phrases? Or is
it that he became an Octobrist (=a counter revolutionary) immediately after
October 17? In calling Heyden a convinced constitutionalist, you teach the
people that the former is characteristic and typical. And that means that you
are senselessly repeating fragments of democratic slogans without understanding
the rudiments of democracy.


For democracy—remember this, you decent gentlemen and members of
respectable society—means fighting against that very domination over the
country by counter-revolutionary landlords which Mr. Heyden upheld and of which
he was the embodiment throughout his political career.


Heyden was an educated man—say our drawing-room democrats
sentimentally. Yes, we have admitted this, and we willingly admit that he was
better educated and cleverer (which does not always go together with
education) than the democrats themselves, for he better understood the
interests of his own class and his own counter-revolutionary
social
movement than you, gentlemen of Tovarishch, understand

    

the interests of the movement for emancipation. The educated
counter-revolutionary landlord knew how to defend the interests of his class
subtly and artfully; he skilfully covered up the selfish strivings and
rapacious appetites of the semi-feudal landlords with a veil of noble words and
outward gentlemanliness; he insisted (to Stolypin) on the protection of these
interests by the most civilised forms of class domination. Heyden and his like
brought all their “education” to the altar of the interests of the
landlords. To a real democrat, and not a “respectable” boor
from the Russian radical salons, this might have served as an excellent subject
for a journalist who wanted to show the prostitution of education in
modern society.


When the “democrat” prates about education, he wants to create in
the reader’s mind an impression of superior knowledge, a broad outlook,
and an ennobled mind and heart. For the Heydens education is a thin veneer,
training, a “coaching” in gentlemanly ways of performing the
meanest and dirtiest political deals. For all Heyden’s Octobrism,
all his “peaceful

renovationism”,[6] all his negotiations with Stolypin
after the dissolution of the First Duma were in fact the carrying-out of the
meanest and dirtiest political business, arranging how most reliably, craftily,
and art fully, how most solidly within and least noticeably without to defend
the rights of the aristocratic Russian nobility to the blood and
sweat of the millions of “muzhiks”,. who have always and incessantly
been robbed by these Heydens, before 1861, during 1861, after 1861, and after
1905.


In their time Nekrasov and Saltykov taught Russian society to see through the
outward gloss and varnish of the feudal landlord’s education the predatory
interests that lay beneath it; they taught it to hate the hypocrisy and
callousness of such types. Yet the modern Russian intellectual, who imagines
himself to be the guardian of the democratic heritage, and who belongs to the
Cadet

Party[1]

or to the Cadet yes-men, teaches the people grovelling servility
and delights in his impartiality as a non-party democrat.

    

A spectacle almost more revolting than that offered by the feats of
      Dubasov and Stolypin....


“Heyden was a



‘man’"—exclaims the drawing-room democrat
with enthusiasm. “Heyden was humane.”


This sentimentalising over Heyden’s humaneness reminds us not only of
Nekrasov and Saltykov, but also of Turgenev in his A Hunter’s
Sketches. Here we find depicted a civilised educated landlord, a cultured
man with a European polish well versed in the social graces. The landlord is
treating his guest with wine and conversing on lofty themes. “Why
hasn’t the wine been warmed?”—he asks the lackey. The lackey turns
pale and does not answer. The landlord rings, and when the servant enters, he
says, without raising his voice, “About Fyodor... make the necessary
arrangements.”


Here you have an example of Heyden-like “humaneness”, or humaneness
à la Heyden. Turgenev’s

landlord[7] is “humane” too, ... so humane, compared with

Saltychikha,[8] for instance, that he does not go to the stables in
person to see that it has been arranged for Fyodor to be flogged. He is so
humane that he does not see to it that the birch with which Fyodor is to be
flogged has been soaked in salt water. He would never think of hitting or
scolding .a lackey, would this landlord; he only “arranges
things” from a distance, like the educated man he is, in a gentle and
humane manner, without noise, without fuss, without making a “public
scene” ....


Heyden’s humaneness was of exactly the same kind. He himself did not join
the Luzhenovskys and Filonovs in flogging and maltreating the peasants. He did
not join the Rennenkampfs and Meller-Zakomelskys in their punitive

expeditions.[9] He did not join Dubasov in his Moscow shootings. So
humane was he that he refrained from such actions, leaving all the
“arrangements” to these heroes of the national “stable”
and controlling from his peaceful and cultured study the political party which
supported the government of the Dubasovs and whose leaders drank the health of
the conqueror of Moscow, Dubasov.... Was it not indeed humane to send the
Dubasovs “to arrange about Fyodor” instead of going to the stables
himself? To the old women who run the political department of our liberal
and

    

democratic press, this is a model of humaneness. “He had a heart of gold,
he wouldn’t hurt a fly!” “A rare and happy lot”—to
support the Dubasovs, to enjoy the fruits of the vengeance wreaked by the
Dubasovs, and not to be held responsible for the Dubasovs.


The drawing-room democrat considers it the height of democracy to sigh over the
fact that we are not being governed by the Heydens (for it never enters the
head of this drawing-room simpleton that there is a “natural”
division of labour between the Heydens and the Dubasovs). Listen to this:



   “...and how sad that he

       [Heyden][2]

   has died now, when he would have been most useful. He would now have
   fought the extreme Right, revealing the finest aspects of his soul and
   defending constitutional principles with all the energy and fertility of
   mind natural to him.” (Tovarishch, No. 299, Friday, June
   22, “In Memory of Count Heyden”, a letter from Pskov
   Gubernia.)  


How sad that the educated and humane Heyden, the peaceful renovator, is not
here to cloak with his constitutional phrase-mongering the nakedness of the
Third, Octobrist Duma, the nakedness of the autocracy which is destroying the
Duma! It is the aim of the “democratic” journalist not to tear off
the false cloak, not to show up to the people their oppressor enemies in all
their nakedness, but to regret the absence of the experienced hypocrites who
adorn the ranks of the Octobrists....

Was ist der Philister? Em hohler Darm, voll Furcht und Hoffnung, dass
Gott erbarm! What is a philistine? A hollow gut, full of fear and hope
that God will have

mercy![10] What is the Russian
liberal-democratic philistine of the Cadet and near-Cadet camp? A hollow gut,
full of fear and hope that the counter-revolutionary landlord will have mercy!

June 1907
 

Notes
 

[1]
The Cadets have shown themselves a hundred times more servile in their
appreciation of Heyden than the gentlemen of Tovarishch. We took
the latter as a specimen of the “democracy” of the “decent people” of
Russian “society”.  —Lenin

[2]
Interpolations in square hrackets (within passages quoted by Lenin)
   have been introduced by Lenin, unless otherwise indicated.—
   Ed.  
 



[3]
The article “In Memory of Count Heyden” was
published in the Bolshevik symposium Voice of Life
(St. Petersburg, 1907) with the following editorial note: “Written in
June, immediately after the appearance of Tovarishch’s
panegyric, this article, owing to circumstances ‘beyond the control’ of the
author, was not published at the time. In now including it in this volume,
the editors believe, that it has lost none of its significance today,
although the occasion that prompted it is now a matter of the past.”  

Circumstances “beyond the control” of the author was a term
usually applied to obstacles on the part of the police and the
censorship. In this case it was to be understood, in addition, that the
Bolshevik symposium was the only publication in which Lenin’s article
could be published at that time. The article was unsigned, but in the table
of contents the author’s initials “N. L.” were
given.

 



[4]
Russkiye Vedomosti (Russian Recorder)—a daily
newspaper published in Moscow since 1863 by liberal professors of Moscow
University and Zemstvo personalities; it expressed the views of the liberal
landlords and bourgeoisie. In 1905, it became the organ of the Right
Cadets. After the October Revolution (1917) it was closed down.

 



[5]
This refers to the All-Russian political strike in October 1905, when
the revolutionary crisis was coming to a head.

 



[6]
Peaceful renovationism—the “Party of Peaceful
Renovation” was a counter-revolutionary organisation of the landlords
and bourgeoisie. It was formed in 1906, uniting the Left Octobrists and
Right Cadets. Lenin called the “Party of Peaceful Renovation”
the “Party of Peaceful Plunder”.

 



[7]
This refers to the landlord Penochkin in Turgenev’s story The
Village Elder.

 



[8]
Saltychikha (Darya Ivanovna Saltykova, 1730-1801)—a
landowner, famous for her brutal treatment of her serfs.

 



[9]
Rennenkampf and Meller-Zakomelsky—tsarist
generals, known for their harsh suppression of the revolutionary
movement.

 



[10]

" Lenin quotes Goethe’s definition of a philistine (Goethe,
Werke. Neue Ausgabe. Zweiter Band, Berlin, 1893, S. 593).










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Theses of a Report Made at the St. Petersburg City Conference of July 8 on the Attitude of the Social-Democratic Labour Party to the Third Duma









Lenin: Theses of a Report Made at the St. Petersburg City Conference of July 8 on the Attitude of the Social-Democratic Labour Party to the Third Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
Theses of a Report Made at the St. Petersburg City Conference of July 8 on the Attitude of the Social-Democratic Labour Party to the Third Duma[1]




Written: Written in July 1907 

Published:

      Published as a leaflet in July 1907.

      Published according to the leaflet text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 58-59.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

1. The boycott of the Duma, as the experience of the
Russian revolution has shown, is the only correct decision on the part of the
revolutionary Social-Democrats under such historical conditions as make it a
really active boycott, i. e., one that represents the force of a broad and
universal revolutionary upswing moving directly towards a straightforward assault
on the old regime (consequently, towards an armed uprising). The boycott fulfils
a great historical task when it serves as a warning by the proletariat to the
whole people against blind petty-bourgeois infatuation with constitutional
illusions and with the first quasi-constitutional institutions granted by the
old regime.


2. To regard the boycott as an effective means in itself, apart from a sweeping,
   universal, powerful, and rapid up swing of the revolution and a direct
   assault of the whole people aimed at overthrowing the old regime, apart from
   the aims of the struggle against popular enthusiasm for the granted
   constitution, is to act under the influence of feeling rather than of reason.


3. Therefore, to proclaim a boycott of the Duma on the grounds that the
   electoral law favourable to the Cadets has been superceded by one favourable
   to the Octobrists, on the grounds that a frankly Octobrist Duma is taking the
   place of the Second Duma, which spoke in a Cadet way and acted in an
   Octobrist way and in which the Social-Democrats took part not without
   benefit to the cause of the revolution—to proclaim a boycott on such
   grounds would mean not only substituting revolutionary excitability for

    

steady revolutionary work, but revealing that the Social-Democrats themselves
are a victim of the worst illusions in regard to the Cadet Duma and the Cadet
constitution.


4. The focal point of all the propaganda of the revolutionary Social-Democrats
   should be to explain to the people that the coup d’éat of June 3,1907
   was a direct and absolutely inevitable result of the defeat of the December
   uprising of 1905. The lesson of the second period of the Russian revolution,
   that of 1906 and 1907, is that the same systematic offensive of reaction and
   retreat of the revolution that took place throughout that period, is
   inevitable so long as a belief in the constitution prevails, so long as
   quasi-constitutional methods of struggle prevail, so long as the proletariat
   has not mustered its strength and recovered from the defeats inflicted on it
   in order to rise in in comparably broader masses for a more decisive and
   aggressive revolutionary assault aimed at the overthrow of the tsarist
   regime.


5. The strike movement that is now flaring up in the Moscow industrial area and
   is beginning to spread to other regions of Russia should be regarded as the
   most important guarantee of a possible revolutionary upswing in the near
   future. Therefore, the Social-Democrats should do their utmost not only to
   support and develop the economic struggle of the proletariat, but to convert
   this movement, which so far is only a trade-union movement, into a broad
   revolutionary upswing and direct struggle of the working-class masses
   against the armed force of tsarism. Only when the efforts of the
   Social-Democrats in this. direction have been crowned with success, only on
   the, basis of an aggressive revolutionary movement that has already
   come. into existence, can the boycott slogan acquire serious importance in
   its inseparable connection with a direct appeal to the masses for an armed
   uprising, for the overthrow of .the tsarist regime, and the replacement of
   the latter by a provisional revolutionary government, for the convocation of
   a constituent assembly on the basis of universal, direct, and equal suffrage
   by secret ballot.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The St. Petersburg City Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. was held
in Terijoki (Finland) on July 8 and 14 (21 and 27), 1907. The records of
this Conference have been lost. Sixty-one delegates with the right to vote
and 21 consultative delegates attended the first session.  

Lenin made a report to the Conference on the attitude towards the
elections to the Third Duma. The Conference approved Lenin’s line
against boycott of the Third Duma, which he upheld in his theses and
reports.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Third Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (Second All-Russian)









Lenin: The Third Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (Second All-Russian)







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Third Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (Second All-Russian)[1]




Written: Written in July 1907 

Published:

      First published in 1933, in Lenin Miscellany XXV.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 60-61.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

1
Draft Resolution on Participation in the Elections to the Third
Duma

Whereas,


(1) active boycott, as the experience of the Russian revolution has shown, is
    correct tactics on the part of the Social-Democrats only under conditions of
    a sweeping, universal, and rapid upswing of the revolution, developing into
    an armed uprising, and only in connection with the ideological aims of the
    struggle against constitutional illusions arising from the convocation of
    the first representative assembly by the old regime;


(2) in the absence of these conditions correct tactics on the part of the
    revolutionary Social-Democrats calls for participation in the elections, as
    was the case with the Second Duma, even if all the conditions of a
    revolutionary period are present.


(3) the Social-Democrats, who have always pointed out the essentially Octobrist
    nature of the Cadet Party and the impermanence of the Cadet electoral law
    (11-XII-1905) under the autocracy, have no reasons whatever for changing
    their tactics because this law has been replaced by an Octobrist electoral
    law;


(4) the strike movement which is now developing in the central industrial region
    of Russia, while being a most important guarantee of a possible
    revolutionary upswing in the near future, at the same time calls for
    sustained efforts towards converting the movement, which so far is only a
    trade-union one, into a political and directly revolutionary movement
    linked with an armed uprising,


the Conference resolves:

 

(a) to take part in the elections to the Third Duma too;


(b) to explain to the masses the connection of the coup d’état of
3-VI-1907 with
the defeat of the December up rising of 1905, as well as with the betrayals by
the liberal bourgeoisie, while at the same time showing the inadequacy of
trade-union struggle alone and striving to convert the trade-union strike
movement into a political and direct revolutionary struggle of the masses for
the over throw of the tsarist government by means of an uprising;


(c) to explain to the masses that the boycott of the Duma is not by itself
capable of raising the working-class movement and the revolutionary straggle to
a higher level, and that the tactics of boycott could be appropriate only
provided our efforts to convert the trade-union upswing into a evolutionary
assault were successful.

2
Outline of a Draft Resolution on the All-Russian Congress
of Trade Unions

The Conference considers it the duty of all members of the Party energetically
to carry out the London Congress resolution on the trade unions, all local
conditions being taken into consideration when effecting organisational contacts
between the trade unions and the Social-Democratic Party or when the
latter’s leadership is accepted by the former, and always, under all
conditions, paying primary attention that the Social-Democrats in the trade
unions should not confine themselves to passive accommodation to a
“neutral” platform—a favourite practice of all shades of
bourgeois-democratic trends (Cadets, non-party

Progressists,[2]
Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc.,)—but should steadfastly uphold the
Social-Democratic views in their entirety and should steadfastly promote
acceptance by the trade unions of the Social-Democrats’ ideological leadership
and the establishment of permanent and effective organisational contacts with
the trade unions.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Third Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (“Second
All-Russian”) was held in Kotka (Finland) on July 21-23 (August 3-5),
1907.  Twenty-six delegates attended, nine of them Bolsheviks, five
Mensheviks, five Polish Social-Democrats, five Bundists, and two Lettish
S.D’s. The questions on the agenda were: participation in the elections to
the Third Duma, election agreements, and the All-Russian Congress of Trade
Unions. On the first question three reports were delivered: those of Lenin
(against boycott) and Bogdanov (for boycott) on behalf of the. Bolsheviks,
and that of Dan on behalf of the Mensheviks and the Bund. The Conference
adopted Lenin’s resolution; on the question of the All-Russian
Trade-Union Congress, four draft resolutions were submitted, which were
handed over to the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. as material. One of
the drafts was based on the text of a resolution proposed by Lenin.





[2]
Non-party Progressists—a political grouping of the
liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie, who, in the elections to the Duma and
within the Duma itself, sought to unite various elements of the bourgeois
and landlord parties and groups under the flag of “non-partisan
ship”.  

In the Third Duma the Progressists formed a parliamentary group
consisting of representatives of the “Peaceful Renovation” and
“Democratic Reforms” parties. Fear of another revolutionary
outbreak made them criticise the “extremes” of the tsarist
government, whose unyielding policy, in their opinion, provided a basis for
Left, revolutionary activities. During the elections to the Fourth Duma in
1912 the Progressists formed a bloc with the Cadets, and by their pretended
non-partisanship helped the Cadets to angle for the votes of the
“bourgeois June-the-third electors”.  

In November 1912, the Progressists formed a separate political p arty
with the following programme: a moderate constitution with limited
franchise, petty reforms, a responsible ministry, i. e., a government
responsible to the Duma, and suppression of the revolutionary
movement. Lenin pointed out that in composition and ideology the
Progressists were “a cross between the Octobrists and Cadets”;
he described the programme of their party as being a national-liberal
programme. “It will be a party of the ‘real’ capitalist bourgeoisie,
such as we have in Germany.” (See present edition, Vol. 18,
“The Results of the Elections”, “National
Liberals”.)  

During the First World War the Progressive Party became more

   

active; it demanded a change of military leadership, the gearing of
industry to the needs of the front, and a “responsible
ministry” in which the Russian bourgeoisie would be
represented. After the February bourgeois-democratic revolution some of the
party’s leaders were members of the bourgeois Provisional
Government. After the victory of the October Socialist Revolution the
Progressive Party waged an active fight against the Soviet power.  

Among the party’s leaders were the well-known Moscow
manufacturers P.P. Ryabushinsky and A.I. Konovalov, and the land owner
I.N. Yefremov. The Progressists, at different times, published their
political organs: Moskovsky Yezhenedelnik (Moscow
Weekly), and the newspapers Slovo (The Word),
Russkaya Molva (Russian Hearsay), and Utro
Rossii (Russia’s Dawn).

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Notes of a Publicist









Lenin: Notes of a Publicist







V. I.  

      Lenin
Notes of a Publicist




Written: Written on August 22 (September 4), 1907 

Published:

      Published in 1907 in the first symposium Voice of Life St. Petersburg. Signed: N. L..

      Published according to the book text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 62-74.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

After the dissolution of the Second Duma despondency, penitence, and apostasy
became the outstanding features of political literature. Beginning with
Mr. Struve, continuing with Tovarishch, and ending with, a number of
writers supporting the Social-Democratic movement we witness a renunciation
of the revolution, of its traditions, and its methods of struggle, an effort in
one way or another to steer a course more to the right. To illustrate what some
Social-Democrats are now saying arid writing, we shall take the first articles
of theirs we come across in the cur rent periodical press—one by
Mr. Nevedomsky in

Obrazovaniye,[1] No. 7, and one by Mr. Vl. Gorn in
Tovarishch, No. 348.


Mr. M. Nevedomsky begins his article with a scathing criticism of the Cadets in
the Second Duma and a vehement defence of the Left-bloc tactics and behaviour of
the Social-Democrats. He ends his article, however, as follows:



   “Speaking in the indicative mood, I will only say one thing, which
   should be obvious to every Social-Democrat, namely, at our present stage of
   political evolution, the ·activity of the socialist parties, in the
   long run, after all merely paves the way for the bourgeois parties and
   prepares for their temporary triumph.  

   “The upshot, in the imperative mood, is this: that whatever this
   ‘mimetic’ (‘one minute a brunette, the next a blonde’) Cadet Party may be,
   it is for the time being the only opposition party, and the activities of
   the socialist party have to be co-ordinated with its activities. This is
   dictated by the principle of economy of strength.”... “On the whole,
   speaking without irony [Mr. Nevedomsky had to make this reservation because
   he cannot write without conceits and extravagances which mislead both the
   readers and the author himself], this phrase of Milyukov’s quite
   correctly defines, in their essential features, the relations between the
   parties ... [this refers to the following phrase of Milyukoy’s: ‘The threat
   of intervention

    

   by the people may be put into effect only when the ground has been prepared
   for that intervention—and that is the object which all those who
   consider the powers of the Duma inadequate for the performance of its
   tremendous tasks should work towards’; let the Lefts prepare the ground and
   build up the movement—Mr. Nevedomsky rightly interprets this
   phrase—‘while the Cadets and the Duma would take account of that
   work’].... ‘Coming from the mouth of a spokesman of the accounting party
   that may not be devoid of cynicism, but when the question is formulated in
   that way by Plekhanov, for example, it is merely an exact and realistic
   definition of the line of conduct for the Social-Democrats and the method
   by which they are to utilise the forces of the liberal opposition.’"  


We are willing to assume that Plekhanov experiences a certain sense
of. ... well, to put it mildly, embarrassment, when such gentlemen as these
kindly pat him on the back. But by his Cadet slogans, such as a single
platform for Social-Democrats and Cadets or the safeguarding of the Duma,
Plekhanov undoubtedly gave people the right to use his words in
just that way.  

Now listen to Mr. Vl. Gorn.



   “Clearly, in order to defeat it [the anti-democratic coalition of
   the landowners and big bourgeois created by the electoral law of June 3]
   two conditions are necessary. First, all democratic sections, including the
   proletariat, should act together to contrapose one coalition to the other,
   and, secondly, the struggle should be waged not by devising the most
   decisive slogans with a view to splitting off elements that, are not
   revolutionary enough and forcing the movement of the avowedly revolutionary
   minority [Mr. Gorn’s italics], but by a real concrete fight, in
   which the masses themselves are drawn in, against the concrete measures of
   the anti-democratic coalition. To create a democratic coalition we do not
   need a merger, but only an agreement, covering ways and the immediate aims
   of the struggle. And such agreements—if the conscious representatives
   of the masses—the parties—will adopt the basis of achieving
   real changes in the conditions of social life and not merely a propaganda
   standpoint—are quite possible.”  


Is it not clear from these excerpts that both our heroes of fashionable Cadet
phrase-mongering are, in substance, saying one and the same thing? Mr. Gorn is
merely a bit more outspoken and has shown his hand a bit more, but he differs
from Mr. Nevedomsky no more than Mr. Struve does from Mr. Nabokov or
Mr. Maklakov.


Politics has its inner logic. How many times has it been pointed out that
technical agreements between the Social-Democrats

    

 and the liberals are possible without leading in any way to a
    political bloc, which has always been rejected by all Party
    Social-Democrats (we say nothing of the non-Party Social-Democrats or those
    people who play a double game, saying one thing within the Party and
    another in the “free” non-Party press). And life has invariably
    upset these fine statements and good intentions, for under cover of
    “technical” agreements ideas of a political bloc have steadily
    forced their way to the top. In a petty-bourgeois country, during a period
    of bourgeois revolution, where there are a lot of petty-bourgeois
    intellectuals in the workers’ party, the tendency towards political
    subordination of the proletariat to the liberals has a very real basis. And
    it is this tendency, rooted in the objective state of affairs, that proves
    to be the sum and substance of all quasi-socialist political chicanery on
    the subject of coalitions with the Cadets. Mr. Gorn, with the
    naïveté of an
    intellectual whose language only is Social-Democratic, but whose whole
    mind, whole ideological background, and entire “marrow” are
    purely liberal or philistine, simply advocates a political bloc, a
    “democratic coalition”—neither more nor less.


It is highly characteristic that Mr. Gorn was obliged to make a
reservation: “we do not need a merger”! In doing so he merely betrayed the
remnants of a guilty socialist conscience. For in saying: “we do not need
a merger, but only an agreement”, he as good as gave a description of this
“agreement”, a definition of its content, which reveals
with the utmost clarity his Social-Democratic apostasy. It is not a question of
a word, of whether the thing is called a “merger” or an
“agreement”. It is a question of what the actual content of this
“conjunction” is. It is a question of what price
you are offering the Social-Democratic Labour Party to become the kept woman of
liberalism.


The price is clearly defined. It is:


(1) To abandon the propaganda standpoint.


(2) To refrain from “devising” decisive slogans.


(3) To cease splitting off the elements that are not revolutionary enough.


(4) To refrain from “forcing” the movement of the avowedly
    revolutionary minority.

 

I would give a prize to anyone who was capable of formulating a
clearer and more precise programme of down right and utterly vile apostasy. The
only difference between Mr. Struve and Mr. Gorn is that
Mr. Struve sees his way clearly and to a certain extent determines his own steps
“independently”, while Mr. Gorn is simply held in leading strings by
his Cadet mentors.


—To abandon the propaganda standpoint—that is what the Cadets in the
Second Duma were all the time telling the people to do. This means not to
develop the political consciousness and demandingness of the
working-class masses and the peasantry, but to diminish both the one and the
other, to quell and suppress them, to advocate social peace.


—Not to devise decisive slogans—means to do what the Cadets have
done, namely, to give up the advocacy of slogans that the Social-Democrats had
put forward long before the revolution.


—Not to split ·off elements that are not revolutionary
enough—means abandoning all public criticism of Cadet hypocrisy, lies, and
reactionary views, it means taking Mr. Struve to one’s bosom.


—Not to force a movement of the avowedly revolutionary
minority—means, in effect, rejecting all revolutionary methods of
struggle. For it is absolutely indisputable that those who participated in the
revolutionary movement throughout 1905 were the avowedly revolutionary
minority:

it was because the masses who were fighting were in a minority—they were
nonetheless masses for being in a minority—that they did not achieve full
success in their struggle. But all the successes which the
emancipation movement in Russia did achieve, all the gains it did make, were
wholly and without exception the result of this struggle of the masses
alone, who were in a minority. That in the first place. Secondly, what
the liberals and their yes-men call “forced movements”, was the
only movement in which the masses (although on this first occasion,
unfortunately, in a minority) took part independently and not through
deputies—the only movement which was not afraid of the
people, which expressed the interests of the masses, and which, had the
support (as was proved by the elections to

    

the First and especially to the Second Dumas) of the vast masses who did not
      take part directly in the revolutionary struggle.


In speaking about “forcing the movement of the avowedly revolutionary
minority”, Mr. Gorn is guilty of a very widespread exaggeration of a
purely Burenin type. When Burenin’s

newspaper[2] warred with Alexinsky
during the period of the Second Duma, it always tried to make out that its
hostility towards him was due not to his fight for political
freedom, but to the fact that he wanted freedom in order to ... smash windows,
climb lampposts, and so on. The same Black-Hundred preparations are made by the
publicist of Tovarishch. He tries to make out that the only thing that
prevents an agreement between the socialists and the liberals is not that the
socialists have always stood and will continue to stand for the development of
the revolutionary consciousness and revolutionary activity of the masses in
general, but the fact that the socialists are forcing, that is
precipitating, artificially whip ping up the movement, that they are
fomenting. movements which are avowedly hopeless.


Our reply to these tricks will be brief. The whole social ist press, Menshevik
as well as Bolshevik, during the period of both the First and Second Dumas
condemned the “forcing” of the movement in any way.... It
is not on account of the forcing of the movement that the Cadets fought the
Social-Democrats during both the First and the Second Dumas, but because the
Social-Democrats develop the revolutionary consciousness of the masses,
their readiness to put forward demands, and expose the reactionary
nature of the Cadets and the mirage of constitutional illusions. These
well-known historical facts cannot be disposed of by any newspaper
acrobatics. As regards the form of Mr. Gorn’s statement, it is highly
characteristic of our times, when “educated society” turns away
from the revolution and seizes upon pornography. A person who considers
himself a Social-Democrat betakes himself to a non-Party newspaper in order to
address the public at large in the manner of Novoye Vremya on the
subject of the workers’ party “forcing” the movement of the
“avowed” minority! Renegade moods among us create also renegade
morals.

    

     *     *  * 

Now let us examine the question from another angle. The views of the Nevedomskys
and Gorns, which arouse such disgust when put forward by quasi-Social-Democrats,
are, beyond question, the highly typical and natural views of wide circles of
our bourgeois intelligentsia, liberal-mind ed “society”, disaffected
civil servants, etc. It is not enough to describe these views as an expression
of the politically spineless, flabby, and wavering petty bourgeoisie. They must
be explained also from the standpoint of the existing state of affairs in the
development of our revolution.


Why is it that certain circles of the petty bourgeoisie develop such views just
now, on the eve of the Third Duma? Because these circles, who meekly change
their convictions with every shift in government policy, believe in the
Octobrist Duma, i. e., they consider its mission practicable and hasten to
adjust
themselves to the “Octobrist reforms”, hasten to find theoretical
reasons justifying their accommodation to Octobrism.


The mission of the Octobrist Duma, as envisaged by the government, is to
consummate the revolution with a direct deal between the old regime and the
landlords and biggest bourgeoisie on the basis of a definite minimum of
constitutional reforms. Speaking in the abstract, there is nothing
absolutely
impossible in this, since in Western Europe a number of bourgeois revolutions
are being consummated by the consolidation of “Octobrist”
constitutional systems. The only question is whether Octobrist “reforms”
capable of stopping the revolution are possible in present-day Russia. Are not
these Octobrist “reforms”, owing to the deep roots of our
revolution, doomed to the same failure as the Cadet “reforms”? Will not
the Octobrist Duma be as brief an episode as the Cadet Dumas were, an episode on
the road towards re-establishing the rule of the Black Hundreds and the
autocracy?


We lived through a period of direct revolutionary struggle of the masses (1905),
which resulted in certain gains of freedom. Then we experienced a period of
suspension of this Struggle (1906 and half of 1907). This period gave reaction

    

    a number of victories and not a single victory to the revolution, which lost
    the gains of the first period. The second period was a Cadet period, one
    of constitutional illusions. The masses still believed, more or less, in
    “parliamentarism” under the autocracy, and the autocracy,
    realising the danger of, pure Black-Hundred domination, sought to come to
    terms with the Cadets, experimented, tried on various types of
    constitutional costumes, tested what measure of reforms the
    “masters” of Russia, the biggest landlords, were capable of
    adopting. The experiment of the Cadet constitution ended in failure,
    although the Cadets in the Second Duma behaved in a perfectly Octobrist
    manner and not only refrained from attacking the government or
    stirring up the masses against it, but systematically soothed the masses,
    combating the “Left”, i. e., the parties of the proletariat and
    the peasantry and openly and vigorously supporting the existing government
    (the budget, etc.). The experiment of the Cadet constitution failed, in
    short, not because the Cadets or the government lacked good will, but
    because the objective contradictions of the Russian revolution proved to be
    too deep-seated. These contradictions proved to be so
    profound, that the Cadet bridge was unable to span the gulf. The experiment
    showed that even with the mass struggle completely suppressed for a time,
    even with the old regime having a completely free hand in rigging the
    elections, etc., the peas ant masses (and in a bourgeois revolution
    the outcome depends. most of all on the peasantry) made demands which
    no art of diplomacy on the part of the Cadet go betweens was able
    to adjust to the domination of the privileged landlords. If Mr. Struve now
    bears malice against the

Trudoviks[3] (not to mention the Social-Democrats), and if

Rech[4] wages a regular campaign against them, this is no
    accident, no mere annoyance on the part of a bourgeois advocate whose
    services have been rejected by the muzhik. It is an inevitable political
    step in the evolution of the Cadets: they failed to reconcile the landlords
    with the Trudoviks, consequently (for the bourgeois intelligentsia
    this is the only possible conclusion) what is necessary is not to
    rally still broader masses against the land lords, but to lower the
    demands of the Trudoviks, to make
    

more concessions to the landlords, to “discard revolutionary
utopias”, as Struve and the Rech say, or to stop inventing
decisive slogans and forcing the movement, as Mr. Gorn, the new servant of the
Cadets, says.


The government accommodates itself to the landlords by placing the
elections entirely in their hands and virtually depriving the peasantry of the
suffrage. The Cadets accommodate themselves to the landlords by attacking the
Trudoviks for their revolutionariness and uncompromising attitude: The
non-party politicians, like the contributors to Tovarishch in general
and Mr. Gorn in particular, accommodate themselves to the landlords by calling
upon the proletariat and the peasantry to “harmonise”
(“co-ordinate”, as Mr. Nevedomsky puts it) their policy with that of
the Cadets, to enter into a “democratic coalition” with the Cadets,
to renounce “decisive slogans”, and so on and so forth.


The government is acting systematically. Step by step it is taking away what has
been gained by the “forced movement” and what has been left
defenceless during the lull in that movement. Step by step it is trying to find
out what “reforms” the landlords could be induced to agree to. Could
not the Cadets have done this? Is it owing to interference from the Lefts that
the Cadets could not, despite their sincere desire and vain efforts? In that
case, the franchise of the “Lefts” will have to be curtailed and
the decision placed in the hands of the Octobrists: only if this
experiment, too, should fail, will it be necessary to place ourselves
entirely in the power of the “Council of the United

Nobility”.[5]


There is sense, method, and logic in the actions of he government. It is the
logic of the landlord’s class interests. These interests have to be
protected; after all, the bourgeois development of Russia has to be safeguarded
too.


To carry out these plans the government requires that the interests and movement
of the masses should be forcibly suppressed, that they should
be deprived of the suffrage and handed over to the tender mercies of the
130,000. Whether it will succeed in carrying out these plans no one can say at
present. This question will be answered only by struggle.

 

We Social-Democrats are answering this question by our struggle. And
    the Cadets are answering it by struggle ...
against the Left. The Cadets are fighting for the
government’s solution of this question: they did this systematically
in the Second Duma in the parliamentary field. Now, too, they are doing it
systematically by their ideological struggle against the Social-Democrats and
the Trudoviks.


Of course, to the ordinary Russian intellectual, as well as to any half-educated
petty bourgeois, this sounds paradoxical; the Cadets, who call themselves
democrats and make liberal speeches, fight for the government solution of the
question! It is so obviously incongruous! If they are democrats, then the place
for them is the “democratic coalition”! This is such an obvious conclusion
for political simpletons, whom even two years of the Russian revolution have
not taught to seek the true basis of both the government s measures and
the liberals’ spate of talk in the struggle of the different
classes. We have any amount of “Marxists” from the intellectual
camp who profess the principles of the class struggle while in reality they use
purely liberal arguments when talking about the Cadets, about the role of the
Duma, and about the boycott! And how many more Cadet votings for the budget will
these political simpletons need before they can digest what has long been a
familiar sight in Europe, namely, that of a liberal making speeches against the
government and sup porting it on every important issue.


The replacement of the Second Duma by the Third is the replacement of the Cadet,
who acts in the Octobrist manner, by the Octobrist who acts with the help of
the Cadet. Predominant in the Second Duma was the party of the bourgeois
intellectuals, who called themselves democrats where the people were concerned
and supported the government where the bourgeoisie was concerned. Predominant
in the Third Duma will be the landlords and the big bourgeoisie, who hire the
bourgeois intellectuals for a make-believe opposition and for business
services. This simple truth is borne out by the whole political behaviour of the
Cadet Party and by the Second Duma in particular. Even the man in the street has
now begun to grasp this simple truth; we shall refer to such a witness as
Mr. Zhilkin, whom

    

it would be absurd to suspect of Bolshevik, sympathies or of prejudiced and
uncompromising hostility towards the Cadets.


In today’s issue of Tovarishch (No. 351), Mr. Zhilkin conveys the
impressions of a “cheerful” (sic! Mr. Zhilkin understands
“cheerfulness” in much the same way as Gorn or Nevedomsky)
provincial in the following words:



   “The Octobrist landlords I spoke to argue as follows: ‘It’s all
   right to vote for the Cadets. The good thing about them is that they are
   tractable. In the First Duma they wanted too much. In the Second they
   hacked down. They even made cuts in their programme. In the Third they’ll
   give way still more. I daresay they’ll come to some arrangement. Besides,
   to tell the truth, there isn’t any Octobrist whose election we could
   ensure.  

   “‘Letthe Cadets get elected. The difference between us
   isn’t very great. They are sure to go to the right in the Third
   Duma....  We’re friendly with the Octobrists out of necessity.... What
   public speakers or big men do they have?’"  


Those who judge of parties by their names, programmes, promises, and speeches,
or are content with crude Bernsteinised “Marxism”, which consists
in reiterating the axiom about support for bourgeois democracy in a bourgeois
revolution, may cherish hopes in regard to a democratic coalition of the Lefts
and the Cadets, in the Third Duma. But those with the slightest revolutionary
flair and thoughtful attitude towards the lessons of our revolution, or those
who are really guided by the principle of tile class struggle and judge of
parties by their class character, will not be in the least surprised to find
that the party of bourgeois intellectuals is fit only to perform flunkey
services for the party of the big bourgeois. The Gorns and Nevedomskys
are capable of believing, that the Cadets’ differences with the democrats are an
exception, and their differences with the Octobrists a rule. It is exactly the
other way round. The Cadets are, true kin to the Octobrists by their very class
nature. Cadet democracy is sheer window-dressing, a temporary reflection of the
democracy of the masses, or a downright hoax, which the Russian Bernsteinians
and petty bourgeois, especially those from the newspaper Tovarishch,
fall for.


And so, if you view the matter from this angle, if you grasp the true
historical role of the Cadet—that bourgeois

    

    intellectual, who helps the landlord to satisfy the muzhik with a beggarly
    reform—the whole infinite wisdom of the Gorn and Nevedomsky gentry,
    who advise the proletariat to harmonise their activity with that
    of the Cadets, will stand revealed to you! The picture of the Octobrist
    “reforms”, which we are promised, is quite clear. The landlord
    “sets up” the muzhik, sets him up in such a manner that the
    population cannot be induced to accept the reforms without punitive
    expeditions, without floggings of the peasants and shootings of the
    workers. The Cadet professor registers opposition: he proves, from the
    standpoint of the modern science of law, the necessity of constitutionally
    en forcing the regulations governing punitive expeditions, while blaming the
    police for being over-zealous. The Cadet lawyer registers opposition: he
    argues that, according to the law, sixty strokes per man should be given and
    not 200, and that money should be assigned to the government for birch rods,
    while stipulating that the law should be observed. The Cadet physician is
    prepared to count the pulse of the victim of flogging and write a research
    about the necessity of reducing the upper limit of strokes by half.


Was not the Cadet opposition in the Second Duma of just this kind? And is it not
clear that for the sake of such an opposition the Octobrist landlord will not
only elect a Cadet to the Duma, but will agree to pay him a professorial or
some other kind of salary?


A democratic coalition of socialists and Cadets in the Second Duma, after the
Second Duma, or during the Third Duma would in fact, by virtue of the objective
state of affairs, only mean turning the workers’ party into a blind arid
wretched, adjunct of the liberals, complete betrayal by the socialists of the
interests of the proletariat and the interests of the revolution. Very likely,
the Nevedomskys and Gorns do not realise what they are doing. With such
people convictions are very often not more deeply seated than the tip of
their tongues. In effect, their endeavours amount to putting an end to the
independent party of the working class, putting an end to Social-Democracy. The
Social-Democrats, who understand the tasks confronting them, should put an end
to these gentlemen. Unfortunately, among us the concept of bourgeois revolution

    

is still interpreted in a one-sided manner. We overlook, for example, the fact
that this revolution should show the proletariat—and it alone can be the
first to show the proletariat—what the bourgeoisie of a given
country is in actual fact, what the national peculiarities of
the bourgeoisie and the petty bourgeoisie are in the given national
bourgeois revolution. The real, definitive, and mass separation of the
proletariat as a class, in opposition to all the bourgeois parties, can only
occur when the history of its own country reveals to the proletariat
the entire character of the bourgeoisie as a class, as a political
unit—the entire character of the petty bourgeoisie as a section, as a
definite ideological and political unit revealing itself in some open, broadly
political activities. We must incessantly explain to the proletariat the
theoretical truths about the nature of the class interests of the bourgeoisie
and petty bourgeoisie in capitalist society. These truths, however, will be
driven home to really broad masses of the proletariat only when these classes
will have visible, tangible experience of the behaviour of the parties of one
class or another, when the clear realisation of their class nature is
supplemented by the immediate reaction of the proletarian mind to the whole
character of the bourgeois parties. Nowhere else in the world, probably,
has the bourgeoisie revealed in the bourgeois revolution such reactionary
brutality, such a close alliance with the old regime, such
“freedom” from anything remotely resembling sincere sympathy
towards culture, towards progress, towards the preservation of human
dignity, as it has with us—so let our proletariat derive from the
Russian bourgeois revolution a triple hatred of the bourgeoisie and a
determination to fight it. Nowhere else in the world, probably, did the
petty bourgeoisie, beginning with the “Popular

Socialists”[6] and the Trudoviks and ending with the intellectuals
who have wormed themselves into the Social-Democratic movement, display
such cowardice and spinelessness in the struggle, such a shameful epidemic
of renegade moods, such toadyism towards the heroes of bourgeois fashion
or reactionary outrages—so let our proletariat derive from our
bourgeois revolution a triple contempt for petty-bourgeois flabbiness and
vacillation. No matter how our revolution

    

    may develop, no matter what severe trials our proletariat may at times
    have to go through,this hatred and this con tempt will help it to close its
    ranks and rid itself of worth less offshoots of alien classes; it will
    increase its forces and steel it for dealing the blows with which it will
    overwhelm the whole of bourgeois society when the time comes.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Obrazovaniye (Education)—a literary,
popular-scientific, social and political monthly published in
St. Petersburg from 1892 to 1909. In 1906-08, the magazine published
articles by Bolsheviks. Issue No. 2 for 1906 contained Chapters V-IX of
Lenin’s book The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of
Marx” (see present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 103-222).

 



[2]
Burenin’s newspaper—the name given by Lenin to the
Black Hundred-monarchist newspaper Novoye Vremya (New
Times). Burenin, who contributed to the newspaper, hounded the
representatives of all progressive trends.

 



[3]
Trudoviks (from trud—“labour”)—a
group of petty-bourgeois democrats, formed in April 1906 from the peasant
deputies to the First Duma.  

The Trudoviks demanded the abolition of all restrictions based on class
or nationality, the democratisation of the Zemstvos and urban
self-government bodies, and universal suffrage in the Duma elections. Their
agrarian programme was based on the Narodnik principles of
“equalised” land tenure; the establishment of a national stock of
distributable land, formed from state, crown, and monastery lands, as well
as from privately owned lands where they exceeded an established labour
standard; compensation being envisaged in the case of alienated private
lands. Lenin pointed out in 1906 that the typical Trudovik was a peasant
who “is not averse to a compromise with the monarchy, to settling
down quietly on his own plot of land under the bourgeois system;
but at the present time his main efforts are concentrated on the fight
against the landlords for the land, on the fight against the feudal state
and for democracy” (see present edition, Vol. 11, p. 229).  

In the Duma the Trudoviks vacillated between the Cadets and the
Social-Democrats, their vacillations being due to the class nature itself
of peasant petty proprietors. Nevertheless, since the Trudoviks represented
the peasant masses, the tactics of the Bolsheviks in the Duma were to
arrive at agreements with them on individual issues with a view to waging a
joint struggle against the Cadets and the tsarist autocracy. In 1917, the
Trudovik group

   

merged with the “Popular Socialist” Party and actively
supported the our bourgeois Provisional Government. After the October
Socialist Revolution the Trudoviks sided with the bourgeois counter
revolution.

 



[4]
Rech (Speech)—a daily newspaper, the central
organ of the Cadet Party, published in St.Petersburg from February 23
(March 8), 1906, under the actual editorship of P.N. Milyukov and
I.V. Hessen and with the close co-operation of M.M. Vinaver,
P.D. Dolgorukov, P.B. Struve, and others. The newspaper was closed down by
the Revolutionary Military Committee of the Petrograd Soviet on October 26
(November 8), 1917. It was eventually reissued (up to August 1918) under
various names:

Nasha Rech (Our Speech), Slobodnaya Rech
(Free Speech), Vek (Century), Novaya
Rech (New Speech), and Nash Vek (Our
Century).

 



[5]
Council of the United Nobility—a counter-revolutionary
organisation of reactionary landlords founded in May 1906 at the First
Congress of Delegates of the Gubernia Societies of the Nobility; it existed
up to October 1917. The chief aim of this organisation was to defend the
autocratic regime, landlordism, and the privileges of the nobility. The
Council was headed by Count A. A. Bobrinsky, Prince
N. F. Kasatkin-Rostovsky, Count D. A. Olsufyev, V. M. Purishkevich, and
others. Lenin called the Council of the United Nobility a “council of
united feudalists”. The Council virtually became a semi-government
body which dictated to the government legislative proposals aimed at
defending the interests of the feudalists. During the period of the Third
Duma many of its members sat on the Council of State and held key positions
in the Black-Hundred organisations.

 



[6]
Popular Socialists—members of the petty-bourgeois
Trudovik Popular Socialist Party, which separated from the Right wing of
the Socialist-Revolutionary Party in 1906. The P.S.’s stood for partial
nationalisation of the land on a redemption basis and the distribution of
the land among the peasants according to the “labour
standard”. They were in favour of a bloc with the Cadets. Lenin
called them “Social-Cadets”, “petty-bourgeois
opportunists”, and “Socialist-Revolutionary Mensheviks”
who vacillated between the Cadets and the S.R.’s, and he emphasised that
this party “differs very little from the Cadets, since it has
discarded from its programme both the Republic and the demand for all the
land”. The party’s leaders were A.V. Peshekhonov,
N.F. Annensky, V.A. Myakotin, and others. After the bourgeois-democratic
revolution of February 1917 the Popular Socialist Party merged with the
Trudoviks and actively supported the bourgeois Provisional Government, in
which it was represented. After the October Socialist Revolution the P.S.’s
participated in plots and armed acts against the Soviets. The party went
out of existence during the period of foreign military intervention and
civil war.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (Proletary)









Lenin: The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (Proletary)







V. I.  

      Lenin
The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart[1] (Proletary)




Written: Written at the end of August and beginning of September 1907 

Published:

      Published in Proletary, No. 17, October 20, 1907.

      Published according to the newspaper text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 75-81.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

A feature of the International Socialist Congress held in Stuttgart this August
was its large and representative composition: the total of 886 delegates came
from all the five continents. Besides providing an impressive demonstration of
international unity in the proletarian struggle, the Congress played an
outstanding part in defining the tactics of the socialist parties. It adopted
general resolutions on a number of questions, the decision of which had
hitherto been left solely to the discretion of the individual socialist
parties. And the fact that more and more problems require uniform, principled
decisions in different countries is striking proof that socialism is being
welded into a single international force.


The full text of the Stuttgart resolutions will be found elsewhere in this

issue.[2] We shall deal briefly with each of them in order to bring
out the chief controversial points and the character of the debate at the
Congress.


This is not the first time the colonial question has figured at international
congresses. Up till now their decisions have always been an unqualified
condemnation of bourgeois colonial policy as a policy of plunder and
violence. This time, however, the Congress Commission was so composed that
opportunist elements, headed by Van Kol of Holland, predominated in it. A
sentence was inserted in the draft resolution to the effect that the Congress
did not in principle condemn all colonial policy, for under socialism colonial
policy could play a civilising role. The minority in the Commission (Ledebour
of Germany, the Polish and Russian Social-Democrats, and many
others)

    

      vigorously protested against any such idea being entertained. The matter
      was referred to Congress, where the forces of the two trends were
      found to be so nearly equal that there was an extremely heated
      debate.


The opportunists rallied behind Van Kol. Speaking for the majority of the German
delegation Bernstein and David urged acceptance of a “socialist colonial
policy” and fulminated against the radicals for their barren, negative
attitude, their failure to appreciate the importance of reforms, their lack
of a practical colonial programme, etc. Incidentally, they were opposed by
Kautsky, who felt compelled to ask the Congress to pronounce against
the majority of the German delegation. He rightly pointed out that there was no
question of rejecting the struggle for reforms; that was explicitly stated in
other sections of the resolution, which had evoked no dispute. The point at
issue was whether we should make concessions to the modern regime of bourgeois
plunder and violence. The Congress was to discuss present-day colonial policy,
which was based on the downright enslavement of primitive populations. The
bourgeoisie was actually introducing slavery in the colonies and subjecting the
native populations to unprecedented outrages and acts of violence,
“civilising” them by the spread of liquor and syphilis. And in that
situation socialists were expected to utter evasive phrases about the
possibility of accepting colonial policy in principle! That would be an outright
desertion to the bourgeois point of view. It would be a decisive step towards
subordinating the proletariat to bourgeois ideology, to bourgeois imperialism,
which is now arrogantly raising its head.


The Congress defeated the Commission’s motion by 128 votes to 108
with ten abstentions (Switzerland). It should be noted that at Stuttgart,
for the first time, each nation was allotted a definite number of votes,
varying from twenty (for the big nations, Russia included) to two
(Luxembourg). The combined vote of the small nations, which either do not
pursue a colonial policy, or which suffer from it, outweighed, the vote of
nations where even the proletariat has been somewhat infected with the lust
of conquest.


This vote on the colonial question is of very great importance. First? it
strikingly showed up socialist opportunism,

    

which succumbs to bourgeois blandishments. Secondly, it revealed a
negative feature in the European labour movement, one that can do no little harm
to the proletarian cause, and for that reason should receive serious
attention. Marx frequently quoted a very significant saying of Sismondi. The
proletarians of the ancient world, this saying runs, lived at the
expense of society; modern society lives at the expense of the

proletarians.[3]


The non-propertied, but non-working, class is incapable of overthrowing
the exploiters. Only the proletarian class, which maintains the whole of
society, can bring about the social revolution. However, as a result of the
extensive colonial policy, the European proletarian partly finds
himself in a position when it is not his labour, but the labour of
the practically enslaved natives in the colonies, that maintains the whole
of society. The British bourgeoisie, for example, derives more profit from
the many millions of the population of India and other colonies than from
the British workers. In certain countries this provides the material and
economic basis for infecting the proletariat with colonial chauvinism. Of
course, this may be only a temporary phenomenon, but the evil must
nonetheless be clearly realised and its causes understood in order to be
able to rally the proletariat of all countries for the struggle against
such opportunism. This struggle is bound to be victorious, since the
“privileged” nations are a diminishing faction of the
capitalist nations.


There were practically no differences at the Congress on the question
of women’s suffrage. The only one who tried to make out a case for a
socialist campaign in favour of a limited women’s suffrage
(qualified as opposed to universal suffrage) was a woman delegate from the
extremely opportunist British Fabian Society. No one supported her. Her
motives were simple enough: British bourgeois ladies hope to obtain the
franchise for themselves, without its extension to women workers in
Britain.


The First International Socialist Women’s Conference was held
concurrently with the Congress in the same building. Both at this
Conference and in the Congress Commission there was an interesting dispute
between the German and Austrian Social-Democrats on the draft
resolution. In

    

their campaign for universal suffrage the Austrians tended to play down the
demand for equal rights of men and women; on practical grounds they placed
the main emphasis on male suffrage. Clara Zetkin and other German
Social-Democrats rightly pointed out to the Austrians that they were acting
incorrectly, and that by failing to press the demand that the vote be
granted to Women as well as men, they were weakening the mass movement. The
concluding words of the Stuttgart resolution (“the demand for
universal suffrage should be put forward simultaneously for both
men and women”) undoubtedly relate to this episode of excessive
“practicalism” in the history of the Austrian labour movement.


The resolution on the relations between the socialist parties and the trade
unions is of especial importance to us Russians. The
Stockholm. R.S.D.L.P. Congress went on record for non-Party unions,
thus endorsing the neutrality standpoint, which has always been upheld by our
non-Party democrats, Bernsteinians and Socialist-Revolutionaries. The London
Congress, on the other hand, put for ward a different principle, namely, closer
alignment of the unions with the Party, even including, under certain
conditions, their recognition as Party unions. At Stuttgart in the
Social-Democratic subsection of the Russian section (the socialists of each
country form a separate section at international congresses) opinion was divided
on this issue (there was no split on other issues). Plekhanov upheld the
neutrality principle.

Voinov,[4] a Bolshevik, defended the anti-neutralist
viewpoint of the London Congress and of the Belgian resolution (published in the
Congress materials with de Brouckère’s report, which will soon appear in
Russian). Clara Zetkin rightly remarked in her journal

Die Gleichheit[5]
that Plekhanov’s arguments for neutrality were just as lame as those of
the French. And the Stuttgart resolution—as Kautsky rightly observed and
as anyone who takes the trouble to read it carefully will see—puts an end
to recognition of the “neutrality” principle. There is not a word in
it about neutrality or non-party principles. On the contrary, it definitely
recognises the need for closer and stronger connections between the unions and
the socialist parties.

 

The resolution of the London R.S.D:L.P. Congress on the trade unions has thus
been placed on a firm theoretical basis in the form of the Stuttgart
resolution. The Stuttgart resolution lays down the general principle that. in
every country the unions must be brought into permanent and close contact with
the socialist party. The London resolution says that in Russia this should take
the form, under favourable conditions, of party unions, and party members must
work towards that goal.


We note that the harmful aspects of the neutrality principle were revealed in
Stuttgart by the fact that the trade-union half of the German delegation were
the most adamant supporters of opportunist views. That is why in Essen, for
example, the Germans were against Van Kol (the trade unions were not
represented in Essen, which was a Congress solely of the Party), while in
Stuttgart they supported him. By playing into the hands of the opportunists in
the Social-Democratic movement the advocacy of neutrality in Germany has
actually had harmful results. This is a fact that should not be
overlooked, especially in Russia, where the bourgeois-democratic counsellors of
the proletariat, who urge it to keep the trade-union movement
“neutral”, are so numerous.


A few words about the resolution on emigration and immigration. Here,
too, in the Commission there was an attempt to defend narrow, craft
interests, to ban the immigration of workers from backward countries
(coolies—from China, etc.). This is the same spirit of aristocratism
that one finds among workers in some of the “civilised”
countries, who derive certain advantages from their privileged position,
and are, therefore, inclined to forget the need for international class
solidarity. But no one at the Congress defended this craft and
petty-bourgeois narrow-mindedness. The resolution fully meets the demands
of revolutionary Social-Democracy.


We pass now to the last, and perhaps the most important, resolution of
the Congress—that on anti-militarism. The notorious Hervé, who
has made such a noise in France and Europe, advocated a semi-anarchist view
by naively suggesting that every war be “answered” by a strike
and an uprising. He did not understand, on the one
hand, that

    

      war is a necessary product of capitalism, and that the proletariat
      cannot renounce participation in revolutionary wars, for such wars
      are possible, and have indeed occurred in capitalist societies. He
      did not understand, on the other hand, that the possibility of
      “answering” a war depends on the nature of the crisis
      created by that war. The choice of the means of struggle depends on
      these conditions; moreover, the struggle must consist (and here we
      have the third misconception, or shallow thinking of Hervéism)
      not simply in replacing war by peace, but in replacing capitalism by
      socialism. The essential thing is not merely to prevent war, but to
      utilise the crisis created by war in order to has ten the overthrow
      of the bourgeoisie. However, underlying all these semi-anarchist
      absurdities of Hervéism there was one sound and practical purpose: to
      spur the socialist movement so that it will not be restricted to
      parliamentary methods of struggle alone, so that the masses will
      realise the need for revolutionary action in connection with the
      crises which war inevitably involves, so that, lastly, a more lively
      understanding of international labour solidarity and of the falsity
      of bourgeois patriotism will be spread among the masses.


Bebel’s resolution (move.d by the Germans and coinciding in all essentials
with Guesde’s resolution) had one shortcoming—it failed to indicate
the active tasks of the proletariat. This made it possible to read Bebel’s
orthodox propositions through opportunist spectacles, and Vollmar was quick to
turn this possibility into a reality.


That is why Rosa Luxemburg and the Russian Social-Democratic delegates moved
their amendments to Bebel’s resolution. These amendments

(1) stated that militarism is the chief weapon of class oppression;

(2) pointed out the need for propaganda among the youth;

(3) stressed that Social-Democrats should not only try to prevent war from
breaking out or to secure the speediest termination of wars that have
already begun, but should utilise the crisis created by the war to hasten
the overthrow of the bourgeoisie.


The subcommission (elected by the Anti-Militarism Commission)
incorporated all these amendments in Bebel’s resolution. In addition,
Jaurès made this happy suggestion: instead of enumerating the
methods of struggle

    

(strikes, uprisings) the resolution should cite historical examples of
proletarian action against war, from the demonstrations in Europe to the
revolution in Russia. The result of all this redrafting was a resolution
which, it is true, is unduly long, but is rich in thought and precisely
formulates the tasks of the proletariat. It combines the stringency of
orthodox—i. e., the only scientific Marxist analysis with
recommendations for the most resolute and revolutionary action by the
workers’ parties. This resolution cannot be interpreted à
la Vollmar, nor can it be fitted into the narrow framework of
naïve Hervéism.


On the whole, the Stuttgart Congress brought into sharp contrast the
opportunist and revolutionary wings of the international Social-Democratic
movement on a number of cardinal issues and decided these issues in the
spirit of revolutionary Marxism. Its resolutions and the report of the
debates should become a handbook for every propagandist. The work done at
Stuttgart will greatly promote the unity of tactics and unity of
revolutionary struggle of the proletarians of all countries.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The International Socialist Congress In Stuttgart (the Seventh
Congress of the Second International) was held from August 18 to 24 (new
style), 1907. The R.S.D.L.P. was represented at it by 37 delegates. Among
the Bolshevik delegates attending the Congress were Lenin, Lunacharsky, and
Litvinov. The Congress considered the following questions:

1) Militarism and international conflicts;

2) Relations between the political parties and the trade unions;

3) The colonial question;

4) Immigration and emigration of workers, and

5) Women’s suffrage.  

The main work of the Congress was in the committees, where resolutions
were drafted for the plenary sessions. Lenin was on the “Militarism
and International Conflicts” Committee.

 



[2]
The issue of Proletary (No. 17) which published this article
also contained the resolution of the International Socialist Congress in
Stuttgart.

 



[3]
See Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. 1, Moscow, p. 595.

 



[4]
Voinov—A. V. Lunacharsky.

 



[5]
Die Gleichheit (Equality)—a Social-Democratic
fortnightly journal, organ of the German women’s movement (later it
became the organ of international women’s movement), published in
Stuttgart from 1890 to 1925 and edited by Clara Zetkin from 1892 to
1917.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908)









Lenin: The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart (Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908)







V. I.  

      Lenin
The International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart[1] (Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908)




Written: Written In September 1907 

Published:

      Published in October 1907 in Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908. Signed: N. L..

      Published according to the text in Kalendar.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 82-93.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The recent Congress in Stuttgart was the twelfth congress of the proletarian
International. The first live congresses belong to the period of the First
International (1866-72), which was guided by Marx, who, as Bebel aptly observed,
tried to achieve international unity of the militant proletariat from
above. This attempt could not be successful until the national socialist parties
were consolidated and strengthened, but the activities of the First
International rendered great services to the labour movement of all countries
and left lasting traces.


The Second International was inaugurated at the International Socialist
Congress in Paris in 1889. At the subsequent congresses in Brussels (1891),
Zurich (1893), London (1896), Paris (1900), and Amsterdam (1904), this new
International, resting on strong national parties, was finally consolidated. In
Stuttgart there were 884 delegates from 25 nations of Europe, Asia (Japan and
some from India), America, Australia, and Africa (one delegate from South
Africa).


The great importance of the International Socialist Congress in Stuttgart lies
in the fact that it marked the final consolidation of the Second International
and the transformation of international congresses into business like meetings
which exercise very considerable influence on the nature and direction of
socialist activities throughout the world. Formally, the decisions of the
International congresses are not binding on the individual nations, but their
moral significance is such that the non-observance of decisions is, in fact, an
exception which is rarer than

    


    

the non-observance by the individual parties of the decisions of their own
congresses. The Amsterdam Congress succeeded in uniting the French
socialists, and its resolution against

ministerialism[2] really expressed the will of the class-conscious
proletariat of the whole world and determined the policy of the
working-class parties.


The Stuttgart Congress made a big stride forward in the same direction, and on a
number of important issues proved to be the supreme body determining the
political line of socialism. The Stuttgart Congress, more firmly even than the
Amsterdam Congress, laid this line down in the spirit of revolutionary
Social-Democracy as opposed to opportunism. Die Gleichheit, the organ
of the German Social-Democratic women workers, edited by Clara Zetkin, justly
observed in this connection:


“On all questions the various deviations of certain socialist parties
towards opportunism were corrected in a revolutionary sense with the
co-operation of the socialists of all countries.”


The remarkable and sad feature in this connection was that German
Social-Democracy, which hitherto had always upheld the revolutionary standpoint
in Marxism, proved to be unstable, or took an opportunist stand. The Stuttgart
Congress confirmed a profound observation which Engels once made concerning the
German labour movement. On April 29, 1886, Engels wrote to Sorge, a veteran of
the First International:


“In general it is a good thing.that the leadership of the Germans is being
challenged, especially after they have elected so many philistine elements
(which is unavoidable, it is true). In Germany everything becomes philistine in
calm times; the sting of French competition is thus absolutely necessary. And
it will not be

lacking.”[3]


The sting of. French competition was not lacking at Stuttgart, and this sting
proved to be really necessary, for the Germans displayed a good deal of
philistinism. It is especially important for the Russian
Social-Democrats to bear this in mind, for our liberals (and not only the
liberals) are trying their hardest to represent the least creditable features
of German Social-Democracy as a model worthy of imitation. The most thoughtful
and outstanding

    

minds among the German Social-Democrats have noted this fact themselves and,
      casting aside all false shame, have definitely pointed to it as a warning.


“In Amsterdam,” writes Clara Zetkin’s journal, “the
revolutionary leit-motiv of all the debates in the parliament of the
world proletariat was the Dresden resolution; in Stuttgart a jarring opportunist
note was struck by Vollmar’s speeches in the Commission on Militarism, by
Pup low’s speeches in the Emigration Commission, and by David’s
[and, we would add, Bernstein’s] speeches in the Colonial Commission. On this
occasion, in most of the commissions and on most issues, the representatives of
Germany were leaders of opportunism.” And K. Kautsky, in appraising the
Stuttgart Congress, writes: ". . .the leading role which German
Social-Democracy has actually played in the Second International up to now was
not in evidence on this occasion.”


Let us now examine individual questions that were discussed at the
Congress. The differences of opinion on the colonial question could not be
ironed out in the Commission. The dispute between the opportunists and the
revolutionaries was settled by the Congress itself, settled in favour of
the revolutionaries by a majority of 127 votes against 108, with 10
abstentions. Incidentally, let us note the gratifying fact that the
socialists of Russia all voted unanimously on all
questions in a revolutionary spirit. (Russia had 20 votes of which 10 were
given to the Russian Social-Democratic Labour Party without the Poles, 7 to
the Socialist-Revolutionaries, and 3 to the representatives of the trade
unions. Poland had 10 votes: the Polish Social-Democrats—4, and the
Polish Socialist Party and the non-Russian parts of Poland—6. Finally
the two representatives of Finland had 8 votes.)


On the colonial question an opportunist majority was formed in the Commission,
and the following monstrous phrase appeared in the draft resolution: “The
Congress does not in principle and for all time reject all colonial policy,
which, under a socialist regime, may have a civilising effect.” In
reality this proposition was tantamount to a direct retreat towards bourgeois
policy and a bourgeois world outlook that justifies colonial wars and
atrocities.

    

It was a retreat towards Roosevelt, said one of the American delegates. The
attempts to justify this retreat by the tasks of a “socialist colonial
policy” and of constructive reform work in the colonies were unfortunate
in the extreme. Socialism has never refused to advocate reforms in the colonies
as well; but this can have nothing in common with weakening our stand in
principle against conquests, subjugation of other nations, violence, and
plunder, which constitute “colonial policy”. The minimum programme
of all the socialist parties applies both to the home countries and the
colonies. The very concept “socialist colonial pol icy” is a
hopeless muddle. The Congress quite rightly deleted the above-quoted words
from the resolution and substituted for them a condemnation of colonial policy
that was sharper than that contained in former resolutions.


The resolution on the attitude of the socialist parties towards the trade unions
is of particularly great importance for us Russians. In our country this
question is on the order of the day. The Stockholm Congress settled it in favour
of non-Party trade unions, i.e., it confirmed the position of our
neutralists, headed by Plekhanov. The London Congress took a step
towards Party trade unions as opposed to neutrality. As is
known, the London resolution gave rise to a violent dispute and dissatisfaction
in some of the trade unions and especially in the bourgeois-democratic press.


In Stuttgart the actual issue at stake was this: neutrality of the trade unions
or their still closer alignment with the Party? And, as the reader may gather
from the resolution, the International Socialist Congress went on record for
closer alignment of the unions with the Party. There is nothing in the
resolution to suggest that the trade unions should be neutral or
non-party. Kautsky, who in the German Social-Democratic Party advocated
alignment of the. unions with the Party as opposed to the neutrality advocated
by Bebel, was therefore fully entitled to announce to the Leipzig workers in his
report on the Stuttgart Congress

(Vorwärts,[4] 1907, No. 209, Beilage):


“The resolution of the Stuttgart Congress says all that we need. It
puts an end to neutrality for ever.”


Clara Zetkin writes:

 

“In principle, no one [in Stuttgart] any longer disputed the basic
historical tendency of the proletarian class struggle to link the political
with the economic struggle, to unite the political and economic
organisations as closely as possible into a single socialist working-class
force. Only the representative of the Russian Social-Democrats, Comrade
Plekhanov [she should have said the representative of the Mensheviks, who
delegated him to the Commission as an advocate of “neutrality”] and
the majority of the French delegation attempted, by rather unconvincing
arguments, to justify a certain limitation of this principle on the plea
that special conditions prevailed in their countries. The overwhelming
majority of the Congress favoured a resolute policy of unity between
Social-Democracy and the trade unions.


It should be mentioned that Plekhanov’s unconvincing (as Zetkin
rightly considered it) argument went the rounds of the Russian legally
published papers in this form. In the Commission of the Stuttgart Congress
Plekhanov referred to the fact that “there are eleven revolutionary
parties in Russia”; “which one of them should the trade unions
unite with?” (We are quoting from Vorwärts,
No. 196,1. Beilage.) This reference of Plekhanov’s is wrong
both in fact and in principle. Actually no more than two parties in every
nationality of Russia are contending for influence over the socialist
proletariat: the Social-Democrats and Socialist-Revolutionaries, the Polish

Social-Democrats[5] and the Polish Socialist

Party,[6] the Lettish Social-Democrats and the Lettish
Socialist-Revolutionaries (known as the Lettish Social-Democratic League),
the Armenian Social-Democrats and the

Dashnaktsutyuns,[7] etc. The Russian delegation in Stuttgart also at once
divided into two sections. The figure eleven is quite arbitrary and misleads
the workers. From standpoint of principle Plekhanov is wrong because the
struggle between proletarian and petty-bourgeois socialism, in Russia is
inevitable everywhere, including the trade unions. The British delegates, for
example, never thought of opposing the resolution, although they, too, have two
contending socialist parties—the Social-Democratic Federation and the
Independent Labour Party.

 

That the idea of neutrality, which was rejected in Stuttgart, has already
caused no little harm to the labour movement is clearly borne out by the
example of Germany. There, neutrality has been advocated and applied more than
anywhere else. As a result, the trade unions of Germany have deviated so
obviously towards opportunism that this deviation was openly admitted even by
Kautsky, who is so cautious on this question. In his report to the Leipzig
workers he bluntly stated that the “conservatism” displayed by the
German delegation in Stuttgart “becomes understandable if we bear in mind
the composition of this. delegation. Half of it consisted of representatives of
the trade unions, and thus the ‘Right wing’ of the Party appeared to have more
strength than it actually has in the Party.”


The resolution of the Stuttgart Congress should undoubtedly hasten a decisive
break of Russian Social-Democracy with the idea of neutrality so beloved by our
liberals. While observing the necessary caution and gradualness, and without
taking any impetuous or tactless steps, we must work steadily in the trade
unions towards bringing them closer and closer to the Social-Democratic Party.


Further, on the question of emigration and immigration, a clear difference of
opinion arose between the opportunists and the revolutionaries in the
Commission of the Stuttgart Congress. The opportunists cherished the idea of
limiting the right of migration of backward, undeveloped
workers—especially the Japanese and the Chinese. In the minds of these
opportunists the spirit of narrow craft isolation, of trade-union
exclusiveness, outweighed the consciousness of socialist tasks: the work of
educating and organising those strata of the proletariat which have not
yet been drawn into the labour movement. The Congress rejected everything that
smacked of this spirit. Even in the Commission there were only a few solitary
votes in favour of limiting freedom of migration, and recognition of the
solidarity of the workers of all countries in the class struggle is the keynote
of the resolution adopted by the International Congress.


The resolution on women’s suffrage was also adopted unanimously. Only
one Englishwoman from the semi-bourgeois Fabian Society defended the
admissibility of a

    

struggle not for full women’s suffrage but for one limited to those
      possessing property. The Congress rejected this unconditionally and
      declared in favour of women workers campaigning for the franchise, not in
      conjunction with the bourgeois supporters of women’s rights, hut in
      conjunction with the class parties of the proletariat. The Congress
      recognised that in the campaign for women’s suffrage it was
      necessary to uphold fully the principles of socialism and equal rights for
      men and women without distorting those principles for the sake of
      expediency.


In this connection an interesting difference of opinion arose in the
Commission. The Austrians (Viktor Adler, Adelheid Popp) justified their
tactics in the struggle for universal manhood suffrage: for the sake of
winning this suffrage, they thought it expedient in their campaign not to
put the demand for women’s suffrage, too, in the fore ground. The
German Social-Democrats, and especially Clara Zetkin, had protested against
this when the Austrians were campaigning for universal suffrage. Zetkin
declared in the press that they should not under any circumstances have
neglected the demand for women’s suffrage, that the Austrians had
opportunistically sacrificed principle to expediency, and that they would
not have narrowed the scope of their agitation, but would have widened it
and increased the force of the popular movement had they fought for
women’s suffrage with the same energy. In the Commission Zetkin was
supported whole-heartedly by another prominent German woman
Social-Democrat, Zietz. Adler’s amendment, which indirectly justified
the Austrian tactics, was rejected by 12 votes to 9 (this
amendment stated only that there should be no abatement of the struggle for
a suffrage that would really extend to all citizens, instead of stating
that the struggle for the suffrage should always include the demand for
equal rights for men and women). The point of view of the Commission and of
the Congress may be most accurately expressed in the following words of the
above-mentioned Zietz in her speech at the International Social ist
Women’s Conference (this Conference took place in Stuttgart at the
same time as the Congress):


“In principle we must demand all that we consider to be correct,”
said Zietz, “and only when our strength is inadequate

    

for more, do we accept what we are able to get. That has always been
the tactics of Social-Democracy. The more modest our demands the more modest
will the government be in its concessions....” This controversy between
the Austrian and German women Social-Democrats will enable the reader to see how
severely the best Marxists treat the slightest deviation from the principles of
consistent revolutionary tactics.


The last day of the Congress was devoted to the question of militarism in which
everyone took the greatest interest. The notorious Hervé tried to defend a
very, untenable position. He was unable to link up war with the capitalist
regime in general, and anti-militarist agitation with the entire work of
socialism. Hervé’s plan of “answering” any war by strike action or
an uprising betrayed a complete failure to understand that the employment of one
or other means of struggle depends on the objective conditions of the
particular crisis, economic or political, precipitated by the war, and not on
any previous decision that revolutionaries may have made.


But although Hervé did reveal frivolity, superficiality, and infatuation with
rhetorical phrases, it would be extremely short-sighted to counter him merely
by a dogmatic statement of the general truths of socialism. Vollmar in
particular fell into this error (from which Bebel and Guesde were not entirely
free). With the extraordinary conceit of a man infatuated with stereotyped
parliamentarism, he attacked Hervé without noticing that his own
narrow-mindedness and thick-skinned opportunism make one admit the
living spark in Hervéism, despite the theoretically absurd and
nonsensical way in which Hervé himself presents the question. It does happen
sometimes that at a new turning-point of a movement, theoretical absurdities
conceal some practical truth. And it was this aspect of the question, the appeal
not to prize only parliamentary methods of struggle, the appeal to act in
accordance with the new conditions of a future war and future crises, that was
stressed by the revolutionary Social-Democrats, especially by Rosa Luxemburg in
her speech. Together with the Russian Social-Democratic delegates (Lenin and
Martov—who here spoke in full harmony) Rosa Luxemburg

    

proposed amendments to Bebel’s resolution, and these amendments
emphasised the need for agitation among the youth, the necessity of taking
advantage of the crisis created by war for the purpose of hastening the
downfall of the bourgeoisie, the necessity of bearing in mind the
inevitable change of methods and means of struggle as the class struggle
sharpens and the political situation alters. In the end Bebel’s
dogmatically one-sided, dead resolution, which was open to a Vollmarian
interpretation, became transformed into an altogether different
resolution. All the theoretical truths were repeated in it for the benefit
of the Hervéists, who are capable of letting anti-militarism make
them forget socialism. But these truths serve as an introduction not to a
justification of parliamentary cretinism, not to the sanction of peaceful
methods alone, not to the worship of the present relatively peaceful and
quiet situation, but to the acceptance of all methods of struggle, to the
appraisal of the experience of the revolution in Russia, to the development
of the active creative side of the movement.


This most outstanding, most important feature of the Congress resolution on
anti-militarism has been very aptly caught in Zetkin’s journal, to which
we have already referred more than once.


“Here too,” Zetkin says of the anti-militarist resolution,
“the revolutionary energy [Tatkraft] and courageous faith of
the working class in its fighting capacity won in the end, winning, on
the one hand, over the pessimistic gospel of impotence and the hidebound
tendency to stick to old, exclusively parliamentary methods of struggle,
and, on the other hand, over the banal anti-militarist sport of the French
semi-anarchists of the. Hervé type. The resolution, which was
finally carried unanimously both by the Commission and by nearly 900
delegates of all countries, expresses in vigorous terms the gigantic
upswing of the revolutionary labour movement since the last International
Congress; the resolution puts forward as a principle that proletarian
tactics should be flexible, capable of developing, and sharpening
[Zuspitzung] in proportion as conditions ripen for that purpose.”

Hervéism has been rejected, but rejected not in favour of
opportunism, not from the point of view of dogmatism

    

and passivity. The vital urge towards more and more resolute and new
methods of struggle is fully recognised by the international proletariat
and linked up with the intensification of all the economic contradictions,
with all the conditions of the crises engendered by capitalism.


Not the empty Hervéist threat, but the clear realisation that the social
revolution is inevitable, the firm determination to fight to the end, the
readiness to adopt the most revolutionary methods of struggle—that is the
significance of the resolution of the International Socialist Congress in
Stuttgart on the question of militarism.


The army of the proletariat is gaining strength in all countries. Its
class-consciousness, unity, and determination are growing by leaps and
bounds. And capitalism is effectively ensuring more frequent crises, which this
army will take advantage of to destroy capitalism.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The article “The International Socialist Congress in
Stuttgart” was written by Lenin at the request of Zerno
Publishers, who had undertaken to issue Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908
(Calendar for All for 1908) in an attempt to use a legal
opportunity for publishing illegal literature. Lenin received a prospectus
from the publishers together with a list of contributors, including
M.S. Olminsky, N.A. Rozhkov, and N.N. Baturin, who wrote articles for the
Kalendar on the history of the Russian workers’ movement, in
particular of the Northern League of Russian Workers as well as of the
Emancipation of Labour group. The Kalendar dealt with the economic
and political situation in Russia, the activities of the Second Duma,
questions of foreign policy, the activities of the trade unions, the strike
movement an he condition of the peasantry, and gave a chronicle of the
revolutionary struggle in Russia in the nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. The Kalendar was issued in an edition of 60,000 copies
and was distributed at factories and in the army and navy (not counting a
few dozen copies which were confiscated by the police).

 



[2]
Ministerialism (Millerandism)—an opportunist trend in
West-European socialist parties in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, given this name after the French socialist A. Millerand, who
joined the reactionary bourgeois government of France in 1899 and pursued
an imperialist policy in concert with the bourgeoisie.

 



[3]
Briefe end Auszüge aus Briefen von Joh. Philbecker,
Jos. Dietzgen, Friedrich Engels, Karl Marx und A. an Sorge end Andere,
S. 220.

 



[4]
Vorwärts—a daily newspaper, the central organ of
the German Social-Democratic Party, published in Berlin from 1891 according
to a decision of the Halle Congress of the Party as successor to the
Berliner Volksblatt (founded in 1884), under the name
Vorwärts. Berliner Volksblatt. Engels used its columns
to combat all manifestations of opportunism. In the late nineties, after
the death of Engels, the editorial hoard of the newspaper was in the hands
of the Right wing of the Party and regularly published articles by the
opportunists. Vorwärts gave a tendentious picture of the
fight against opportunism and revisionism in the R.S.D.L.P., supporting the
Economists, and later, after the split in the Party, the Mensheviks. During
the years of reaction in Russia it published slanderous articles by
Trotsky, while denying Lenin and the Bolsheviks the opportunity to
controvert him and give an objective account of the state of affairs within
the Party.  

During the First World War Vorwärts took a
social-chauvinist stand. After the Great October Socialist Revolution it
conducted anti-Soviet propaganda. It was issued in Berlin until
1933.

.  



[5]
The Polish Social-Democrats members of the Social-Democracy of
the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania (S.D.K.P.&L.), the revolutionary
party of the Polish working class, founded in 1893 as the Social-Democracy
of the Kingdom of Poland, and from August 1900, after the Congress of the
Social-Democratic organisations of the Kingdom of Poland and Lithuania,
where the Polish Social-Democrats merged with part of the Lithuanian
Social-Democrats, it became known as the Social-Democracy of the Kingdom of
Poland and Lithuania. The party rendered a service in that it guided the
Polish workers’ movement towards an alliance with the Russian workers’
movement and opposed nationalism.  

During the revolution of 1905-07 the S.D.K.P.&L. fought under
slogans that were close to those of the Bolshevik Party and took an
uncompromising stand in regard to the liberal bourgeoisie. At that time the
S.D.K.P.&L. was guilty of a number of errors:

it failed to understand Lenin’s theory of the socialist revolution
and the leading role of the Party in the democratic revolution, and it
underestimated the role of the peasantry as an ally of the working class
and the significance of the national-liberation movement. While criticising
the erroneous views of the S.D.K.P.&L., Lenin did not overlook the
services it had rendered to the revolutionary movement in Poland. He
pointed out that the Polish Social-Democrats had “created for the
first time a purely proletarian party in Poland and proclaimed the vitally
important principle of close union between the Polish and Russian workers
in their class struggle” (see present edition, Vol. 20, “The
Right of Nations to Self-Determination”). At the Fourth (Unity)
Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in 1906 the S.D.K.P.&L. was admitted to the
R.S.D.L.P. in the capacity of a territorial organisation.  


The S.D.K.P.&L. hailed the October Socialist Revolution and
developed a struggle for the victory of the proletarian revolution in
Poland. In December 1918, at the Unity Congress of the
S.D.K.P. & L. and the P.P.S. Left wing, the two parties
united, forming the Communist Workers’ Party of Poland.

 



[6]
The Polish Socialist Party (P.P.S.—Polska
Partia Socjalistyczna)—a reformist nationalist party founded in
1892.

 



[7]
Dashnaktsutyuns—members of the nationalist bourgeois
party of that name. Founded in the early nineties of the nineteenth century
in Turkish Armenia with the aim of liberating the Turkish Armenians from
the Sultan’s yoke, this party was a bourgeois-democratic conglomerate
of representatives of different classes. Be sides the bourgeoisie, its
membership consisted largely of intellectuals, and included also peasants
and workers uninfluenced by Social-Democratic propaganda, and some
lumpen-proletarians, who made up the so-called “Zinvori”
squads.  

On the eve of the 1905-07 revolution the Dashnaktsutyuns transferred
their activities to the Caucasus and established close ties with the
Socialist-Revolutionaries. The Left wing of the party, which formed the
“Young Dashnaktsutyun” group, joined the S.R. Party in 1907.


The activities of the Dashnaktsutyuns were anti-popular. Their
nationalist propaganda did much harm to the cause of the international
education of the proletariat and the working masses of Armenia and the
whole of Transcaucasia.  

After the bourgeois-democratic revolution of February 1917 the Dashnaks
supported the policy of the bourgeois Provisional Government; after the
October Socialist Revolution they formed a counter-revolutionary bloc with
the Mensheviks, Socialist-Revolutionaries, and Musavatists against the
Bolsheviks. In 1918-20, the Dashnaks headed the bourgeois-nationalist
counter-revolutionary government of Armenia; all their actions helped to
convert Armenia into a colony of the foreign imperialists and a base for
the Anglo-French interventionists and Russian whiteguards in their fight
against the Soviet government. The working people of Armenia under the
leadership of the Bolshevik Party and with the assistance of the Red Army,
overthrew the Dashnak government in November 1920. With the victory of the
Soviets, the Dashnaktsutyun organisations in Transcaucasia were broken up
and suppressed.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Preface to the Collection Twelve Years









Lenin: Preface to the Collection Twelve Years







V. I.  

      Lenin
Preface to the Collection Twelve Years[17]




Written: September 1907 

Published:

      Published in November 1907 in the collection Twelve Years, St. Petersburg.

      Published according to the book text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 94-113.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



 

The volume of collected articles and pamphlets here offered
to the reader covers, the period from 1895 through 1905. The theme of these
writings is the programmatic, tactical, and organisational problems of the
Russian Social-Democratic movement, problems which are being posed and
dealt with all the time in the struggle against the Right wing of the
Marxist trend in Russia.


At first the struggle was fought on purely theoretical ground against
Mr. Struve, the chief spokesman of our legal Marxism of the nineties. The close
of 4894 and the beginning of 1895 saw an abrupt change in our legal
press. Marxist views found their way into it for the first time, presented not
only by leaders of the Emancipation of Labour

group[18] living abroad, but also by Social-Democrats in Russia. This
literary revival and the heated controversy between the Marxists and the
old Narodnik leaders, who (N. K. Mikhailovsky, for instance) had up till
then held practically undivided sway in our progressive literature, were
the prelude to an upswing in the mass labour movement in Russia. These
literary activities of the Russian Marxists were the direct forerunners of
active proletarian struggle, of the famous St. Petersburg strikes of 1896,
which ushered in an era of steadily mounting workers’ movement—the
most potent factor in the whole of our revolution.


The Social-Democrats in those days wrote under conditions which compelled them
to use Aesopian language. and confine themselves to the most general principles,
which were farthest removed from practical activity and politics.

    


    

This did much to unite the heterogenous elements of the Marxist movement in
the fight against the Narodniks. Besides the Russian Social-Democrats
abroad and at home this fight was waged also by men like Struve, Bulgakov,
Tugan-Baranovsky, Berdyayev, and others. They were bourgeois democrats
for whom the break with Narodism signified transition from
petty-bourgeois (or peasant) socialism to bourgeois liberalism, and not to
proletarian socialism as was the case with us.


The history of the Russian revolution in general, the history of the Cadet
Party in particular, and especially the evolution of Mr. Struve (to the verge of
Octobrism) have now made this truth self-evident, made it current small coin for
our publicists. But in 1894-95, this truth had to be demonstrated on the basis
of relatively minor deviations by one or another writer from Marxism; at that
time the coin had still to be minted. That. is why, in now print—ing the
full text of my article against Mr. Struve (“The Economic Content of
Narodism and the Criticism of It in Mr. Struve’s Book”, over the
signature of K. Tulin in the symposium Material on the Question of the
Economic Development of Russia, published in St. Petersburg in 1885 and
destroyed by the

censor[1]

),

I pursue a triple purpose. First, since the reading public is familiar with
Mr. Struve’s book and the Narodnik articles of 1894-95 against the
Marxists, it is important to give a criticism of Mr. Struve’s
viewpoint. Secondly, in order to reply to repeated accusations of alliance
with these gentry, and in order to appraise the very significant political
career of Mr. Struve himself, it is important to cite the warning to
Mr. Struve made by a revolutionary Social-Democrat simultaneously
with our general statements against the Narodniks. Thirdly, the old, and in
many respects outdated, polemic with Struve is important as an instructive
example, one that shows the practical and political value of irreconcilable
theoretical polemics Revolutionary Social-Democrats have been accused times
without number of an excessive penchant for such polemics with the
“Economists”, the Bernsteinians, and the Mensheviks. Today,
too, these accusations

    

are being bandied about by the “conciliators” inside the
Social-Democratic Party and the “sympathising” semi-socialists
outside it. An excessive penchant for polemics and splits, we are all too
often told, is typical of the Russians in general, of the Social-Democrats
in particular and of the Bolsheviks especially. But the fact is all too
often overlooked that the excessive penchant for skipping from socialism to
liberalism is engendered by the conditions prevailing in the capitalist
countries in general, the conditions of the bourgeois revolution in Russia
in particular, and the conditions of the life and work of our intellectuals
especially. From that standpoint it is well worth taking a look at the
events of ten years ago, the theoretical differences with
“Struveism” which then began to take shape, and the minor
(minor at first glance) divergencies that led to a complete political
demarcation between the parties and to an irreconcilable struggle in
parliament, in the press, at public meetings, etc.


The article against Mr. Struve, I should add, is based on a paper I read in the
autumn of 1894 to a small circle of Marxists of that time. The group of
Social-Democrats then active in St. Petersburg, and who a year later founded
the League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the Working Class, was
represented in this circle by St., R., and myself. The legal Marxist writers
were represented by P. B. Struve, A. N. Potresov, and

K.[19] The subject of my paper was “The Reflection of Marxism in
Bourgeois Literature”. As will be seen from the title, the polemic
with Struve here was incomparably sharper and more definite (in its
Social-Democratic conclusions) than in the article published in the spring
of 1895. The latter was toned down partly for censorship reasons and partly
for the sake of an “alliance” with the legal Marxists for joint
struggle against Narodism. That the “leftward jolt” which the
St. Peters burg Social-Democrats then gave Mr. Struve has not remained
altogether without result is clearly shown by Mr. Struve’s article in
the police-destroyed symposium of 1895, and by several of his articles in

Novoye Slovo[20]

(1897).

Moreover, in reading the 1895 article against Mr. Struve it should be borne in
mind that in many respects it is a

    

synopsis of subsequent economic studies (notably The Development of

   Capitalism[2]

).

Lastly, I should draw the reader’s attention to the concluding pages
of this article, which emphasise the positive (from the Marxist
standpoint) features and aspects of Narodism as a revolutionary-democratic
trend in a country that was on the threshold of bourgeois revolution. This
was a theoretical formulation of the propositions which twelve or thirteen
years later were to find their practical and political expression in the
“Left bloc” at the elections to the Second Duma and in the
“Left bloc” tactics. That section of the Mensheviks which
opposed the idea of a revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the
proletariat and peasantry, maintaining that a Left bloc was absolutely
impermissible, had on this issue gone back on the very old and very
important tradition of the revolutionary Social-Democrats—a tradition
vigorously up held by

Zarya[21] and the old

Iskra.[22] It stands to reason that the conditional and limited
permissibility of “Left bloc” tactics follows inevitably from
the same fundamental theoretical Marxist views on Narodism.


The article against Struve (1894-95) is followed by The Tasks of the Russian

       Social-Democrats,[3]

written to wards the close of 1897 on the basis of the experience of
Social-Democratic activities in St. Petersburg in 1895. It presents in a
positive form the views which in other articles and pamphlets in this
volume are expressed in the form of polemics with the Social-Democratic
Right wing. The various prefaces to the Tasks are reprinted here
in order to show the connection between these activities and the various
periods of our Party’s development (for instance, Axelrod’s
preface emphasises the pamphlet’s connection with the struggle
against “Economism”, and the 1902 preface stresses the
evolution of the Narodnaya Volya and Narodnoye Pravo

members[23]).


The article “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of

    Liberalism”[4]

was published abroad in Zarya in 1901. It dissolves, so
to speak, Social-Democratic association

    

with Struve as a political leader. In 1895, we warned him and cautiously
dissociated ourselves from him as an ally. In 1901, we declared war on him
as a liberal who was incapable of championing even purely democratic
demands with any consistency.


In 1895, several years before the

Bernsteinism[24] in the West and before the complete break with Marxism
on the part of quite a few “advanced” writers in Russia, I
point ed out that Mr. Struve was an unreliable Marxist with whom
Social-Democrats should have no truck. In 1901, several years before the
Cadet Party emerged in the Russian revolution, and before the political
fiasco of this party in the First and Second Dumas, I pointed out the very
features of Russian bourgeois liberalism which were to be fully revealed in
the mass political actions of 1905-07. The article “Hannibals of
Liberalism” criticised the false reasoning of one liberal, but is now
almost fully applicable to the policy of the biggest liberal party in our
revolution. As for those who are inclined to believe that we Bolsheviks
went back on the old Social-Democratic policy in regard to liberalism when
we ruthlessly combated constitutional illusions and fought the Cadet Party
in 1905-07—the article “Hannibals of Liberalism” will
show them their mistake. The Bolsheviks remained true to the traditions of
revolutionary Social-Democracy and did not succumb to the bourgeois
intoxication to which the liberals gave their support during the
“constitutional zig zag” and which temporarily misled the
Right-wing members of our Party.


The next pamphlet., What Is To Be Done?, was published abroad early in

1902.[5]

It is a criticism of the Right wing, which was no longer a literary trend
but existed within the Social-Democratic organisation. The first
Social-Democratic congress was held in 1898. It founded the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party, represented by the Union of Russian
Social-Democrats Abroad, which incorporated the Emancipation of Labour
group. The central Party bodies, however, were suppressed by the police and
could not be re-established. There was, in fact, no united

    

party: unity was still only an idea, a directive. The infatuation with the
strike movement and economic struggles gave rise to a peculiar form of
Social-Democratic opportunism, known as “Economism”. When the
Iskra group began to function abroad at the very end of 1900,
the split over this issue was already an accomplished fact. In the
spring of 1900, Plekhanov resigned from the Union of Russian
Social-Democrats Abroad and set up an organisation of his
own—Sotsial-Demokrat.


Officially, Iskra began its work independently of the two groups, but
for all practical purposes it sided with Plekhanov’s group against the
Union. An attempt to merge the two (at the Congress of the Union and the
Sotsial-Demokrat in Zurich, June 1901) failed. What Is To Be
Done? gives a systematic account of the reasons for the divergence of views
and of the nature of Iskra tactics and organisational activity.


What Is To Be Done? is frequently mentioned by the Mensheviks, the
present opponents of the Bolsheviks, as well as by writers belonging to the
bourgeois-liberal camp (Cadets,

Bezzaglavtsi[25] in the newspaper Tovarishch, etc.). I have,
therefore, decided to reprint the pamphlet here, slightly abridged,
omitting only the details of organisational relations and minor polemical
remarks. Concerning the essential content of this pamphlet it is necessary
to draw the attention of the modern reader to the following.


The basic mistake made by those who now criticise What Is To Be Done?
is to treat the pamphlet apart from its connection with the concrete historical
situation of a definite, and now long past, period in the development of our
Party. This mistake was strikingly demonstrated, for instance, by Parvus (not to
mention numerous Mensheviks), who, many years after the pamphlet appeared, wrote
about its incorrect or exaggerated ideas on the subject of an organisation of
professional revolutionaries.


Today these statements look ridiculous, as if their authors want to dismiss a
whole period in the development of our Party, to dismiss gains which, in their
time, had to be fought for, but which have long ago been consolidated and have
served their purpose.


To maintain today that Iskra exaggerated (in 1901 and
1902) the idea of an organisation of professional revolutionaries, is
like reproaching the Japanese, after the Russo-Japanese War, for
having exaggerated the strength of Russia’s armed forces, for having
prior to the war exaggerated the need to prepare for fighting these
forces. To win victory the Japanese had to marshal all their forces against
the probable maximum of Russian forces. Unfortunately, many of those who
judge our Party are outsiders, who do not know the subject, who do not
realise that today the idea of an organisation of professional
revolutionaries has already scored a complete victory. That
victory would have been impossible if this idea had not been pushed to the
forefront at the time, if we had not “exaggerated” so
as to drive it home to people who were trying to prevent it from being
realised.  

What Is To Be Done? is a summary of Iskra tactics and
Iskra organisational policy in 1901 an4 1902. Precisely a
“summary”, no more and no less. That will be clear to
anyone who takes the trouble to go through the file of Iskra for 1901
and

1902.[6]

But to pass judgement on that summary without knowing
Iskra’s struggle against the then dominant trend of
Economism, without understanding that struggle, is sheer idle
talk. Iskra fought for an organisation of professional
revolutionaries. It fought with especial vigour in 1901 and 1902, vanquished
Economism, the then dominant trend, and finally created this
organisation in 1903. It preserved it in face of the subsequent split in the
Iskrist ranks and all the convulsions of the period of storm and stress; it
preserved it throughout the Russian revolution; it preserved it intact from
1901-02 to 1907.


And now, when the fight for this organisation has long been won, when the seed
has ripened, and the harvest gathered, people come along and tell us:
“You exaggerated the idea of an organisation of professional
revolutionaries!” Is this not ridiculous?

 

Take the whole pre-revolutionary period and the first two and a half years of
the revolution (1905-07). Compare our Social-Democratic Party during this whole
period with the other parties in respect of unity, organisation, and continuity
of policy. You will have to admit that in this respect our Party is
unquestionably superior to all the others—the Cadets,
the Socialist-Revolutionaries, etc. Before the revolution it drew up a programme
which was formally accepted by all Social-Democrats, and when changes were made
in it there was no split over the programme. From 1903 to 1907 (formally from
1905 to 1906), the Social-Democratic Party, despite the split in its ranks, gave
the public the fullest information on the inner-party situation (minutes of the
Second General Congress, the Third Bolshevik, and the Fourth General, or
Stockholm, congresses). Despite the split, the Social-Democratic Party earlier
than any of the other parties was able to take ad vantage of the temporary spell
of freedom to build a legal organisation with an ideal democratic structure, an
electoral system, and representation at congresses according to the number of
organised members. You will not find this, even today, either in the
Socialist-Revolutionary or the Cadet parties, though the latter is practically
legal, is the best organised bourgeois party, and has incomparably greater
funds, scope for using the press, and opportunities for legal activities than
our Party. And take the elections to the Second Duma, in which all parties
participated—did they not clearly show the superior organisational unity
of our Party and Duma group?


The question arises, who accomplished, who brought into being this superior
unity, solidarity, and stability of our Party? It was accomplished by the
organisation of professional revolutionaries, to the building of which
Iskra made the greatest contribution. Anyone who knows our
Party’s history well, anyone who has had a hand in building the Party, has
but to glance at the delegate list of any of the groups at, say, the London
Congress, in order to he convinced of this and notice at once that it is a list
of the old membership, the central core that had worked hardest of all to build
up the Party and make it what it is. Basically, of course, their success was due
to the fact that

    

the working class, whose best representatives built the Social-Democratic
Party, for objective economic reasons possesses a greater capacity for
organisation than any other class in capitalist society. Without this
condition an organisation of professional revolutionaries would be nothing
more than a plaything, an adventure, a mere signboard. What Is To Be
Done? repeatedly emphasises this, pointing out that the organisation
it advocates has no meaning apart from its connection with the
“genuine revolutionary class that is spontaneously rising to
struggle”. But the objective maximum ability of the proletariat to
unite in a class is realised through living people, and only through
definite forms of organisation. In the historical conditions that prevailed
in Russia in 1900-05, no organisation other than Iskra could
have created the Social-Democratic Labour Party we now have. The
professional revolutionary has played his part in the history of Russian
proletarian socialism. No power on earth can now undo this work, which has
outgrown the narrow framework of the “circles” of 1902-05. Nor
can the significance of the gains already won be shaken by belated
complaints that the militant tasks of the movement were exaggerated by
those who at that time had to fight to ensure the correct way of
accomplishing these tasks.


I have just referred to the narrow framework of the circles of the old
Iskra period (beginning with issue No. 51, at the close of 1903,
Iskra turned to Menshevism, proclaiming that “a gulf separates
the old and the new Iskra”—Trotsky’s words in a pamphlet
approved by the Menshevik Iskra editors). This circle spirit has to be
briefly explained to the present-day reader. The pamphlets What Is To Be
Done? and One Step Forward,

 Two Steps Back[7]

published in this collection present to the reader a heated, at times
bitter and destructive, controversy within the circles
abroad. Undoubtedly, this struggle has many unattractive
features. Undoubtedly, it is something that could only be possible in a
young and immature workers’ movement in the country in
question. Undoubtedly, the present leaders of the present workers’ movement
in Russia will have to

    

break with many of the circle traditions, forget and discard many of the trivial
features of circle activity and circle squabbles, so as to concentrate on the
tasks of Social-Democracy in the present period. Only the broadening of the
Party by enlisting proletarian elements can, in conjunction with open
mass activity, eradicate all the residue of the circle spirit which has been
inherited from the past and is unsuited to our present tasks. And the transition
to a democratically organised workers’ party, proclaimed by the Bolsheviks in

Novaya Zhizn[26]

  in November 1905,[8]

i.e., as soon as the conditions appeared for legal activity—this
transition was virtually an irrevocable break with the old circle ways that
had outlived their day.


Yes, “that had had outlived their day”, for it is not enough to
condemn the old circle spirit; its significance in the special circumstances of
the past period must be understood. The circles were necessary in their day and
played a positive role. In an autocratic state, especially in the situation
created by the whole history of the Russian revolutionary movement,
the socialist workers’ party could not develop except from these
circles. And the circles, i.e., close-knit, exclusive groups uniting a very
small number of people and nearly always based on personal friendship, were a
necessary stage in the development of socialism and the workers’ movement in
Russia. As the movement grew, it was confronted with the task of uniting these
circles, forming strong links between them, and establishing continuity. This
called for a firm base of operations “beyond the reach” of the
autocracy—i.e., abroad. The circles abroad, therefore, came into
being through necessity. There was no contact between them; they had no
authority over them in the shape of the Party in Russia, and it was inevitable
that they should differ in their understanding of the movement’s main
tasks at the given stage, that is, an understanding of how exactly to
set up a base of operations and in what way they could help
to build the Party as a whole. A struggle between the circles was, therefore,
inevitable. Today, in retrospect, we can clearly see which of the
circles was really in a position

    

to act as a base of operations. But at that time, when the various circles
were just beginning their work, no one could say that and the controversy
could be resolved only through struggle. Parvus, I remember, subsequently
blamed the old Iskra for waging a destructive circle war and
advocated after the event a conciliatory policy. That is an easy thing to
say after the event, and to say it reveals a failure to understand the
conditions then prevailing. For one thing, there was no criterion by which
to judge the strength or importance of one or another circle. The
importance of many of them, which are now forgotten, was exaggerated, but
in their time they wanted through struggle to assert their right to
existence. Secondly, the differences among the circles were over the
direction the work was to take, work which at the time was new to
them. I noted at the time (in What Is To Be Done?) that these
seemingly minor differences were actually of immense importance, since at
the beginning of this new work, at the beginning of the Social-Democratic
movement, the definition of the general nature of the work and movement
would very substantially affect propaganda, agitation, and
organisation. All subsequent disputes between the Social-Democrats
concerned the direction of the Party’s political activity on specific
issues. But at that time the controversy was over the most general
principles and the fundamental aims of all Social-Democratic
policy generally.


The circles played their part and are now, of course, obsolete. But they became
obsolete only because the struggle that they waged posed the key problems of the
Social-Democratic movement in the sharpest possible manner and solved them in
an irreconcilable revolutionary spirit, thereby creating a firm basis for broad
party activity.


Of particular questions raised in the literary discussion over What Is To Be
Done? I shall comment on only two. Writing in Iskra in 1904, soon
after the appearance of One Step Forward, Two Steps Back, Plekhanov
declared that he differed from me in principle on the question of spontaneity
and political consciousness. I did not reply either to that declaration (except
for a brief note in the

    

Geneva newspaper

       Vperyod[27]),[9]

or to the numerous repetitions of it in Menshevik literature. I did not
reply because Plekhanov’s criticism was obviously mere cavilling,
based on phrases torn out of context, on particular expressions which I had
not quite adroitly or precisely formulated. Moreover, he ignored the
general content and the whole spirit of my pamphlet What Is To Be
Done? which appeared in March 1902. The draft Party programme (framed
by Plekhanov and amended by the Iskra editors) appeared in June or
July 1902. Its formulation of the relation between spontaneity and
political consciousness was agreed upon by all the Iskra editors
(my disputes with Plekhanov over the programme, which took place in the
editorial board, were not on this point, but on the question of small
production being ousted by large-scale production, concerning which I
called for a more precise formula than Plekhanov’s, and on the
difference in the standpoint of the proletariat or of the labouring classes
generally; on this point I insisted on a narrower definition of the purely
proletarian character of the Party).


Consequently, there could be no question of any difference principle between
the draft Party programme and What To Be Done? on this issue. At the
Second Congress (August 1903) Martynov, who was then an Economist, challenged
our views on spontaneity and political consciousness as set forth in the
programme. He was opposed by all the Iskrists, as I emphasise in One Step
Forward. Hence it is clear that the controversy was essentially between the
Iskrists and the Economists, who attacked what was common both to
What Is To Be Done? and the programme drafts. Nor at the Second
Congress did I have any intention of elevating my own formulations, as given in
What Is To Be Done?, to “programmatic” level, constituting
special principles. On the contrary, the expression I used— and it has
since been frequently quoted—was that the Economists had gone to one
extreme. What Is To Be Done?, I said, straightens out what had been
twisted by the Economists (cf. minutes of the Second R.S.D.L.P. Congress in
1903, Geneva, 1904). I emphasised that just because we were

    

so vigorously straightening out whatever had been twisted our line of
action would always be the

     straightest.[10]

The meaning of these words is clear enough: What Is To Be Done? is
a controversial correction of Economist distortions and it would be wrong
to regard the pamphlet in any other light. It should be added that
Plekhanov’s article against the pamphlet was not reprinted
in the new Iskra collection (Two Years), and for that
reason I do not here deal with Plekhanov’s arguments, but merely
explain the issue involved to the present-day reader, who may come across
references to it in very many Menshevik publications.


My second comment concerns the question of economic struggle and the
trade. unions. My views on this subject have been frequently misrepresented in
the literature, and I must, therefore, emphasise that many pages in What Is
To Be Done? are devoted to explaining the immense importance of
economic struggle and the trade unions. In particular, I advocated
neutrality of the trade unions, and have not altered that view
in the pamphlets or newspaper articles written since then, despite the numerous
assertions by my opponents. Only the London R.S.D.L.P. Congress and the
Stuttgart International Socialist Congress led me to conclude that trade-union
neutrality is not defensible as a principle. The only correct
principle is the closest possible alignment of the unions with the Party. Our
policy must be to bring the unions closer to the Party and link them with
it. That policy should be pursued perseveringly and persistently in all our
propaganda, agitation, and organising activity, without trying to obtain mere
“recognition” of our views and without expelling from the trade
unions those of a different opinion.

 *     *  * 

The pamphlet One Step Forward, Two Steps Back was published in Geneva
in the summer of. 1904. It reviews the first stage of the split between
the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks,

    

which began at the Second Congress (August 1903). I have cut this pamphlet
down by half, since-minor details of the organisational struggle,
especially points concerning the personal composition of the Party centres,
cannot possibly be of any interest to the present-day reader and, in fact,
are best forgotten. But what is important, I think, is the analysis of the
controversy over tactical and other conceptions at the Second Congress, and
the polemic with the Mensheviks on matters of organisation. Both are
essential for an understanding of Menshevism and Bolshevism as trends which
have left their mark upon all the activities of the workers’ party in our
revolution.


Of the discussions at the Second Congress of the Social-Democratic Party, I
will mention the debate on the agrarian programme. Events have clearly
demonstrated that our programme at the time (return of the

cut-off lands[28]) was much too limited and, underestimated the
strength of the revolutionary-democratic peasant movement—I shall
deal with this in greater detail in Volume 2 of the present

     publication.[11]

Here it is important to emphasise that even this excessively
limited agrarian programme was at that time considered too
broad by the Social-Democratic Right wing. Martynov and other
Economists opposed it on the grounds that it went too far! This shows the
great practical importance of the whole struggle that the old
Iskra waged against. Economism, against attempts to narrow down
and belittle the character of Social-Democratic policy.


At that time (the first half of 1904) our differences with the
Mensheviks were restricted to organisational issues. I described the
Menshevik attitude as “opportunism in questions of
organisation”. Objecting to this P. B. Axelrod wrote to Kautsky:
“My feeble mind just cannot grasp this thing called ‘opportunism in
questions of organisation’ which is now being brought to the fore as
something independent and having no direct connection with programmatic and
tactical views.” (Letter of June 6, 1904, reprinted in the
new-Iskra collection Two Years, Part II, p. 149.)

 

The direct connection of opportunism in organisational views with that in
tactical views has been sufficiently demonstrated by the whole record of
Menshevism in 1905-07. As for this “incomprehensible thing”,
“opportunism in questions of organisation”, practical
experience has borne out my appraisal more brilliantly than I could ever
have expected. It suffices to say that even the Menshevik
Cherevanin now has to admit (see his pamphlet on the London
R.S.D.L.P. Congress of 1907) that Axelrod’s organisational plans (the
much-talked-of “labour congress”, etc.) could only lead to
splits that would ruin the proletarian cause. What is more, the same
Cherevanin tells us in this pamphlet that in London Plekhanov had to con
tend with “organisational anarchism” within the
Menshevik faction. And so it was not for nothing that I fought
“opportunism in questions of organisation” in 1904, seeing that
in 1907 both Cherevanin and Plekhanov have had to recognise the
“organisational anarchism” of influential Mensheviks.


From organisational opportunism the Mensheviks passed to tactical
opportunism. The pamphlet, The Zemstvo Campaign and “Iskra’s”

      Plan[12]

(published in Geneva towards the end of 1904, in November or December if I
am not mistaken) marks their first step in that direction. One frequently
finds statements in current, writings that the dispute over the Zemstvo
campaign was due to the fact that the Bolsheviks saw no value at all in
organising demonstrations before the Zemstvo people. The reader will see
that this was not the case at all. The differences were due to the
Mensheviks insisting that we should not cause panic among the
liberals, and, still more to the fact that, after the Rostov strike of
1902, the summer strikes and barricades of 1903, and on the eve of January
9, 1905, the Mensheviks extolled the idea, of demonstrations before the
Zemstvo

people[29] as the highest type of demonstration. Our attitude to
this Menshevik “Zemstvo campaign plan” was expressed in the
heading of an article on the subject in the Bolshevik paper
Vperyod, No. I (Geneva, January 1905):

    

“Good Demonstrations of Proletarians and Poor Arguments of Certain

   Intellectuals.”[13]


The last pamphlet included in this collection, Two Tactics of
Social-Democracy in the Democratic Revolution, appeared in Geneva in the
summer of

1905.[14]

It is a systematic statement of the fundamental tactical
differences with the Mensheviks. These differences were fully formulated in
the resolutions of the Third (spring) R.S.D.L.P. (Bolshevik) Congress in
London and the Menshevik Conference in Geneva which established the
basic divergence between the Bolshevik and Menshevik appraisals of
our bourgeois revolution as a whole from the standpoint of the
proletariat’s tasks. The Bolsheviks claimed for the proletariat the
role of leader in the democratic revolution. The Mensheviks
reduced its role to that of an “extreme opposition”. The
Bolsheviks gave a positive definition of the class character and class,
significance of the revolution, maintaining that a victorious revolution
implied a “revolutionary-democratic dictatorship of the proletariat
and the peasantry”. The Mensheviks always interpreted the bourgeois
revolution so incorrectly as to result in their acceptance of a position in
which the role of the proletariat would be subordinate to and dependent on
the bourgeoisie.


How these differences of principle were reflected in practical activities is
well known. The Bolsheviks boycotted the Bulygin Duma: the Mensheviks
vacillated. The Bolsheviks boycotted the Witte Duma; the Mensheviks vacillated,
appealing to the people to vote, but not for the Duma, The Mensheviks supported
a Cadet Ministry and Cadet policy in the First Duma, while the Bolsheviks,
parallel with propaganda in favour of an “executive committee of the

Left”,[30] resolutely exposed constitutional illusions and Cadet
counter-revolutionism. Further, the Bolsheviks worked for a Left bloc in
the Second Duma elections, while the Mensheviks called for a bloc with the
Cadets, and so on and so forth.


Now it seems that the “Cadet period” in the Russian revolution (the
expression is from the pamphlet The Victory
    

of the Cadets and the Tasks of the Workers’ Party, March

1906)[15]

has come to an end. The counter-revolutionary nature of the Cadets has been
fully exposed. The Cadets themselves are beginning to admit that they had
been combating the revolution all along, and Mr. Struve frankly reveals the
inner thoughts of Cadet liberalism. The more attentively the
class-conscious proletariat now looks back on this Cadet period, on the
whole of this “constitutional zigzag”, the more clearly will it
see that the Bolsheviks correctly appraised beforehand both this period and
the essence of the Cadet Party, and that the Mensheviks were in fact
pursuing a wrong policy, one that, objectively, was tantamount to throwing
over independent proletarian policy in favour of subordinating the
proletariat to bourgeois liberalism.

 *     *  * 

In casting a retrospective glance at the struggle of the two trends in Russian
Marxism and Social-Democracy during the last twelve years (1895-1907), one
cannot avoid the conclusion that “legal Marxism”,
“Economism”, and “Menshevism” are diverse forms of one
and the, same historical tendency. The “legal Marxism” of
Mr. Struve (1894) and those like him was a reflection of Marxism in
bourgeois literature. “Economism”, as a distinct trend in
Social-Democratic activities in 1897 and subsequent years, virtually
implemented the programme set forth in the bourgeois liberal
“Credo”: economic struggle for the workers, political struggle
for the liberals. Menshevism is not only a literary trend, not only a tendency
in Social-Democratic activity, but a close-knit faction, which during the first
period of the Russian revolution (1905-07) pursued its own distinct
policy—a policy which in practice subordinated the proletariat to
bourgeois

  liberalism.[16]

 

In all capitalist countries the proletariat is inevitably connected by
a thousand transitional links with its neighbour on the right, the petty
bourgeoisie. In all workers’ parties there inevitably emerges a more or
less clearly delineated Right wing which, in its views, tactics, and
organisational “line”, reflects the opportunist tendencies of
the petty bourgeoisie. In such a petty-bourgeois country as Russia, in the
era of bourgeois revolution, in the formative period of the young
Social-Democratic Labour Party, these tendencies were bound to manifest
themselves much more sharply, definitely, and clearly than anywhere else in
Europe. Familiarity with the various forms in which this tendency is
displayed in the Russian Social-Democratic movement in different periods of
its development is necessary in order to strengthen revolutionary
Marxism. and steel the Russian working class in its struggle for
emancipation.

September 1907
 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 333-507.—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 21-632.—Ed.  

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 2, pp. 321-51.—Ed.  

[4]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 31-80.—Ed.  

[5]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp 347-529.—Ed.  

[6]
Volume 3 of this publication will contain the most Important
Iskra articles for these

years.[31] —Lenin

[7]
See present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 203-425.—Ed. 

[8]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 29-39.—Ed.  

[9]
See present edition, Vol. 8, p. 245.—Ed.  

[10]
See present edition, Vol. 6, p. 491.—Ed.  

[11]
See pp. 256-58 of this volume.—Ed.  

[12]
See present edition, Vol. 7, pp. 497-518.—Ed.  

[13]
See present edition, Vol. 8, pp. 29-34.—Ed.  

[14]
See present edition, Vol. 9, pp. 15-140.—Ed.  

[15]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 499-276.—Ed.  

[16]
An analysis of the struggle of the various trends and shades of opinion
at the Second Party Congress (cf. One Step Forward, Two Steps
Back, 1904) will show beyond all doubt the direct and close ties
between the Economism of 1897 and subsequent years and Menshevism. The link
between Economism in the Social-Democratic movement and the “legal
Marxism” or “Struveism” of 1895-97 was demonstrated

   

by me in the pamphlet What Is To Be Done? (1902). Legal
Marxism-Economism-Menshevism are linked not only ideologically, but also by
their direct historical continuity.  —Lenin
 



[17]
In 1907, the Zerno Book Publishers, directed by M. S. Kedrov,
decided to bring out a three-volume collection of Lenin’s works under
the general title Twelve Years. The original contract for this
publication is in the Central Party Archive of the Institute of
Marxism-Leninism under the Central Committee of the Communist Party of the
Soviet Union. Only the first volume and part one of the second
appeared. The first volume contained: The Economic Content of Narodism
and the Criticism of it in Mr. Struve’s Book; The Tasks of the
Russian Social-Democrats; The Persecutors of the Zemstvo
   

and the Hannibals of Liberalism; What is To Be Done?;
One Step Forward, Two Steps Back; The Zemstvo Campaign and
Iskra’s Plan; Two Tactics of Social-Democracy in the
Democratic Revolution. The first volume came off the press in November
1907 (the cover gives the date 1908) and was confiscated soon after its
appearance, but a large part of the edition was saved; the book continued
to circulate illegally.  

Volume II was to contain Lenin’s writings on the agrarian
question. Owing to persecution by the censorship it was decided to drop the
title Twelve Years and to issue the second volume in two parts:
part one to contain the legal works published in 1899 in the symposium
Economic Studies and Essays; part two the illegal works. Lenin
included in the second volume his book The Agrarian Programme of
Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907, which he
had just completed. This plan of publication, however, was not
realised. Only the first part of Volume II under the title The Agrarian
Question came out in the beginning of 1908, containing the following
writings: A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism; The
Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia and General Problems of
“Handicraft” Industry, and The Agrarian Question and
the “Critics of Marx” (Chapters I-XI). Part two of the
second volume, for which The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in
the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907 had been set up, was
confiscated by the police in the printing-press and destroyed.  

Volume III was to contain programmatic and polemical articles which had
appeared in the Bolshevik press (Iskra, Vperyod,
Proletary, Novaya Zhizn, and others). The intensification
of repression and censorship persecution against revolutionary literature
prevented the publication of the third volume.

 



[18]
The Emancipation of Labour group—the first Russian
Marxist group founded by G. V. Plekhanov in Switzerland in 1883. Other
members of the group were P. B. Axelrod, L. G. Deutsch, Vera Zasulich, and
V. N. Ignatov.  

The Emancipation of Labour group did a great deal for the propaganda of
Marxism in Russia. It translated into Russian, published abroad, and
distributed in Russia Marx’s and Engels’s Manifesto of the
Communist Party, Marx’s Wage-Labour and Capital,
Engels’s Socialism: Utopian and Scientific, and other works
by the founders of Marxism, and also popularised Marxism in its own
publications. Their work dealt a severe blow to Narodism, which was the
chief ideological obstacle to the spread of Marxism and the development of
the Social-Democratic movement in Russia. In his Socialism and the
Political Struggle (1883), Our Differences (1885), and other
writings, Plekhanov criticised the reactionary views of the Narodniks from
the Marxist standpoint (their views concerning the non-capitalist path of
Russia’s development, denial of the leading role of the proletariat
in the revolutionary movement, their subjective-idealistic view on the role
of the individual in history, etc.). Plekhanov’s two drafts of a
programme for Russian Social-Democrats (1883 and 1885) published
by the Emancipation

   

of Labour group were an important step towards the building of a
Social-Democratic Party in Russia. Plekhanov’s hook The
Development of the Monist View of History (1895) “served to rear
a whole generation of Russian Marxists” (Lenin, see present edition,
Vol. 16, “The Vperyod Faction”). It played a very
important role in spreading Marxist views and stating the case for
dialectical and historical materialism. The group published and distributed
in Russia four volumes of the symposium Sotsial-Demokrat, as well
as a series of popular pamphlets for the workers.  

Engels welcomed the appearance of the Emancipation of Labour group
“which sincerely and without reservations accepted the great economic
and historical theories of Marx” (Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels,
Ausgewählte Briefe, Berlin, Dietz Verlag, 1953,
S. 453). Plekhanov and Vera Zasulich were personal friends of Engels and
corresponded with him for many years. The group established contacts with
the international labour movement, and, be ginning with the First Congress
of the Second International (Paris, 1889) and throughout the whole period
of its existence, it represented Russian Social-Democracy at all congresses
of the International.  

The group played an important p art in developing revolutionary
consciousness of the Russian working class, although the group had no
practical ties with the workers’ movement in Russia. Lenin pointed out that
the group “only laid the theoretical foundations for the
Social-Democratic movement and took the first step towards the
working-class movement” (see present edition, Vol. 20, “The
Ideological Struggle in the Working-Class Movement”). Moreover, the
members of the group were guilty of serious errors. They over estimated the
role of the liberal bourgeoisie and underestimated the revolutionary role
of the peasantry as a reserve force of the proletarian revolution. These
errors contained the germ of the future Menshevik views adopted by
Plekhanov and other members of the group.  

On the initiative of the group, the Union of Russian Social-Democrats
Abroad was founded in 1894. The members of the group with drew from the
Union in 1900 and founded the revolutionary organisation
Sotsial-Demokrat. Members of the group on the editorial boards of
Iskra and Zarya were Plekhanov, Axelrod, and Vera
Zasulich. The Emancipation of Labour group announced its dissolution at the
Second Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. in August 1903.

 



[19]
St. is V. V. Starkov, R. is S. I. Radchenko, K. is R. E. Klasson.

 



[20]
Novoye Slovo (New Word)—a monthly scientific, literary,
and political magazine, published by liberal Narodniks in St. Petersburg
from 1894, and by the “legal Marxists” from the spring of
1897. It published two articles by Lenin, “A
Characterisation of Economic Romanticism” and “About a Certain
Newspaper Article”. The magazine was closed down by the tsarist
authorities in December 1897.

 



[21]
Zarya (Dawn)—a Marxist theoretical and political
magazine published by the editors of Iskra in 1901-02. The
following articles by Lenin were published in it: “Casual
Notes”, “The Persecutors of the Zemstvo and the Hannibals of
Liberalism”, the first four chapters of The Agrarian Question and
the “Critics of Marx” (under the title of “The
‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question”), “Review of Home
Affairs”, and “The Agrarian Programme of Russian
Social-Democracy”. Four issues of the magazine appeared.

 



[22]
Iskra (The Spark)—the first all-Russian illegal
Marxist newspaper, founded by Lenin in 1900. After the Second Congress of
the R.S.D.L.P. it became the Central Organ of the Party. Lenin’s
reference to the old Iskra applies to issues No. 1 to No. 51 of
the paper. After that Iskra became the factional organ of the
Mensheviks.

 



[23]
The Narodnaya Volya (People’s Will) group,
whose members were known as Narodovoltsi, came into existence in
St. Petersburg in the autumn of 1891. Among its original membership were
M.S. Olminsky (Alexandrov) N.L. Meshcheryakov, Y. M. Alexandrova,
A.A. Fedulov, and A.A. Yergin. The group adhered to the Narodnaya Volya
programme. Its press issued a number of illegal pamphlets and leaflets,
Worker’s Miscellany, and two issues of Letuchy
Listok (The Leaflet). The group was suppressed by the police
in April 1894 but shortly resumed its activities. At that period it was in
process of abandoning Narodnaya Volya views for Social-Democracy. The last
issue of Letuchy Listok, No. 4, which appeared in December 1895,
showed clear signs of Social-Democratic influence. The group established
contact with the St. Petersburg League of Struggle for the Emancipation of
the Working Class, printed several of the League’s publications (for
example, Lenin’s Explanation of the Law on Fines Imposed on
Factory Workers), and made arrangements with the League for the joint
publication of the newspaper Rabocheye Dyelo. Arrangements were
also made to use the group’s press to print Lenin’s pamphlet
On Strikes, which was smuggled out of prison in May 1896 (the
manuscript is still missing). This plan did not mature, however, owing to
the discovery and suppression of the printing-press by the police and the
arrest of members of the group in June 1896, after which the group went out
of existence. Eventually some of its members (P.F. Kudelli,
N.L. Meshcheryakov, M.S. Olminsky, and others) became active figures in the
R.S.D.L.P., the majority, however, joining the Socialist-Revolutionary
Party.  

The Narodnoye Pravo (People’s Right) group,
whose members were known as Narodopravtsi, was an illegal organisation of
Russian democratic Intellectuals founded in the summer of 1893 by the
former Narodovoltsi 0.V. Aptekman, A.I. Bogdanovich, A.V. Gedeonovsky,
M.A. Natanson, N.S. Tyutchev, and others. The Narodopravtsi made it their
aim to unite all opposition forces for the fight to win political
reforms. The organisation issued two programmatic documents—“The
Manifesto” and “An Urgent Issue”. It was suppressed by
the tsarist authorities in spring of 1894. For

   

Lenin’s assessment of the Narodnoye Pravo as a political party see
What the “Friends of the People” Are and How They Fight the
Social-Democrats (present edition, Vol. 1, pp. 320-32) and The
Tasks of the Russian Social-Democrats (present edition, Vol. 2,
pp. 344-45).  Most of the Narodopravtsi subsequently joined the
Socialist-Revolutionary Party.

 



[24]
Bernsteinism—an opportunist trend in German and
international Social-Democracy hostile to Marxism. It arose in the late
nineteenth century and received its name from Eduard Bernstein, who was the
most outspoken representative of the Right opportunist trend in the German
Social-Democratic Party.

 



[25]
Bezzaglavtsi—members of a semi-Cadet, semi-Menshevik,
group of Russian intellectuals (S.N. Prokopovich, Y.D. Kuskova,
V.Y. Bogucharsky, V.V. Portugalov, V.V. Khizhnyakov, and others), which
came into being when the revolution of 1905-07 was beginning to
decline. The group’s name was derived from the weekly political
periodical Bez Zaglaviya (literally Without a Title)
issued in St. Petersburg in January-May 1906 under the editorship of
Prokopovich. Later the Bezzaglavtsi grouped themselves around the
Left-wing Cadet newspaper Tovarishch. Under the cloak of formal
non-partisanship they advocated the ideas of bourgeois liberalism and
opportunism and supported the revisionists in Russian and international
Social-Democracy.

 



[31]
“Volume 3 of this publication”— meaning the third
volume of the collection Twelve Years, which was never
published.

 



[26]
Novaya Zhizn (New Life)—the first legal
Bolshevik newspaper, published in St. Petersburg as a daily from October 27
(November 9) to December 3 (16), 1905. Lenin took over the editorship upon
his return to Russia in early November. Novaya Zhizn was in fact
the Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P. Closely associated with the paper were
V. D. Bonch-Bruyevich, V. V. Vorovsky, A. V. Lunacharsky, M. S. Olminsky,
and others. Maxim Gorky actively collaborated and gave the paper great
financial aid. The circulation reached 80,000 copies.  

The newspaper was constantly persecuted. Of the twenty-seven issues,
fifteen were confiscated. Following the appearance of issue No. 27 the
taper was closed down by the government. The last issue, No. 2 , came out
illegally.

 



[27]
Vperyod (Forward)—an illegal Bolshevik weekly,
published in Geneva from December 22, 1904 (January 4,1905) to May 5 (18),
1905. Eighteen numbers were issued. The newspaper’s organiser,
manager, and ideological guide was Lenin. Other members of the Editorial
Board were V.V. Vorovsky, A.V. Lunacharsky, and M. S. Olminsky.  

The outstanding role which the newspaper played in combating
Menshevism, re-establishing the Party principle, and formulating

   

and elucidating the tactical issues posed by the rising revolution was
acknowledged in a special resolution of the Third Party Congress, which
recorded a vote of thanks to the Editorial Board.

 



[28]
Cut-off lands (otrezki)—lands which were taken
away (cut off) from the peasants by the landlords when serfdom was
abolished in Russia.

 



[29]
Zemstvo—so-called local self-government bodies headed by the
nobility. Zemstvos were set up in the central gubernias of Russia in
1864. Their powers were restricted to purely local economic affairs
(hospitals, roads, statistics, insurance, etc.). They were subordinate to
the provincial governors and the Ministry of the Interior, who could
overrule any decisions the government found undesirable.

 



[30]
Executive Committee of the Left—the slogan for the
formation of such a committee was put forward by the Bolsheviks in order to
ensure the independence of the class line pursued by the workers’ deputies
in the Duma,to guide the activities of the peasant deputies, and keep them
free from the influence of the Cadets. The Mensheviks countered this slogan
with their slogan of “a national opposition”, that is, support
of the Cadets by the workers’ and peasants’ deputies, the Mensheviks
classing the Cadets as a Left party, along with the Social-Democrats,
Socialist-Revolutionaries, and Trudoviks.  

In July 1906, after the First Duma was dissolved, the Executive
Committee of the Left virtually organised itself around the
Social-Democratic group of the Duma. On the initiative of the Executive
Committee of the Left the following manifestoes were issued:

“Manifesto to the Army and Navy” over the signatures of the
Committee of the Social-Democratic Duma group and the Committee of the
Trudovik group; “Manifesto to All the Russian Peasants” signed
also by the A11-Russian Peasant Union, the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P., the
C.C. of the Party of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, the All-Russian
Railwaymen’s Union, and the All-Russian Teachers’ Union;
“Manifesto to All the People” signed by the above parties
(without the three unions) as well as by the Polish Socialist Party and the
Bund. The manifestoes rallied the people to the revolutionary struggle
against the government and put forward the slogan of a constituent
assembly.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Revolution and Counter-Revolution









Lenin: Revolution and Counter-Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
Revolution and Counter-Revolution




Published:
Proletary, No. 17, October 20, 1907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 114-122.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In October 1905, Russia was at the peak of the
revolutionary upsurge. The proletariat swept away the Bulygin Duma and drew
the mass of the people into an open struggle against the autocracy. In
October 1907, we are apparently at the lowest ebb of the open mass
struggle. But the period of decline that set in after the defeat of
December 1905 brought with it not only a flowering of constitutional
illusions, but a complete shattering of these illusions. After the
dissolution of the two Dumas and the coup d’état of June 3, the
Third Duma, which is to be convened, clearly puts an end to the period of
belief in peaceful cohabitation between the autocracy and popular
representation and ushers in a new epoch in the development of the
revolution.


At a moment like the present, a comparison between the revolution and
counter-revolution in Russia, between the period of revolutionary onslaught
(1905) and that of counter-revolutionary playing with a constitution (1906
and 1907) suggests itself as a matter of course. Such a comparison is
implicit in any attempt to define a political line for the immediate
future. Contrasting “errors of the revolution” or
“revolutionary illusions” with “positive constitutional
work” is the keynote of present-day political literature. The Cadets
shout about it at their pre-election meetings. The liberal press chants,
howls, and rants about it. We have here Mr. Struve, vehemently and
spitefully venting his annoyance on the revolutionaries because hopes of a
“compromise” have totally collapsed. We have here Milyukov,
who, for all his mincing manners and Jesuitism, has been forced by events
to arrive at the clear,accurate and—above all—truthful
statement: “the enemies are on the left”. We have here
publicists in the vein of Tovarishch, such as Kuskova, Smirnov,
Plekhanov, Gorn, Yordansky, Cherevanin, and others who denounce the
October-December struggle as folly, and more or less openly

    

advocate a “democratic” coalition with the Cadets. The real Cadet
elements in this turbid stream express the counter-revolutionary interests of
the bourgeoisie and the boundless servility of intellectualist philistinism. As
for the elements which have not yet sunk quite to the level of Struve, their
dominant feature is failure to understand the connection
between revolution and counter-revolution in Russia, an inability to see
everything we have experienced as an integral social movement developing in
accordance with its own inner logic.


The period of revolutionary onslaught demonstrated in action the class
composition of Russia’s population and the attitude of the different
classes towards the old autocracy. Events have now taught everyone, even people
who are utter strangers to Marxism, to reckon the chronology of the revolution
from January 9, 1905, that is, from the first consciously political
movement of the masses belonging to a single definite
class. When the Social-Democrats, from an analysis of Russia’s
economic realities, deduced the leading role, the hegemony of the proletariat in
our revolution, this seemed to be a bookish infatuation of theoreticians. The
revolution confirmed our theory, because it is the only truly revolutionary
theory. The proletariat actually took the lead in the revolution all the
time. The Social-Democrats actually proved to be the ideological vanguard of the
proletariat. The struggle of the masses developed under the leadership of the
proletariat with remarkable speed, much faster than many revolutionaries had
expected. In the course of a single year it rose to the most decisive forms of
revolutionary onslaught that history has ever known—to mass strikes and
armed uprisings. The organisation of the proletarian masses went forward with
astonishing speed in the course of the struggle itself. Other sections of the
population, comprising the fighting ranks of the revolutionary people, followed
the proletariat’s lead and began to organise. The semi-proletarian mass of
various kinds of non-manual workers began to organise, followed by the peasant
democracy, the professional intelligentsia, and so on. The period of
proletarian victories was a period of growth in mass organisation unprecedented
in Russian history and vast even by European standards.

    

The proletariat at that time won for itself a number of improvements in
working conditions. The peasant mass won a “reduction” in the
arbitrary power of the landlords and lower prices for the lease and sale of
land. All Russia won a considerable degree of freedom of assembly, speech,
and association, and made the autocracy publicly renounce its old practices
and recognise the constitution.


All that the liberation movement in Russia has won up to now was won entirely
and exclusively by the revolutionary struggle of the masses headed by the
proletariat.


The turning-point in the struggle began with the defeat of the December
uprising. Step by step the counter-revolution passed to the offensive as
the mass struggle weakened. During the period of the First Duma this
struggle was still formidably manifest in the intensification of the
peasant movement, in widespread attacks upon the nests of the semi-feudal
landlords, and in a number of revolts among the soldiers. The reaction
attacked slowly at that time, not daring to carry out a coup d’état
straightaway. Only after the suppression of the Sveaborg and Kronstadt
revolts of July 1906 did it act more boldly, when it introduced the regime
of military tribunals, began piecemeal to deprive the population of their
franchise (the Senate

interpretations[1]), and, finally, surrounded the Second Duma completely
with a police siege and overthrew the whole notorious constitution. All
self-established free organisations of the masses were replaced at that
time by “legal struggle” within the framework of the police
constitution as interpreted by the Dubasovs and Stolypins. The supremacy of
the Social-Democrats gave place to the supremacy of the Cadets, who
predominated in both Dumas. The period of decline in the movement of the
masses was a period of peak development for the Party of the Cadets. It
exploited this decline by coming forward as the “champion” of
the constitution. It upheld faith in this constitution among the people
with all its might and preached the need to keep strictly to
“parliamentary” struggle.


The bankruptcy of the “Cadet constitution” is the bankruptcy of
Cadet tactics and Cadet hegemony in the emancipatory struggle. The selfish
class character of all the talk by our liberals about “revolutionary
illusions” and the

    

“errors of the revolution” becomes patently obvious when we compare
the two periods of the revolution. The proletarian mass struggle won gains
for the whole people. The liberal leadership of the movement produced
nothing but defeats. The revolutionary onslaught of the proletariat
steadily raised the political consciousness of the masses and their
organisation. It set increasingly higher aims before them, stimulated their
independent participation in political life, and taught them how to
fight. The hegemony of the liberals during the period of the two Dumas
lowered the political consciousness of the masses, demoralised their
revolutionary organisation, and dulled their comprehension of democratic
aims.


The liberal, leaders of the First and Second Dumas gave the people a splendid
demonstration of slavish legal “struggle”, as a result of which the
autocratic advocates of serfdom swept away the constitutional paradise of the
liberal wind-bags with a stroke of the pen and ridiculed the subtle diplomacy
of the visitors to ministerial ante-rooms. The liberals have not a single gain
to show throughout the Russian revolution, not a single success, not .a single
attempt, at all democratic, to organise the forces of the people in the struggle
for freedom.


Until October 1905, the liberals sometimes maintained a benevolent neutrality
towards the revolutionary struggle of the masses, but already at that time they
had begun to oppose it, sending a deputation to the tsar with abject speeches
and supporting the Bulygin Duma not out of thoughtlessness, but out of sheer
hostility to the revolution. After October 1905, all that the liberals did was
to shame fully betray the cause of the people’s freedom.


In November 1905, they sent Mr. Struve to have an intimate talk with
Mr. Witte. In the spring of 1900, they undermined the revolutionary
boycott, and by refusing to speak out openly against the loan for Europe to
hear, helped the government to obtain millions of rubles for the conquest
of Russia. In the summer of 1900, they carried on backdoor haggling with

Trepov[2] over ministerial portfolios and fought the “Left”,
i. e., the revolution, in the First Duma. January 1907 saw them running
again to the police authorities (Milyukov’s call on Stolypin). In the
spring

    

of 1907, they supported the government in the Second Duma. The
revolution exposed the liberals very quickly and showed them in their true
counter-revolutionary colours.


In this respect the period of constitutional hopes served a
very useful purpose as far as the people were concerned. The experience of
the First and Second Dumas has not only made them realise how utterly
contemptible is the role that liberalism plays in our revolution. It has
also, in actual fact, quashed the attempt at leadership of the democratic
movement by a party which only political infants or senile dotards can
regard as being really constitutionally “democratic”.


In 1905 and the beginning of 1906, the class composition of the
bourgeois democrats in Russia was not yet clear to everyone. Hopes that the
autocracy could be combined with actual representation of more or less
broad masses of the people existed not only among the ignorant and
downtrodden inhabitants of various out-of-the-way places. Such hopes were
not absent even in ruling spheres of the autocracy. Why did the electoral
law in both the Bulygin and the Witte Dumas grant a considerable degree of
representation to the peasantry? Because belief in the monarchist
sentiments of the countryside still persisted. “The muzhik will help
us out”—this exclamation of an official newspaper in the spring of
1906 expressed the government’s reliance on the conservatism of the
peasant mass. In those days the Cadets were not only not aware of the
antagonism between the democracy of the peasants and bourgeois liberalism,
but even feared the backwardness of the peasants and desired only one
thing—that the Duma should help to convert the conservative or
indifferent peasant into a liberal. In the spring of 1906, Mr. Struve
expressed an ambitious wish when he wrote, “the peasant in the Duma
will be a Cadet”. In the summer of 1907, the same Mr. Struve raised
the banner of struggle against the Trudovik or Left parties, which he
regarded as the main obstacle to an agreement between bourgeois liberalism
and the autocracy. In the course of eighteen months the slogan of a
struggle for the political enlightenment of the peasants was changed by the
liberals to a slogan of struggle against a “too” politically
educated and demanding peasantry!

 

This change of slogans expresses as plainly as can be the complete bankruptcy of
liberalism in the Russian revolution. The class antagonism between the mass of
the democratic rural population and the semi-feudal landlords proved to be
immeasurably deeper than the cowardly and dull-witted Cadets imagined. That is
why their attempt to take the lead in the struggle for democracy failed so
quickly and irrevocably. That is why their whole “line” aimed at
reconciling the petty-bourgeois democratic mass of the people with the Octobrist
and Black-Hundred landlords was a fiasco. A great, though negative, gain of the
counter-revolutionary period of the two Dumas was this bankruptcy of the
treacherous “champions” of the “people’s
freedom”. The class struggle going on below threw these heroes of
ministerial ante-rooms overboard, turned them from claimants to
leadership into ordinary lackeys of Octobrism slightly touched up with
constitutional varnish.


He who still fails to see this bankruptcy of the liberals, who have undergone a
practical test of their worth as champions of democracy, or at least as
fighters in the democratic ranks, has understood absolutely nothing of the
political history of the two Dumas. Among these people the meaningless
reiteration of a memorised formula about supporting bourgeois democracy becomes
counter-revolutionary snivelling. The Social-Democrats should have no regrets at
the shattering of constitutional illusions. They should say what Marx said about
counter-revolution in Germany:

the people gained by the loss of its

illusions.[3] Bourgeois democracy in Russia gained by the loss of
worthless leaders and weak-kneed allies. So much the better for the
political development of this democracy.


It remains for the party of the proletariat to see to it that the
valuable political lessons of our revolution and counter-revolution should
be more deeply pondered over and more firmly grasped by the broad
masses. The period of onslaught on the autocracy saw the deployment of the
forces of the proletariat and taught it the fundamentals of revolutionary
tactics; it showed the conditions for the success of the direct struggle of
the masses, which alone was able to achieve improvements of any
importance. The long period during which the proletarian forces were
prepared,

    

trained, and organised preceded those actions of hundreds of thousands of
workers which dealt a mortal blow to the old autocracy in Russia. The
sustained and imperceptible work of guiding all the manifestations of the
proletarian class struggle, the work of building a strong and seasoned
party preceded the outbreak of the truly mass struggle and provided the
conditions necessary for turning that outbreak into a revolution. And now
the proletariat, as the people’s fighting vanguard, must strengthen
its organisation, scrape off all the green mould of intellectualist
opportunism, and gather its forces for a similar sustained and stubborn
effort. The tasks which history and the objective position of the broad
masses have posed before the Russian revolution have not been
solved. Elements of a new, national political crisis have not been
eliminated, but, on the contrary, have grown deeper and wider. The advent
of this crisis will place the proletariat once more at the head of the
movement of the whole people. The workers’ Social-Democratic Party should
be prepared for this role. And the soil, fertilised by the events of 1905
and subsequent years, will yield a harvest tenfold richer. If a party of
several thousand class-conscious advanced members of the working class
could rally a million proletarians behind it at the end of 1905, then
today, when our Party has tens of thousands of Social-Democrats tried and
tested in the revolution, who have become still more closely linked with
the mass of the workers during the struggle itself, it will rally tens of
mil lions behind it and crush the enemy.


Both the socialist and the democratic tasks of the working-class movement in
Russia have been focused much more sharply and brought to the fore more urgently
under the impact of revolutionary events. The struggle against the bourgeoisie
is rising to a higher stage. The capitalists are uniting in national
associations, are leaguing themselves more closely with the government, and are
resorting more often to extreme methods of economic struggle, including mass
lock-outs, in order to “curb” the proletariat. But only moribund
classes are afraid of persecutions. The more rapidly the capitalists achieve
successes the more rapidly does the proletariat grow in numbers and unity. The
economic development of both Russia and the whole world is a

    

guarantee of the proletariat’s invincibility. The bourgeoisie first began
to take shape as a class, as a united and conscious political force during our
revolution. All the more effectively will the workers organise into a united
class all over Russia. And the wider the gulf between the world of capital and
the world of labour, the clearer will be the socialist consciousness of the
workers. Socialist agitation among the proletariat, enriched by the experience
of the revolution, will become more definite. The political organisation of
the bourgeoisie is the best stimulus to the definitive shaping of a socialist
workers’ party.


The aims of this party in the struggle for democracy can henceforth be
considered controversial only among the sympathising” intellectuals, who
are making ready to go over to the liberals. For the mass of the workers these
aims have been made tangibly clear in the fire of revolution. The proletariat
knows from experience that the peasant masses are the basis and the only basis
of bourgeois democracy as a historical force in Russia. On a national scale the
proletariat has already acted as leader of this mass in the struggle against the
semi-feudal landlords and the autocracy and no power can now deflect the
workers’ party from its right path. The role of the liberal Party of the Cadets,
who, under the flag of democracy, guided the peasantry under the wing of
Octobrism, is now played out, and the Social-Democrats, in spite of individual
whiners, will continue their work of explaining this bankruptcy of the liberals
to the masses, explaining that bourgeois democrats cannot do what they want to
do unless they disentangle themselves once for all from their alliance with the
lackeys of Octobrism.


No one at this stage can tell what forms bourgeois democracy in Russia will
assume in the future. Possibly, the bankruptcy of the Cadets may lead to the
formation of a peasant democratic party, a truly mass party, and not an
organisation of terrorists such as the Socialist-Revolutionaries have been and
still are. It is also possible that the objective difficulties of achieving
political unity among the petty bourgeoisie will prevent such a party from being
formed and, for a long time to come, will keep the peasant democracy in its
present state as a loose, amorphous, jelly like Trudovik mass. In either case
our line is one: to hammer.

    

out the democratic forces by merciless criticism of all vacillations, by
uncompromising struggle against the democrats joining the liberals, who
have proved their counter revolutionariness.


The farther reaction goes, the more violent does the Black-Hundred landlord
become; the more control he gets over the autocracy, the slower will be
Russia’s economic progress and her emancipation from the survivals of
serfdom. And that means, all the stronger and wider will class-conscious and
militant democracy develop among the masses of the urban and rural petty
bourgeoisie. All the stronger will be the mass resistance to the famines,
tyrannies, and outrages to which the peasantry is doomed by the
Octobrists. The Social-Democrats will see to it that, when the democratic
struggle inevitably breaks out with new force, the band of liberal careerists
called the Cadet Party does not once again divide the democratic ranks and
spread discord among them. Either with the people or against the people, that
is the alternative that the Social-Democrats have long put to all claimants to
the role of “democratic” leaders in the revolution. Up to now not
all Social-Democrats have been able to pursue this line consistently; some of
them even believed the liberals’ promises, others closed their eyes to the
liberals’ flirting with the counter-revolution. Now we already have the
educational experience of the first two Dumas.


The revolution has taught the proletariat to wage a mass struggle. The
revolution has shown that the proletariat is able to lead the peasant masses in
the struggle for democracy. The revolution has united the purely proletarian
party still more closely by casting out petty-bourgeois elements from it. The
counter-revolution has taught the petty-bourgeois democrats to give up seeking
for leaders and allies among the liberals, who are mortally afraid of the mass
struggle. On the basis of these lessons of history we can boldly say to the
government of the Black-Hundred landlords: continue along the same line,
Mr. Stolypin and Co.! We shall reap the fruits of what you are sowing!

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Senate interpretations—interpretations of the Law of
December Ii (24), 1905 governing elections to the Duma issued by the Senate
on the eve of the elections to the Second Duma. By these interpretations
the Senate deprived further groups of the population of the
franchise.

 



[2]
Trepov, D.F.—Governor-General of St. Petersburg,
notorious for inspiring Black-Hundred outrages and for his brutal
suppression of the revolution of 1905.

 



[3]
See Karl Marx, “The Prussian Counter-Revolution and the Prussian
Judicial Caste” (Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Werke, Bd. 6,
S. 138, Berlin, Dietz Verlag, 1959).

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Third Duma









Lenin: The Third Duma







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Third Duma




Published:

      Proletary, No. 18, October 29, 1907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 123-132.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The government is garnering the results of the infamous
crime which it committed against the people on June 3. The grotesque
electoral law which, for the benefit of a handful of landlords and
capitalists, completely distorts the will not only of the nation as a
whole, but even of the enfranchised minority, has yielded the fruits that
tsarism hankered for. At the time of writing this article 432 out of 442
deputies have been returned to the Duma, leaving another 10 to be
elected. The results of the elections can, therefore, be considered
sufficiently clear. According to a fairly accurate estimate the members
elected are 18 Social-Democrats, 13 others of the Left, 46 Cadets, 55
members of groups standing close to them, 92 Octobrists, 21 members of
groups belonging to allied trends, 171 members of various Right-wing
trends, including 32 members of the Union of the Russian

People,[2] and 16 non-party deputies.


Thus, not counting an Insignificant number of non-party deputies, all
the others may be divided into four groups:

the extreme Left, constituting a little over 7 per cent, the Left (Cadet)
Centre 23 per cent, the Right (Octobrist) Centre 25.1 per cent, and the
Right 40 per cent; the non-party deputies are a little less than 4 per
cent.


None of these groups by itself has an absolute majority. Does this
result fully meet the wishes and expectations of those who inspired and
drafted the new electoral law? We believe that this question should be
answered in the affirmative, and that the new Russian
“parliament”, from the point of view of the ruling groups
supporting the tsarist

    

autocracy, is a

     chambre introuvable[1]

in the full sense of that word.  

The point is that with us, as in every country that has an autocratic
or semi-autocratic regime, there are really two governments: an official
one—a Ministry, and another one behind the scenes—the court
camarilla. This latter always and everywhere is backed by the most
reactionary sections of society, by the feudal—in our country
Black-Hundred—nobility, which draws its economic strength from
large-scale landownership with the semi-serf economy this involves. Effete,
depraved, and degenerate this social group presents a striking example of
the most revolting parasitism. To what depths of depravity this
degeneration can descend is borne out by the scandalous Moltke v. Harden
trial in Berlin, which revealed what a filthy cesspool the influential
camarilla at the court of the semi-autocratic German Emperor Wilhelm II
really was. It is no secret that with us in Russia similar abominations in
corresponding circles are no exception. The mass of the Right in the Third
Duma—at least the overwhelming majority if not all of them—will
defend the interests of precisely this social canker, these whited
sepulchres, bequeathed to us from the dismal past. The preservation of a
feudal economy, of aristocratic privileges and the regime of the autocracy
and nobility is a matter of life and death to these mastodons and
ichthyosauri, for to call them

“zubri”[3] is to pay them a compliment.


By using their all-powerful influence at court, the mastodons and ichthyosauri
usually try their utmost to take full monopoly of possession of the official
government as well—the Ministry. Usually a considerable part of the
Ministry consists of their henchmen. Very often, however, the majority of the
Ministry, as regards its composition, does not fully meet the requirements of
the camarilla. The antediluvian predator, the predator of the feudal era, finds
a competitor here in the shape of a predator of the epoch of primary
accumulation—one just as coarse, greedy, and parasitic, but having a
certain cultural veneer and, most important of all, desirous also of
seizing a sizable share

    

of the official pie in the shape of guarantees, subsidies, concessions,
protective tariffs, etc. This section of the landowning and industrial
bourgeoisie, which is typical of the era of primary accumulation, finds its
expression in Octobrism and the trends associated with it. It has many interests
in common with the Black Hundreds sans phrases—economic
parasitism and privileges, as well as jingoism, are as essential from the
Octobrist as from the Black-Hundred point of view.


Thus we have a Black-Hundred-Octobrist majority in the Third Duma reaching the
imposing figure of 284 deputies out of 432, that is, 65.7 per cent, or over
two-thirds of the total number.


This is a stronghold that enables the government in its agrarian policy to help
the ruined landlords to get rid of their lands by profitably fleecing the
land-poor peasants, to turn labour legislation into an instrument for the gross
exploitation of the proletariat by capital, and to ensure that financial policy
keeps the main burden of taxation on the shoulders of the masses. It is a
stronghold of protectionism and militarism. No one can deny the
counter-revolutionary nature of the Octobrist-Black-Hundred majority.


But the main point is that this is not the only majority in the Third
Duma. There is another majority.


The Black Hundreds are a dependable ally of the Octobrists, just as the court
camarilla is an ally of the Ministry in defending tsarism. But just as the court
camarilla displays an inherent urge not so much towards an alliance with the
Ministry as towards dominating it, so do the Black Hundreds yearn for a
dictatorship over the Octobrists, try to boss them and keep them under.


The interests of capitalism, grossly predatory and parasitic as it is, cannot
be reconciled with the undivided sway of feudal landownership. Both of these
kindred social groups are trying to seize the lion’s share of the pie, and
that accounts for their inevitable differences on questions of local
self-government and the central organisation of state power. The Black Hundreds
in the Zemstvos and municipal councils want to keep things as they are, but in
the centre what they want is “down with the accursed
constitution”. The Octobrists want to increase their influence both in the

    

Zemstvos and municipal councils, but in the centre there has to be a
      “constitution”, even if a docktailed one that is fictitious as
      far as the masses are concerned.


Not for nothing does

Russkoye Znamya[4] revile the Octobrists, while

Golos Moskvy,[5] in turn, finds that there are more members of
the Right in the Third Duma than are needed.


Thus, the objective course of events compels the Octobrists to seek
allies in this respect. They could have found them long ago in the Left
(Cadet) Centre, which has long been declaring its unhypocritical devotion
to the constitution, but the trouble is that the young Russian bourgeoisie
of the period of capitalist accumulation now represent ed by the Cadets has
preserved from the past some very inconvenient friends and certain
unpleasant traditions. It was found, however, that traditions in the
political sphere could easily be dispensed with: the Cadets had declared
themselves monarchists long ago, even before the First Duma; they had
tacitly refused to form a responsible ministry in the Second Duma; and
Cadet schemes for various “freedoms” are hedged in with so many
stumbling-blocks, barbed wire entanglements, and pitfalls that there is
every hope of further progress in this respect. The Cadets’ attitude
towards uprisings and strikes had always been one of reproach—at
first in a mild, then in a melancholy way; after December 1905 the reproach
became half disdain, and after the dissolution of the First Duma flat
rejection and condemnation. Diplomacy, deals, bargaining with the powers
that be—that is the basis of Cadet tactics. As to inconvenient
friends, they have long been called simply “neighbours” and
recently have been publicly declared to be enemies


An agreement, then, is possible, and so we have another majority, a
counter-revolutionary one again—the Octobrist-Cadet majority. To
be. sure, it is somewhat less than half the number of deputies elected so
far—214 out of 432— but, first, some if not all of the non-party
deputies will undoubtedly join it, and, secondly, there is every reason to
believe that it will increase during the further elections, since the towns and
most of the gubernia electoral conferences in which elections have not yet
taken place will return

    

an overwhelming majority of either Octobrists or Cadets.


The government considers itself master of the situation. The liberal
bourgeoisie apparently takes this to be a fact. In these circumstances the
deal is hound, more than ever before, to hear the stamp of a most
disgusting and treacherous compromise, to be more exact—the surrender
of all liberal positions that have the slightest democratic
tinge. Obviously, no local governing or central legislative bodies can be
at all democratically constituted by means of such a deal without a new
mass movement. An. Octobrist-Cadet majority is not able to give us
that. And can we expect any at all tolerable solution of the agrarian
question or any alleviation of the workers’ situation from a Black-Hundred
Octobrist majority, from the savage landlords in league with the capitalist
robbers? The only answer to that question can be a hitter laugh.


The position is clear: our “chambre introuvable” is
incapable of accomplishing the objective tasks of the revolution even in
the most distorted form. It cannot even partly heal the gaping wounds
inflicted upon Russia by the old regime— it can only cover up those wounds
with wretched, sour, fictitious reforms.


The election results only confirm our firm belief that Russia
cannot emerge from her present crisis in a peaceful way.


Under these conditions the immediate tasks confronting Social-Democrats at
the present time are quite clear. Making the triumph of socialism its
ultimate aim, being convinced that political freedom is necessary to
achieve that aim, and bearing in mind the circumstance that this freedom at
the present time cannot be achieved in a peaceful way, without open mass
actions, Social-Democracy is obliged now, as before, to put democratic and
revolutionary tasks on the immediate order of the day, without for a
moment, of coarse, abandoning either propaganda of socialism or defence of
proletarian class interests in the narrow sense of the word. Representing
as it does the most advanced, most revolutionary class in modern
society— the proletariat, which in the Russian revolution has proved
by deeds its fitness for the role of leader in the mass struggle—

    

Social-Democracy is obliged to do everything it possibly can to retain that
role for the proletariat in the approaching new phase of the revolutionary
struggle, a phase characterised more than ever before by a preponderance of
political consciousness over spontaneity. To achieve that end
Social-Democracy must strive with all its might for hegemony over the
democratic masses and for developing revolutionary energy among them.


Such a striving brings the party of the proletariat into sharp conflict with the
other class political organisations, for whom, by virtue of the group interests
which they represent, a democratic revolution is hateful and dangerous not only
for its own sake but especially in view of the hegemony of the proletariat in
it, a hegemony fraught with the danger of socialism.


It is perfectly clear and beyond doubt that both the Duma
majorities—the Black-Hundred-Octobrist and the
Octobrist-Cadet—with the alternate backing of which the Stolypin
government hopes to balance itself, that both these majorities, each in its
own way—on different issues— will be
counter-revolutionary. There can be no question of any struggle
with the Ministry on the part of one or the other of these majorities or
even of their separate elements— a struggle in any way systematic or
regular. Only separate temporary conflicts are possible. Such conflicts are
possible first of all between the Black-Hundred elements of the first-named
majority and the government. It should not be forgotten, however, that
these conflicts cannot be deep-seated, and the government, without
abandoning its counter-revolutionary basis, can quite comfortably and
easily emerge the victor in these conflicts through the backing of the
second majority. With the best will in the world, revolutionary
Social-Democracy and, together with it, all the other revolutionary-minded
elements of the Third Duma cannot use these conflicts in the interests of
the revolution other than for purely propaganda purposes; there can. be no
question whatever of “supporting” any of the conflicting sides,
because such support, in itself, would be a counter-revolutionary act.


Somewhat greater and better use, perhaps, could be made of possible conflicts
between various elements of the

    

second majority—between the Cadets, on the one hand, and the Octobrists
and the government, on the other. But here, too, the position is such that,
owing to objective conditions no less than to subjective moods and intentions,
these conflicts will be both superficial and transient, merely a means by which
political hucksters will find it easier to make deals on terms outwardly more
decorous but in essence opposed to the interests of democracy. Consequently,
while not refraining from utilising even such superficial and in frequent
conflicts, Social-Democracy must wage a stubborn struggle for democratic and
revolutionary aims not only against the government, the Black Hundreds, and the
Octobrists, but also against the Cadets.


These are the principal aims which Social-Democracy must set itself in
the Third Duma. Obviously, these aims are the same as those that confronted the
party of the proletariat in the Second Duma. They have been quite clearly
formulated in the first paragraph of the resolution of the London Congress on
the State Duma. This paragraph reads:


“The immediate political aims of Social-Democracy in the Duma are:

(a) to explain to the people the utter uselessness of the Duma as a means
of achieving the demands of the proletariat and the revolutionary petty
bourgeoisie, especially the peasantry;

(b) to explain to the people the impossibility of achieving political
freedom by parliamentary means as long as real power remains in the hands
of the tsarist government, and to explain the inevitability of an open
struggle of the masses against the armed forces of absolutism, a struggle
aimed at securing complete victory, namely, the assumption of power by the
masses and the convocation of a constituent assembly on the basis of
universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot.”


This resolution, particularly in its concluding words, formulates also the very
important special task of the Social-Democrats in the Third Duma, a
task which the Social-Democratic deputies must fulfil in order to expose the
lull infamy of the crime committed on June 3. They must expose this crime, of
course, not from the liberal stand point of a formal breach of the constitution,
but as a gross and brazen violation of the interests of the broad masses of the
people, as a shameless and outrageous falsification

    

of popular representation. hence the need for explaining to the broad
masses the utter failure of the Third Duma to meet the interests and
demands, of the people, and consequently for wide and vigorous propaganda
of the idea of a constituent assembly with full power based on universal,
direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot.


The London resolution also defines very clearly the nature of Social-Democratic
activities in the State Duma in the following terms: “The critical,
propagandist, agitational, and organisational role of the Social-Democratic
group in the Duma should be brought to the fore”; “the general
character of the Duma struggle should be subordinated to the entire struggle of
the proletariat outside the Duma, it being particularly important in this
connection to make use of mass economic struggle and to serve the interests of
that struggle.” It is perfectly obvious what a close, inseparable
connection there is between such Duma activities and the aims, which, as stated
above, Social-Democracy should set itself in the Duma at the present
moment. Peaceful legislative work by the Social-Democrats in the Third Duma
under conditions which make mass movements highly probable would not only be
inadvisable, would not only be absurd quixotry, but a downright betrayal of
proletarian interests. It is bound to lead Social-Democracy to “a
whittling down of its slogans, which can only discredit it in the eyes of the
masses and divorce it from the revolutionary struggle of the
proletariat”. The spokes men of the proletariat in the Duma could commit
no greater crime than this.


The critical activity of Social-Democracy should be expanded to the full and
pointed as sharply as possible, all the more as there will be an abundance of
material for this in the Third Duma. The Social-Democrats in the Duma must
completely expose the class nature of both the government’s and the
liberals’ measures and proposals that will be passed through the Duma. Moreover,
in full keeping with the Congress resolution, particular attention must be given
to those measures and proposals which affect the economic interests of the broad
masses; this applies to the labour and agrarian questions, the budget, etc. On
all these issues Social-Democracy must counter the governmental

    

and liberal standpoints with its own socialist and democratic demands;
these issues are the most sensitive nerve of public life and at the same time
the most sensitive spot of the government and of those social groups upon which
the two Duma majorities rest.


The Social-Democrats in the Duma will carry out all these agitational,
propaganda, and organisational tasks not only by their speeches from the Duma
rostrum but also by introducing Bills and making interpellations to the
government. There is one important difficulty here, however: to introduce a Bill
or to make an interpellation the signatures of no less than thirty
deputies are required.


The Third Duma does not and will not have thirty Social-Democrats. That
is indubitable. Hence the Social-Democrats alone, without the
assistance of other groups, can neither introduce a Bill nor make
interpellations. Undoubtedly, this makes matters difficult and complicated.


We have in mind, of course, Bills and questions of a consistently democratic
character. Can Social-Democracy in this respect count on assistance from the
Constitutional-Democratic Party? Certainly not. Can the Cadets, who are now
fully prepared for undisguised compromise on terms which leave nothing of their
programmatic demands, skimpy though they are and reduced to a bare minimum by
various reservations and exceptions—can the Cadets be expected to annoy
the government by democratic interpellations? We all remember that already in
the Second Duma the speeches of the Cadet orators in making interpellations
became very colourless and often turned into infantile prattle or polite and
even deferential inquiries made with a slight bow. And now, when the
Duma’s “effectiveness” in the matter of weaving strong and
reliable nets for the people, nets that would enmesh them like chains, has
become the talk of the town, Their Excellencies, the ministers, can sleep in
peace: they will seldom be bothered by the Cadets—after all, they have to
legislate!—and even if they are bothered, it will be with due observance
of all the rules of politeness. Not for nothing did Milyukov at his election
meetings promise to “guard the flame”. And is Milyukov the only one?
Does not Dan’s unconditional rejection of the
“down-with-the-Duma” slogan signify the

    

same guarding of the flame? And is not Plekhanov advising Social-Democracy
to follow the same policy of “politeness” when he talks about
“supporting the liberal bourgeoisie”, whose
“struggle” amounts to nothing more than curtsies and low bows?


There can be no question of the Cadets seconding the legislative proposals of
the Social-Democrats, for these Bills will have a pronounced propaganda
character, will express to the full consistently democratic demands, and that,
of course, will cause as much irritation among the Cadets as among the
Octobrists and even the Black Hundreds.


And so the Cadets will have to be left out of the account in this respect
too. In the matter of making interpellations and presenting Bills the
Social-Democrats can count only on the support of groups to the left of the
Cadets. Apparently, together with the Social-Democrats, they will number up to
thirty deputies, thus providing the full technical possibility of displaying
initiative in this direction. It is not, of course, a question of any bloc, but
only of those “joint actions”, which, in the words of the London
Congress resolution, “must exclude any possibility of deviations from the
Social-Democratic programme and tactics and serve only the purpose of a general
onslaught both against reaction and the treacherous tactics of the liberal
bourgeoisie”.

 

Notes
 

[1]
Second to none, as Louis XVIII in 1815 called the reactionary French
Chamber of Deputies.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Union of the Russian People—an extremely reactionary
Black-Hundred organisation of monarchists, founded in St. Petersburg in
October 1905 to fight the revolutionary movement. It was a union of
reactionary landlords, big houseowners, merchants, police officials,
clergymen, middle-class townspeople, kulaks, and declassed and criminal
elements. The Union was headed by V.A. Bobrinsky, A.I. Dubrovin,
P.A. Krushevan, N.Y. Markov 2nd, V.M. Purishkevich, and others. Its press
organs were the newspapers Russkoye Znamya (Russian Banner),
Obyedineniye (Unity), and Groza (Storm). The Union
had branches in many towns.  

It upheld the tsarist autocracy, semi-feudal landlordism, and the
privileges of the nobles. It adopted as its programme slogan the old
monarchist and nationalist motto of the days of serfdom—
“Orthodoxy, Autocracy, and Nationhood”. The Union’s
principal method of struggle against the revolution was pogroms and
murder. With the aid and connivance of the police, its members openly and
with impunity beat up and murdered revolutionary workers and
democratically-minded intellectuals, broke up and shot down meetings,
organised anti-Jewish pogroms, and hounded non-Russian nationalities.  

After the dissolution of the Second Duma the Union divided into two
organisations: the League of Michael the Archangel, headed by Purishkevich,
which stood for the Third Duma being used for counter-revolutionary
purposes, and the Union of the Russian People proper, headed by Dubrovin,
which continued the tactics of open terrorism. Both these reactionary
organisations were abolished during the bourgeois-democratic February
revolution (1917). After the October Socialist Revolution the former
members of these organisations took an active part in counter-revolutionary
insurrections, and plots, against the Soviet government.

 



[3]
Zubri (literally “aurochs”) applied in Russian
political literature to the extreme Right-wing representatives of
reactionary landlordism (die-hards).

 



[4]
Russkoye Znamya (Russian Banner)—a
Black-Hundred newspaper, organ of the Union of the Russian People,
published in St. Petersburg from November 1905 to 1917.

 



[5]
Golos Moskvy (Voice of Moscow)—a Moscow daily
newspaper organ of the Octobrist Party, published from December 1906 to
June 1915.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## On Plekhanov’s Article









Lenin: On Plekhanov's Article







V. I.  

      Lenin
On Plekhanov’s Article[1]




Published:
Proletary, No. 18, October 29, 1907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 133-134.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In his article in Tovarishch of October 20 Plekhanov continues his
campaign of lies and scoffing at the discipline of the Social-Democratic
Party. Here are some specimens of these lies. “Tovarishch, as
everyone knows, was an organ of the Left bloc,” says Plekhanov in reply to
the accusation that he had become a regular collaborator of Prokopovich, Kuskova
& Co. It is a lie. First, Tovarishch never was an organ of the Left
bloc. The latter could not have had a common organ. Secondly, the Bolsheviks
never conducted any political campaign in Tovarishch, never came out
against fellow-members of the Social-Democratic Party in such a
newspaper. Thirdly, the Bolsheviks, having formed a Left bloc, split
Tovarishch and drove out of it (only for a week, it is true) those
who stood for the Cadets. And Plekhanov is dragging both the
proletariat and the petty-bourgeois democrats towards flunkeyism before the
Cadets. The Bolsheviks, without participating in Tovarishch, shifted it
to the left. Plekhanov participates and drags it to the right. It need hardly be
said that his reference to a Left bloc is not a happy one!


Plekhanov thus side-steps the question of his being accepted by a bourgeois
newspaper to write things agreeable to the bourgeoisie and gives still greater
pleasure to the liberals by scoffing at the discipline of the workers’ party. I
am not obliged to obey when I am asked to betray principles, he exclaims.


This is an anarchist platitude, my dear sir, because the principles of the
Party are watched over between congresses and interpreted by the
Central Committee. You are entitled to refuse to obey if the Central Committee
violates

    

the will of the Congress, the Party Rules, etc. In the present case,
however, not a single person has even attempt ed to contend that the
Central Committee violated the will of the Congress by its directives in
regard to the elections. Consequently, Plekhanov is simply using the
phrase about “betrayal of principles” to cover up his own
betrayal of the Party.


Lastly, Plekhanov tries to attack the St. Petersburg Committee by saying that it
itself refused to obey the Central Committee during the elections to the Second
Duma. We answer: first, the St. Petersburg Committee refused to carry out the
demand to divide the organisation, i. e., it rejected interference in its
autonomy, which is guaranteed by the Party Rules. Secondly, during the
elections to the Second Duma the Mensheviks split the organisation;
this aspect of the conflict is passed over in silence by Plekhanov in the
bourgeois newspaper! Plekhanov’s arguments amount to only one thing:
during the elections to the Second Duma the Mensheviks split the
St. Petersburg. part of the Party, consequently, I have a right now to split the
whole Party! Such is Plekhanov’s logic, such are Plekhanov’s
actions. Let everyone bear in mind that Plekhanov is a splitter. Only
he is afraid to call a spade a spade.

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin’s comment “On Plekhanov’s Article” was
published in Proletary as an editorial postscript to
I.P. Meshkovsky’s article “And This Is Called
‘Polemics’\thinspace".

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Conference of the St. Petersburg Organisation of the R.S.D.L.P.









Lenin: Conference of the St. Petersburg Organisation of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
Conference of the St. Petersburg Organisation of the R.S.D.L.P.[1]
From a Newspaper Report




Published:
Proletary, No. 20, November 19, 1907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 135-140.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

1
Report on the Third State Duma

The speaker first of all described the composition of the Third Duma. The
government, by a simple rule-of-thumb method, so fashioned the electoral law of
June 3 that the Duma was found to have two possible majorities: The
Octobrist-Black-Hundred and the Octobrist-Cadet majorities. Both are certainly
counter-revolutionary. In pursuing its reactionary policy the government will
rely now on one and now on the other of these majorities, at the same time
trying to screen the autocratic and feudal nature of its actions by talk about
paper “reforms”. The Cadets, for their part, while in fact pursuing
a treacherous policy of counter-revolution, will in words claim to be a party of
truly democratic opposition.


A deal between the Cadets and the Octobrists in the Duma is inevitable, and the
first steps towards it—as the speaker proved by a number of quotations
from Cadet and Octobrist Party newspapers, by a number of facts about the
activities of these parties and by reports from the re cent Cadet Party
Congress—have already been taken. In the Third Duma the Cadet policy of a
deal with the old regime is assuming clearer shape than it has had hitherto and
no one will be left in doubt as to its true nature.


Neither of the Duma majorities, however, is objectively in a position to meet
the vital economic and political

    

demands of any wide mass of the proletariat, peasantry, and urban
democracy. The needs of these sections of the people will, as hitherto, be
voiced primarily by the Social-Democrats. The make—up and activity of
the Third Duma promise to provide the Social-Democrats with abundant and
excellent propaganda material, which should be used against the
Black-Hundred government, the avowedly feudal-minded landlords, Octobrists,
and Cadets. As before, the tasks of Social-Democracy is to popularise among
the widest mass of the people the idea of a national constituent assembly
on the basis of universal suffrage, etc. There can be no question,
therefore, of supporting the “Left” Octobrists or Cadets in the
Duma. Few though they are in the Third Duma, the Social-Democrats should
pursue an independent, socialist, and consistently democratic policy by
making use of the Duma rostrum, the right of interpellation, etc. Some
agreements are permissible with the group of Left deputies (especially in
view of the need to have thirty signatures for making interpellations), but
with no others, and they must be agreements that do not conflict with the
programme or tactics of Social-Democracy. With that end in view an
Information Bureau should be organised which would be binding upon no one,
but would merely enable the Social— Democrats to influence the Left
deputies.


Voices can already be heard in the Social-Democratic ranks, the speaker went on,
calling for support of the “Left” Octobrists (in the election of the
presiding committee, for instance), for the organisation of an Information
Bureau with the Cadets, and for the so-called “guarding” of our Duma
group. The talk about supporting the Octobrists, which comes from the
Mensheviks, testifies as plainly as could be to the utter failure of the
Menshevik tactics. When the Duma was dominated by the Cadets the Mensheviks
clamoured for support for the Cadets. Stolypin had only to alter the electoral
law in favour of the Octobrists for the Mensheviks to show themselves ready to
support the Octobrists. Where will this path lead the Mensheviks in the end?


The speaker regarded an Information Bureau with the Cadets as impermissible,
because it would mean informing one’s avowed enemies.

 

On the question of “guarding” the Duma group the speaker said that
it was true that the group should be guarded. But for what purpose? Only in
order that it should hold high the banner of Social-Democracy in the Duma, and
that it should wage an irreconcilable struggle in the Duma against the
counter-revolutionaries of all shades and descriptions, beginning with the
Union people and ending with the Cadets. But on no account in order that it
should support the “Left” Octobrists and Cadets. If its existence
depended upon its having to support these groups, that is, support a deal with
the Stolypin autocracy, then it would be better for it to end its existence
honourably, explaining to the whole people why it was expelled from the Duma,
should such expulsion follow.

 

In his concluding remarks Lenin dealt chiefly with the principal mistake of
Menshevism—the idea of a “national opposition”. The Russian
bourgeoisie was never revolutionary in the proper sense of the word, and for a
quite understandable reason: owing to the position which the working class
occupies in Russia and owing to the role of the working class in the
revolution. After examining all the other arguments of the Mensheviks he moved
the resolution published in Proletary, No. 19.

[Proletary, No. 20, November 19, 1907]
    

2
Resolution on the Third State Duma

Considering it obligatory for the Social-Democratic group in the Third Duma to
be guided by the resolution of the London Congress on the State Duma, as well as
by the resolution on the non-proletarian parties,


the conference of the St. Petersburg organisation of the R.S.D.LP., in
elaboration of these resolutions, considers it necessary to state the following:


1. Two majorities have already taken shape in the Third Duma: the
Black-Hundred-Octobrist and the Octobrist Cadet majorities. The first is
counter-revolutionary and stands particularly for increased repression and the
protection of landlord privileges, going to the length of striving for complete
restoration of the autocracy. The second majority, too, is definitely
counter-revolutionary, but inclined to cover up its struggle against the
revolution with certain illusory bureaucratic “reforms


2. Such a situation in the Duma is exceedingly favour able to a double political
   game being played by both the government and the Cadets. The government,
   while intensifying repression and continuing its “conquest” of
   Russia by military force, seeks to pose as a supporter of constitutional
   reforms. The Cadets, while actually voting with the counter-revolutionary
   Octobrists, seek to pose not only as an opposition but as spokesmen of
   democracy. In these circumstances the Social-Democrats have a particular
   responsibility for ruthlessly exposing this game, laying bare before the
   people both the oppression of the Black-Hundred landlords and the government
   on the one hand, and the counter-revolutionary nature of the Cadets, on the
   other. Direct or indirect support for the Cadets by the Social-Democrats
   (whether in the form of voting for the Right-wing

    

Cadets or the “Left” Octobrists in the presiding committee, or in
the form of an Information Bureau with the participation of the Cadets, or by
adapting our actions to their policy, etc.) would now directly harm the cause of
class education of the mass of the workers and the cause of the revolution.


3. While upholding their socialist aims in full and criticising from this
   standpoint all the bourgeois parties, not excepting the most democratic and
   “Trudovik” of them, the Social-Democrats in their propaganda,
   should give prominence to the task of making it. clear to the broad masses
   that the Third Duma fails completely to meet the interests and demands of
   the people, and in this connection [they should conduct] widespread and
   vigorous propaganda for the idea of a constituent assembly based on
   universal, direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot.


4. One of the principal tasks of Social-Democracy in the Third Duma is to
   expose. the class nature of the government’s and the liberals’
   proposals with special attention to questions affecting the economic
   interests of the broad masses (the labour and agrarian questions, the budget,
   etc.)—the more so as the composition of the Third Duma promises
   exceptionally abundant material for the propaganda activities of the
   Social-Democrats.


5. In particular, the Social-Democrats in the Duma should use the right to make
   interpellations, for which purpose they should co-operate with other groups
   to the left of the Cadets without in any way retreating from the programme
   and tactics of Social-Democracy and without entering into any kind of blocs.


To avoid a repetition of the mistakes made by the Social-Democrats in the
Second Duma, the Social-Democratic group should immediately propose to the
Left, and only to the Left, deputies of the Duma (i. e., those capable of
fighting the Cadets) the formation of an Information Bureau which would not bind
its participants but would enable the workers’ deputies to exert systematic
influence upon the democratic elements in the spirit of Social-Democratic
policy.


[Proletary, No. 19, November 6, 1907][sic.]

    

3
Report on the Participation of Social-Democrats
in the Bourgeois Press

Comrade Lenin’s second report concerned the question of Social-Democratic
participation in the bourgeois press. The speaker set forth the point of view of
the two wings of international Social-Democracy on this score and particularly
the views of the orthodox members and of the revisionists in the German
Social-Democratic Party. The orthodoxes at the Dresden

Parteitag[2] agreed to the formula that it was permissible to
participate in the press that was not hostile to Social-Democracy, on the
grounds that in practice this was tantamount to a complete ban, since in
present-day developed capitalist society there were no bourgeois newspapers
that were not hostile to Social-Democracy.


The speaker took the stand that political participation in the
bourgeois press, especially the supposedly non-party press, is absolutely
inadmissible. Such newspapers as Tovarishch, by their hypocritically
disguised fight against Social-Democracy, cause it much greater harm than the
bourgeois party newspapers which are frankly hostile to Social-Democracy. This
is best illustrated by the contributions to Tovarishch made by
Plekhanov, Martov, Gorn, Kogan, etc. All their utterances are directed against
the Party, and in actual fact it was not the Social-Democratic comrades who made
use of the bourgeois newspaper Tovarishch, but this newspaper that
made use of these comrades against the hateful R.S.D.L.P. Not a single article
by a Social-Democrat has so far appeared which the editors of
Tovarishch would not have approved of.


[Proletary, No. 20, November 19, 1907]

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Conference of the St. Petersburg Organisation of the
R.S.D.L.P. was held in Terijoki on October 27 (November 9), 1907. It
was attended by 57 delegates with the right to vote and 11 consultative
delegates. The agenda consisted of the following items:

1) Report of the St. Petersburg Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. on the
election campaign to the Third Duma;

2) Report on the activities of the Central Committee;

3) The All-Russian Conference:

4) The trial of the Second Duma’s Social-Democratic group;

5) Unemployment;

6) Re-election of the city conference and other organisational questions.


The report of the St. Petersburg Committee stated that the police used
brutal violence against the working-class voters during the elections to
the Third Duma, prevented the Social-Democrats from conducting their
election campaign, and so on. The report also mentioned the existence in
St. Petersburg of an absolutely independent organisation of the Mensheviks,
which was kept a secret from the Party.  

The report on the activities of the Central Committee pointed out that
the latter’s efficiency was inadequate owing to the absence of a
stable majority. On many important questions (the publication of a Central
Organ, endorsement of the resolution on the trade unions, discussion of the
Duma group’s first steps, etc.) the Central Committee had not been
able to arrive at any decisions owing to the disruptive role of the
Mensheviks. On this item of the agenda the Conference expressed the wish
that the representatives of the St. Petersburg organisation at the
forthcoming All-Russian Conference should do their utmost to “help
the C. C. out of the present impasse and raise its activities to the
requisite level” (Proletary, No. 20, November 19, 1907).


Lenin delivered reports at the Conference on the preparations for the
All-Russian Conference, namely, on the tactics of the Social-Democratic
group in the Third Duma and the participation of Social-Democrats in the
bourgeois press. On the questions of S.D. tactics in the Duma the
Conference voted for Lenin’s resolution by a majority of 37 against
12. Those who voted against it were the Mensheviks, who proposed supporting
the “Left” Octobrists in the Third Duma and voting for a
“Left” Octobrist in the election to the Duma presidium. The
Conference adopted the Bolsheviks’ motion that it was inadmissible for
Social-Democrats to participate in the bourgeois press. During the
discussion of the trial against the S.D. group in the Second Duma, Lenin
informed the Conference that he had notified the International Socialist
Bureau about the impending trial, and that the Bureau, through the
International Parliamentary Union, would raise the question in the British,
German, and Belgian parliaments in order to draw the attention of the
international working class to this matter. The Conference decided. to call
a one-day strike of the men and women workers of St. Petersburg and the
gubernia on the opening day of the trial against the S.D. group of the
Second Duma.  

The Conference elected two Bolshevik delegates to the All-Russian
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P.

 



[2]
Dresden Parteitag—the Dresden Congress of the German
Social-Democratic Party, held September 13-20 (new style), 1903. The
Congress adopted an opportunist resolution on the admissibility of
S.D. participation in the bourgeois press.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Fourth Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (“Third All-Russian”)









Lenin: The Fourth Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. ('Third All-Russian')







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Fourth Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (“Third All-Russian”)[1]
From a Newspaper Report




Published:
Proletary, No, 20, November 19, 1907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 141-146.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



    

I
Report on the Tactics of the Social-Democratic Group in the Third State
    Duma

Comrade Lenin proceeded from the premise that the objective aims of the Russian
revolution have not been achieved and that the period of reaction which has set
in imposes upon the proletariat the task of defending the cause of democracy and
the cause of the revolution more firmly than ever in face of the widespread
vacillation. Hence the view that the Duma should be used for the purposes of the
revolution, should be used mainly for promulgating the Party’s political
and socialist views and not for legislative “reforms”, which, in any
case, would mean supporting the counter-revolution and curtailing democracy in
every way.


In the words of Comrade Lenin, the “crux” of the Duma question must
lie in an explanation of the following three points:

(a) what is the class composition of the Duma?

(b) what should be and will be the attitude of the Duma centres towards the
revolution and democracy?

(c) what is the significance of Duma activity for the progress of the
Russian revolution?


On the first question, on the basis of an analysis of the Duma composition
(according to data on the party affiliations of the deputies), Lenin stressed
that the views of the famous so-called “opposition” could secure
endorsement in the Third Duma only on one condition, that no less than 87
Octobrists co-operated with the Cadets and the Left.

    

Cadets and the Left were short of 87 votes for obtaining a majority in the
voting on a Bill. Consequently, effective legislative activity in the Duma
was possible only if the bulk of the Octobrists participated in it. What
this kind of legislative activity would lead to and what disgrace
Social-Democracy would incur by such a link-up with the Octobrists were
all too obvious. This was not a matter of abstract principle. Speaking,
abstractly, one could and sometimes should support the representatives of
the big bourgeoisie. But in this case it was necessary to consider the
concrete conditions of development of the Russian bourgeois-democratic
revolution. The Russian bourgeoisie had long embarked on the path of
struggle against the revolution and of compromises with the autocracy. The
recent Cadet congress had finally stripped off all the fig-leaves with
which the Milyukovs and Co. had been covering them selves, and was an
important political event inasmuch as the Cadets had declared with cynical
frankness that they were going, into the Octobrist-Black-Hundred Duma to
legislate and that they would fight the “enemies on the
Left”. Thus, two possible majorities in the Duma—the
Octobrist-Black-Hundred and the Cadet-Octobrist—and both, in
different ways, would work towards tightening the screw of reaction: the
first, by trying to restore the autocracy, the second, by making deals with
the government and introducing illusory reforms that disguise the counter
revolutionary aspirations of the bourgeoisie. Thus, Social-Democracy could
not lend its support to legislative reforms, as this would be tantamount to
supporting the government, Octobrist, party. The way of
“reforms” on the present political basis and with the present
balance of forces would not mean improving the condition of the masses, or
expanding freedom, but bureaucratically regulating the non-freedom and
enslavement of the masses. Such, for example, were the Stolypin agrarian
reforms under

Article 87.[2] They were progressive in clearing the way for capitalism,
but it was the kind of progress that no Social-Democrat could bring himself
to support. The Mensheviks were harping on one string, namely, the class
interests of the bourgeoisie are bound to clash with those of the
autocracy! But there was not a grain of historic truth in this vulgar
would-be

    

Marxism. Did not Napoleon III and Bismarck succeed for a time in appeasing
the appetites of the big bourgeoisie? Did they not, by their
“reforms”, tighten the noose round the neck of the working people
for years to come? What grounds then were there for believing that the Russian
government, in its deal with the bourgeoisie, was likely to agree to any other
kind of reforms?

[Proletary, No, 20, November 19, 1907]
    

2
Resolution on the Tactics of the Social-Democratic Group in the Third
    State Duma

In pursuance of the resolution of the London Congress on the State Duma and on
non-proletarian parties, the All-Russian Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. deems it
necessary, in elaboration of these resolutions, to state the following:


(1) In the Third Duma, which is the outcome of the coup d’état of
    June 3, there
    are two possible majorities: that of the Black-Hundreds-Octobrists and that
    of the Octobrists Cadets. The first, expressing chiefly the interests of the
    semi-feudal landlords, is counter-revolutionary and stands mainly for
    protecting landlord interests and increased repression going to the length
    of striving for complete restoration of the autocracy. The second majority,
    expressing chiefly the interests of the big bourgeoisie, is likewise
    definitely counter-revolutionary, but inclined to cover up its struggle
    against the, revolution with certain illusory bureaucratic reforms;


(2) such a situation in the Duma is extremely favourable to a double political
    game being played by both the government and the Cadets. The government,
    while intensifying repression and continuing its “conquest” of
    Russia by military force, seeks to pose as a supporter of constitutional
    reforms. The Cadets, while actually voting with the counter-revolutionary
    Octobrists, seek to pose not only as an opposition, but as spokesmen of
    democracy. Under these conditions the Social-Democrats have a particular
    responsibility for ruthlessly exposing this game, laying bare before the
    people both the oppression of the Black-Hundred landlords and the government
    and the counter-revolutionary

    

policy of the Cadets. Direct or indirect support for the Cadets by the
Social-Democrats—whether in the form of an Information Bureau with the
participation of the Cadets or by adapting our actions to their policy,
etc.—would now directly harm the cause of class education of the mass of
the workers and the cause of the revolution;


(3) while upholding their socialist aims and criticising all the bourgeois
    parties from this standpoint, the Social-Democrats, in their propaganda,
    should give prominence to the task of making it clear to the broad masses
    that the Third Duma fails completely to meet the interests and demands of
    the people, and in this connection conduct widespread and vigorous
    propaganda for the idea of a constituent assembly based on universal,
    direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot;


(4) one of the principal tasks of Social-Democracy in the Third Duma is to
    expose the class nature of the government’s and the liberals’
    proposals and to systematically oppose to them the demands of the
    Social-Democratic minimum programme without any whittling-down, with
    special attention to questions affecting the economic interests of the
    broad
    masses (the labour and agrarian questions, the budget, etc.)—the more
    so as the composition of the Third Duma promises exceptionally abundant
    material for the propaganda activities of Social-Democrats


(5) the Social-Democratic group should take special care that no outward
    coincidence between Social-Democratic voting and the voting of the
    Black-Hundred-Octobrist or Octobrist-Cadet blocs should be used in the sense
    of sup porting one bloc or the other;


(6) the Social-Democrats in the Duma should introduce Bills and use their right
    to make interpellations, for which purpose they should co-operate with other
    groups to the left of the Cadets without in any way retreating from the
    programme and tactics of Social-Democracy and without entering into any kind
    of blocs. The Social-Democratic group should immediately propose to the Left
    deputies of the Duma the formation of an Information Bureau which would not
    bind its participants but would enable the workers’ deputies to exert
    systematic influence upon democratic elements in the spirit of
    Social-Democratic policy;

 

(7) among the first concrete steps of the Social-Democratic group in the
Duma the Conference deems it necessary to place special emphasis on the
need:

(1) to come forward with a special declaration;

(2) to make an interpellation concerning the coup d’état of June 3;

(3) to raise in the Duma, in the most advisable form, the question of the
trial of the Social-Democratic group in the Second Duma.


[Proletary, No. 20, November 19, 1907]

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Fourth Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (“Third
All-Russian”) was held in Helsingfors (Helsinki) November 5-12
(18-23), 1907, shortly after the elections to the Third Duma. Twenty-seven
delegates attended the Conference: ten Bolsheviks, four Mensheviks, five
Polish S.D.’s five Bundists, and three Lettish S.D.’s.  

The agenda of the Conference contained the following questions:

the tactics of the S.D. group in the Duma, the question of group centres,
and the strengthening of the C.C.’s contacts with the local organisations,
and the participation of Social-Democrats in the bourgeois press. The
Conference also discussed the question of giving a name to
Social-Democratic representation in the Duma. The report on the tactics of
the S.D. group in the Third Duma was made by Lenin. His evaluation of the
June-the-third regime and the tasks of the Party was challenged by the
Mensheviks and the Bundists, who spoke in favour of supporting the Cadets
and the “Left” Octobrists in the Duma. By a majority of votes,
the Conference adopted the Bolshevik resolution proposed on behalf of the
St. Petersburg City Conference. It also adopted the Bolshevik resolution on
the inadmissibility of S.D. participation in the bourgeois press, directed
against the Menshevik publicists, especially Plekhanov, who had criticised
the decisions of the Third Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. (the “Second
All-Russian”) in the Left Cadet newspaper Tovarishch. The
Conference named S.D. representation in the Duma “the
Social-Democratic group”.  

In view of the fact that the Menshevik centre, behind the back of the
Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., was making contacts with the local
committees, the Conference outlined measures for strengthening contacts
between the C.C. of the Party and the local 

By adopting Leninist decisions on fundamental issues, The Fourth
Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. equipped the Party with correct, Marxist
tactics in the struggle to win the masses during the period of reaction.


The minutes of the Conference have not been found. The proceedings and
decisions were extensively reported by the Bolshevik news paper
Proletary, No. 20, November 19, 1907.

 



[2]
Lenin is referring to the agrarian laws drafted by Stolypin and
promulgated by the tsarist government in November 1906. A ukase, “On
Amendments to Certain Enactments Regarding Peasant Land Tenure and
Ownership”, was issued on November 9 (22), 1906; after being passed
by the Duma and the Council of State, it became known as the Law of June
14, 1910. Another ukase was issued on November 15 (28), 1906, “On the
Issue of Loans by the Peasant Land Bank on Security of Allotment
Lands”. Under these laws the peasant was given the right to take
possession of his allotment as

   

private property and withdraw from the village commune to his
otrub or khutor. The otrub or khutor
peasant could receive a loan from the Peasant Bank to acquire his
property. The object of Stolypin’s agrarian reforms was to create a
mainstay for the autocracy in the countryside in the shape of a class of
kulaks, while preserving landlord ownership and destroying the village
communes. This policy hastened capitalist evolution of agriculture by the
most painful, “Prussian” method, while p reserving the power,
property, and privileges of the semi-feudal landlords; it intensified the
forcible expropriation of the bulk of the peasants,and accelerated the
development of a peasant bourgeoisie, which was enabled to buy up the
allotments of the poor peasants for a song.  

Lenin called the Stolypin agrarian legislation of 1906 (and the Law
promulgated on June 14 1271, 1910) the second step, after the 1861 Reform,
towards converting tsarism into a bourgeois monarchy. “The ‘delay’
granted to the old order. and the old semi-feudal landlordism by
Stolypin,” wrote Lenin, “opened another, and last,
safety valve without expropriating the whole landownership of the
landlords” (see present edition, Vol. 18, “The Last
Valve”). Despite the government’s propaganda drive to encourage
the peasants to withdraw from the communes, only some 2,500,000 peasant
house holds withdrew from the communes in European Russia in the nine years
1907-15. Those most interested in this arrangement were the rural
bourgeoisie, for it enabled them to build up their farms. Some poor
peasants, too, left the communes in order to sell their allotments and have
done with village life. The bulk. of the small impoverished peasants,
however, continued the same old miserable existence on their backward
farms.  

Stolypin’s agrarian policy did not do away with the fundamental
antagonism between the peasantry as a whole and the landlords, and led to
the still greater impoverishment of the peasant masses and the aggravation
of class contradictions between the kulaks and the rural poor.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Preparation of a “Disgusting Orgy”









Lenin: The Preparation of a 'Disgusting Orgy'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Preparation of a “Disgusting Orgy”




Published:
Proletary, No. 19, November 5, 1907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 147-152.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In assessing the tasks of the Social-Democrats in the
Second Russian Duma and the aspirations of the Russian liberals, Franz
Mehring, the well-known German Marxist, wrote that German Liberalism has
for the last sixty years been following a wretched and shameful path under
cover of the slogan: “positive work”. When the National
Assembly, on a single night in the summer of 1789, achieved the
emancipation of the French peasants, that brilliantly venal ad venturer
Mirabeau, the incomparable hero of constitutional democracy, described the
event by the picturesque expression “a disgusting orgy”. In our
(Social-Democratic) opinion, however, this was positive work. On the
contrary, the emancipation of the Prussian peasants, which dragged on at a
snail’s pace for sixty years, from 1807 to 1865, and took cruel and
ruthless toll of countless peasant lives, was, from the point of view of
our liberals, “positive work which they proclaim from the
house-tops. In our opinion it was a “disgusting

orgy”.[1]


Thus Mehring wrote. We cannot but recall his words today, when the Third Duma is
opening, when the Octobrists want to start a disgusting orgy in real earnest,
when the Cadets are ready to take part in it with servile zeal, when even among
the Social-Democrats there are (to our shame) Plekhanovites who are prepared to
assist in this orgy. Let us take a closer look at all these preparations.


The eve of the Third Duma was marked by a spate of meetings of the different
parties on the question of Duma tactics. The Octobrists at their Moscow
conference drew up a draft programme for the parliamentary group of the Union of
October Seventeenth, and their spokesman, Mr. Plevako, raised the “banner
of the Russian Liberal-Constitutional Party” at a banquet in Moscow. The
Cadets completed their

    

Fifth so-called “Party” Congress in three or four days. The
Left-wing Cadets were utterly defeated and thrown out of the Cadets’
Central Committee (which consists of 38 members, who completely control the
“party”). The Right-wing Cadets obtained complete freedom of
action—in the spirit of the “report on tactics in the Third
Duma”, that remarkable, “historical” justification of the
“disgusting orgy”. The Social-Democrats started to discuss
Third Duma tactics in the Central Committee and at the conference of the
St. Petersburg organisation of the R.S.D.L.P.


The parliamentary programme of the Octobrists is no table for its frank
admission of the counter-revolutionary policy which the. Cadets
virtually pursued in the Second Duma behind a screen of phrases and excuses. For
instance, the Octobrists openly declare that revision of the fundamental laws
and the electoral law is “untimely” on the grounds that it is first
of all necessary to “lull and abolish the war of passions and class
interests” by introducing “a number of pressing reforms”. The
Cadets did not say this, but they acted in just this way in the Second
Duma. Another example. The Octobrists stand “for drawing the widest
possible circle of people into participation in self-government”, while
at the same time “ensuring proper representation” of the
nobility. This outspoken counter-revolutionism is more honest than the Cadets’
policy of promising universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot while
in reality fiercely opposing election of the local land commit tees by such
means both in the First and in the Second Dumas and proposing that these
committees should consist of peasants and landlords in equal numbers, that is,
the same idea of “ensuring representation of the nobility”. Yet
another example. The Octobrists openly reject the compulsory alienation of the
landlords’ land. The Cadets “accept” it, but accept it in such a
way that they vote in the Second Duma with the Right against the Trudoviks and
the Social-Democrats on the question of winding up the agrarian debate with a
general formula accepting compulsory alienation.


On terms consolidating the “victories” of the counter revolution the
Octobrists are prepared to promise all kinds of liberal reforms. These include
“extension of the Duma’s

    

budgetary rights” (this is not a joke!), “extension of its rights of
supervision over the legality of the government’s actions”, measures
guaranteeing the independence of the courts, “removal of constraints on
workers’ economic organisations and on economic strikes” (“which do
not prejudice state and public interests”), “strengthening the
bases of lawful civil liberties”, and so on and so forth. The Octobrist
governing party is as lavish of “liberal” phrases as the government
of Mr. Stolypin itself.


How did the Cadets put the question of their attitude towards the Octobrists at
their congress? The handful of Left Cadets was found to consist of blusterers
who were unable even to pose the question intelligently, while the mass of the
Right-wing knights of disguised Octobrism rallied strongly to smother the truth
in the meanest fashion. The impotence of the Left Cadets is best illustrated by
their draft resolution. Its first point recommends the Cadets “to adopt a
stand of sharp opposition without aligning themselves with the Octobrists, who
are hostile to it (to the Party of Constitutional-Democrats) both in spirit and
in programme”. The second point calls on the Cadets “not to withhold
support from Bills that lead the country along the path of liberation and
democratic reforms, no matter from what source they originate”. This is a
joke, because Bills capable of obtaining a majority in the Third Duma
cannot originate from any other source than the Octobrists! The Left
Cadet gentlemen fully deserve their defeat, for they behaved like wretched
cowards or fools, who are incapable of saying clearly and bluntly that it is a
disgrace to intend to legislate in such a Duma, that voting with the Octobrists
means supporting the counter-revolution. Some individuals among the Left
Cadets, apparently, understood the state of affairs, but being drawing-room
democrats, they showed their cowardice at the congress. At any rate, Mr. Zhilkin
in Tovarishch mentions a private speech by the Cadet Safonov,
in which the latter said:

“The Cadet group, in my opinion, should now take the stand of the Trudovik
group in the First Duma. Opposition, strong speeches—and nothing
more. Yet those people intend to legislate. I wonder how? By
friendship, by an alliance with the Octobrists? What a strange
tendency

    

towards the Right. The whole country is Left, and we are going Right”
(Tovarishch, No. 407). Apparently, Mr. Safonov has lucid intervals
of shame and conscience ... but only privately!


On the other hand, Mr. Milyukov and his gang revealed themselves in all their
old glory as shameless and unprincipled careerists. In the adopted resolution
they gloss over the issue in order to fool the public at large, in the way that
the liberal heroes of parliamentary prostitution have always fooled the
people. In the congress resolutions (“theses”) there is not a
word about the Octobrists! This is incredible, but it is a fact. The crux
of the Cadets’ congress was the question of the Constitutional-Democrats voting
with the Octobrists. All the debates centred around this question. But that is
just what the art of the bourgeois politicians consists in—to
fool the masses, to conceal their parliamentary
hocus-pocus. The “theses on tactics” adopted by the Congress of the
Constitutional-Democrats on October 26 are a classical document, showing, in
the first place, how the Cadets coalesce with the Octobrists, and, secondly, how
resolutions designed to hoodwink the masses are writ ten by the liberals. This
document should be compared with the “parliamentary programme” of
the “Union of October Seventeenth”. This document should be compared
with the “report on tactics” which Milyukov delivered at the
Congress of the Constitutional-Democrats (Rech, No. 255). The following
are the most important passages of this report:


“Placed in opposition, the party, however [precisely—however!],
will not play the role of an irresponsible minority, in the sense in which it
itself used this term to describe the conduct of the extreme Left in the
Duma” [translated from parliamentary into simple and frank language,
this means: please, Octobrist-gentlemen, give us a place, we are only an
opposition in name!]. “It will not regard the Duma as a means for
preparing actions outside the Duma, but as a supreme organ of state, possessing
a share of the supreme authority as precisely defined by law” [are not the
Octobrists, who bluntly declare the revision of the fundamental laws to be
untimely, more honest?]. “The party is going into the Third Duma, as into
the first

    

two, with the firm intention of taking an active part in its legislative
work. The party always considered this kind of activity to be the chief and
basic activity, in contrast to both the agitational aims of the Left and
the conspiratorial activity of the Right.” As for
“conspiracy”, gentle men, that is another lie, for in
both Dumas you conspired with the ministers or the
ministers’ lackeys. As for the disavowal of agitation, this is a complete
and irrevocable disavowal of democracy.


To legislate in the Third Duma it is necessary either way, directly or
indirectly, to unite with the Octobrists and take one’s stand
unequivocally with the counter-revolution and with the defence of its
victories. The Cadets try to pass this obvious thing over in silence. They let
the cat out of the bag, however, in another passage of the report: “The
use of the legislative initiative should be made dependent on a preliminary
elucidation of the practicability of the party projects”. The
practicability depends on the Octobrists. To elucidate it means having recourse
to the Octobrists by the backstairs. To make one’s initiative depend on
this elucidation means to curtail one’s own projects for the benefit
of the Octobrists, it means making one s own policy dependent on that of
the Octobrists.


There is no middle way, gentlemen. Either a party of real opposition, in which
case—an irresponsible minority. Or a party of active counter-revolutionary
legislation, in which case—servility to the Octobrists. The Cadets chose
the latter, and as a reward for this the Black-Hundred Duma is said to be
electing the Right-wing Cadet Maklakov to the presidium! Maklakov deserves it.


But how are we to account for the Social-Democrats who are capable, even today,
of talking about support for the Cadets? Such Social-Democrats are the product
of intellectualist philistinism, the philistinism of Russian life as a
whole. Such Social-Democrats have been bred by Plekhanov’s vulgarisation
of Marxism. At the conference of the St. Petersburg Social-Democratic
organisation it became clear that the Mensheviks, following in the wake of the
Right Duma, are going still farther to the right. They are prepared to support
the Octobrists, i. e., the government party! Then why should not the
Social-Democrats vote for

    

Khomyakov, who is better than Bobrinsky? It is a question of expediency!
Why not vote for Bobrinsky if the choice is only between him and
Purishkevich? Why not support the Octobrists against the Black Hundreds,
since Marx taught us to support the bourgeoisie against the feudal

squirearchy?[2]


Yes, one is ashamed to admit the fact, but it is a sin to conceal it, that
Plekhanov has led his Mensheviks to heap infinite disgrace upon
Social-Democracy. Like a true “man in the muffler”, he kept
repeating the same old words about “support for the bourgeoisie”,
and by his mechanical repetition obscured all understanding of the
special tasks arid special conditions of the proletariat’s struggle in the
revolution and the struggle against the counter-revolution. In Marx the whole
analysis of revolutionary epochs turns on the struggle of genuine democrats and
particularly of the proletariat against constitutional illusions, against the
treachery of liberalism, against counter-revolution. Plekhanov recognises
Marx—but it is a counterfeit of Marx in the manner of Struve. Let
Plekhanov now reap what he has sown!


The counter-revolutionary nature of liberalism in the Russian
revolution was proved by the whole course of events prior to October 17 and
especially after October 17. The Third Duma will make even the
blind see. The alignment of the Cadets with the Octobrists is a political
fact, and no excuses and subterfuges can disguise it. Let the news paper of
the dull-witted Bernsteinians, Tovarishch, confine itself to
impotent whining in this connection, intermingling this whining with
pushing the Cadets towards the Octobrists, with political pimping. The
Social-Democrats have to understand the class reasons for the
counter-revolutionary nature of Russian liberalism. The Social-Democrats
must ruthlessly expose in the Duma all the approaches made to the
Octobrists by the Cadets, all the baseness of so-called democratic
liberalism. The workers’ party will dismiss with contempt all
considerations about “guarding the flame” and will unfurl the
banner of socialism and the banner of the revolution!

 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 12, p. 386.—Ed.  
 



[2]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, Manifesto of the Communist Party,
Chapter IV.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## But Who Are the Judges?









Lenin: But Who Are the Judges?







V. I.  

      Lenin
But Who Are the Judges?




Published:
Proletary, No. 19. November 5, t907.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 153-160.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Malicious chuckling over the split between the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks in
the R.S.D.L.P, in general and over the sharp struggle at the London Congress in
particular has become a regular feature of the bourgeois press. No one thinks
of studying the differences of opinion, of analysing the two tendencies, of
acquainting the reading public with the history of the split and with the nature
of the differences between the Mensheviks and the Bolsheviks. The publicists of
Rech and Tovarishch—the Vergezhskys, the E. K.’s, the
Pereyaslavskys, and other

       penny a-liners[1]

simply fasten on all kinds of rumours, serve up “piquant”
details of “scandals” for blasé society gossips, and go
out of their way to addle people’s minds with trashy anecdotes about
our struggle.


This genre of vulgar scoffing is being taken up, too, by the
Socialist-Revolutionaries. The editorial in

Znamya Truda,[4]

No. 6, drags out Cherevanin’s story about the incident of hysteria at
the London Congress, sniggers at the expenditure of “tens of
thousands”, and smacks its lips at “the pretty picture of the
internal state of Russian Social-Democracy at the present
moment”. With the liberals such introductions are preliminaries to
lauding the opportunists à la Plekhanov; with the
Socialist-Revolutionaries they are the preliminaries to a severe criticism
of them (the Socialist-Revolutionaries are repeating now the
arguments of the revolutionary Social-Democrats against a labour congress!
They have bethought themselves!). But both of them gloat over the hard
struggle in the Social-Democratic ranks.

    

We shall say a few words about the liberal heroes of this crusade before we deal
      in detail with the Socialist-Revolutionary heroes of “the struggle
      against opportunism”.


The liberals sneer at the struggle within Social-Democracy in order to cover up
their systematic deception of the public in regard to the Cadet
Party. It is a thorough going deception, and the struggle among the Cadets them
selves and their negotiations with the, authorities are systematically
concealed. Everyone knows that the Left Cadets rebuke the Right. Everyone knows
that Milyukov, Struve & Co. called at the ante-rooms of the Stolypins. But
the exact facts are kept hidden. Differences have been glossed over and not a
word has been said of the disputes of the Struve gentry with the Left
Cadets. There are no records of the proceedings of the Cadet congresses. The
liberals issue no figures of their party membership either as a whole or by
organisations. The tendency of the different committees is unknown. Nothing but
darkness, nothing but the official lies of Rech, nothing but attempts
to fool democracy by those on conversational terms with ministers—that is
what the party of Constitutional-Democrats is. Lawyers and professors, who make
their career by parliamentarism, hypocritically condemn the underground
struggle and praise open activity by parties while actually flouting the
democratic principle of publicity and concealing from the public the different
political tendencies with in their party. It needs the short-sightedness of a
Plekhanov, who goes down on his knees before Milyukov, not to be able to see
this gross dirty deception of democracy by the Cadets,. a deception touched up
with a gloss of culture.


And what about the Socialist-Revolutionaries? Are they doing their duty as
honest democrats (we do not say as socialists, for that cannot be said
of them), the duty of giving the people a clear and truthful account of
the struggle of the different political tendencies among those who seek to lead
the people?


Let us examine the facts.


The December Congress of the Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries in 1905 was the
first and only one to publish minutes of the proceedings. Mr. Tuchkin, a
delegate of the Central Organ, exclaims: “The Social-Democrats were at

    

one time convinced, apparently quite sincerely, that the advent of political
liberties would spell political death to our party.... The epoch of liberties
has proved the reverse” (p. 28 of the supplement to the Minutes). You
don’t really mean that, Mr. Tuchkin, do you? Is that what the epoch of
liberties proved? Is that what the actual policy of the party of
Socialist-Revolutionaries proved in 1905? In 1906? In 1907?


Let us turn to the facts.


In the minutes of the Congress of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
(December 1905, published in 1906/) we read that after October
17 a writers’ group, which had a voice but no vote at this Congress,
“urged the Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionaries to
organise a legal party” (p. 49 of the Minutes; further quotations are
from the same source). The Central Committee of the Socialist-Revolutionaries
“was asked to set up not a legal organisation of the Party of
Socialist-Revolutionaries, but a special parallel Popular Socialist
Party” (51). The Central Committee refused and referred the question
to the Congress. The Congress rejected the motion of the Popular
Socialists by a majority of all against one with seven abstentions
(66). “Is it conceivable to be in two parallel parties?” cried
Mr. Tuchkin, beating his breast (p. 61). And Mr. Shevich hinted at the Popular
Socialists’ kinship with the liberals, so that the Popular Socialist
Mr. Rozhdestvensky began to lose his equanimity (p. 59) and avowed that
“no one has the right” to call them
“semi-liberals”

(59).[2]


Such are the facts. In 1905, the Socialist-Revolutionaries broke with
the “semi-liberal” Popular Socialists. But did they?


In 1905, a powerful means for the party openly to influence the masses was the
press. During the October “days of liberty” the
Socialist-Revolutionaries ran a newspaper in a bloc with the Popular
Socialists, prior to the December Congress, it is true. Formally
the Socialist-Revolutionaries

    

are right on this point. in reality, during the period of the greatest
liberties, the period of most direct influence upon the masses, they
concealed from the public the existence of two different
tendencies within the party. The differences of opinion were as great as
those within the Social-Democratic ranks, but the Social-Democrats tried to
clarify them, whereas the Socialist-Revolutionaries tried diplomatically to
conceal them. Such are the facts of 1905.


Now take 1906. The First-Duma period of “small liberties”. The
socialist newspapers are revived. The Socialist-Revolutionaries are again
in a bloc with the Popular Socialists, and they have a joint newspaper. No
wonder the break with the “semi-liberals” at the congress was a
diplomatic one: if you like—a break, or if you like—no break! The
proposal was rejected, the idea of “being in two parallel parties”
was ridiculed, and ... and they went on sitting side by side in two parties,
reverently exclaiming: We thank thee, 0 Lord, that we are not as those
Social-Democrats who fight one .another! Such are the facts. Both periods of
the free press in Russia were marked by the So-cialist-Revolutionaries
aligning themselves with the Popular Socialists and concealing from democracy
by deception (“diplomacy”) the two profoundly divergent tendencies
within their party.


Now take 1907. After the First Duma the Popular Socialists formally organised
their own party. That was inevitable, since in the First Duma, in the first
address of the parties to the peasant electors all over Russia, the
Popular Socialists and the Socialist-Revolutionaries came forward with
different agrarian plans (the Bills of the 104 and the 33). The Popular
Socialists defeated the Socialist-Revolutionaries by securing three
times as many signatures of the Trudovik deputies to their plan, to their
agrarian programme. And this programme, as the Socialist-Revolutionary Vikhlyaev
admitted (Nasha Mysl, Collection, No. 1, St. Petersburg, 1907, article:
“The Popular Socialist Party and the Agrarian Question”)
“similarly” with the law of November 9, 1906,
“arrives at negation of the basic principle of communal land
tenure”. This programme legalises “the manifestations of selfish
individualism” (p. 89 of Mr. Vikhlyaev’s article),
“pollutes the broad ideological stream with
    

individualist mud” (p. 91 of the same article), and embarks
upon “the path of encouraging individualist and egoistic
tendencies among the masses” (ibid., p. 93).


Clear enough, it would seem? The overwhelming majority of peasant
deputies displayed bourgeois individualism. The S.R.’s first address to
the peasant electors of all Russia strikingly confirmed the theory of the
Social-Democrats by virtually converting the S.R.’s into the extreme Left wing
of the petty-bourgeois democrats.


But, perhaps the S.R.’s, after the Popular Socialists had separated from them
and won the Trudovik group over to their programme, definitely dissociated
themselves from them? They did not. The elections to the Second Duma in
St. Petersburg proved the reverse. Blocs with the Cadets were then the greatest
manifestation of socialist opportunism. The Black-Hundred danger was a fiction
covering up the policy of truckling to the liberals. The Cadet press
revealed this very clearly by stressing the “moderation” of the
Mensheviks and Popular Socialists. How did the S. R. s behave? Our
“revolutionaries” formed a bloc with the Popular Socialists and the
Trudoviks; the terms of this bloc were concealed from the public. Our
revolutionaries trailed after the Cadets, just like the Mensheviks. The
S.R. spokesmen proposed a bloc to the Cadets (the meeting of January 18,
1907. See N. Lenin’s pamphlet When You Hear the Judgement of a
Fool..., St. Petersburg,

  January 15, 1907,[3]

in which it is established that the S.R.’s behaved in a politically
dishonest manner in the question of agreements by negotiating
simultaneously with the Social-Democrats, who had declared war on the
Cadets on January 7, 1907, and with the Cadets). The S.R.’s found
themselves in the Left bloc against their will, owing to the
Cadets’ refusal.


Thus, after a complete break with the Popular Socialists the S.R.’s in
actual fact pursued the policy of the Popular Socialists and Mensheviks,
i. e., the opportunists. Their “advantage” consists in concealing
from the public the motives of this policy and the currents within their party.

 

The extraordinary Congress of the S.R. Party in February 1907 not
only failed to raise this question of blocs with the Cadets, not only
failed to assess the significance of such a policy, but, on the contrary,
confirmed it! We would remind the reader of G.A. Gershuni’s
speech at that Congress, which at that time Rech lauded in exactly
the same way as it always lauds Plekhanov. Gershuni said that he adhered to
his “old opinion: the Cadets so far are not our enemies” (p. 11
of the pamphlet: “Speech by G. A. Gershuni at the Extraordinary
Congress of the S. R. Party”, 1907, pp. 1-15, with the party motto of
the S.R.’s: “In struggle you will win your
rights”). Gershuni warned against mutual struggle within the
opposition: “Will not the people lose faith in the very possibility
of government by means of a popular representative assembly”
(ibid.). Obviously, it was in the spirit of this Cadet-lover that the
Congress of the S.R.’s adopted a resolution, which stated, among
other things: 


   “The Congress holds that a sharp party alignment of groups within
   the Duma, with isolated action by each separate group and acute inter-group
   struggle, could completely paralyse the activities of the oppositional
   majority and, thereby discredit the very idea of popular representation in
   the eyes of the working classes” (Partiiniye Izvestia of the
   S.R. Party, No. 6, March 8, 1907).  


This is the sheerest opportunism, worse than our Menshevism. Gershuni
in a slightly more clumsy way made the Congress repeat
Plekhanovism. And the entire activity of the S.R. Duma group
reflected this spirit of Cadet tactics of concern for the unity of the
national opposition. The only difference between the
Social-Democrat Plekhanov and the Socialist-Revolutionary Gershuni is that
the former is a member of a party that does not cover up such decadence,
but exposes and fights against it, while the latter is a member of a party
in which all tactical principles and theoretical views are muddled and
hidden from the eyes of the public by a thick screen of parochial
diplomacy. “Not to wash one’s dirty linen in public” is a
thing the S.R.’s are adept at. The trouble is they have nothing to
show in public but dirty linen. They could not tell the whole truth about
their relations with the Popular Socialists in 1905, 1906, or 1907. They
cannot disclose how a party—not a circle, but, a
party—can

    

one day adopt an ultra-opportunist resolution by 67 votes to 1, and the next
day exhaust themselves shouting “revolutionary” cries.


No, gentlemen “judges”, we do not envy you your formal
right to rejoice at the sharp struggle and splits within the ranks of
Social-Democracy. No doubt, there is much in this struggle that is to be
deplored. Without a doubt, there is much in these splits that is disastrous
to the cause of socialism. Nevertheless, not for a single minute would we
care to barter this heavy truth for your “light” lie. Our
Party’s serious illness is the growing pains of a mass
party. For there can be no mass party, no party of a class, without full
clarity of essential shadings, without an open struggle between various
tendencies, without informing the masses as to which leaders and
which organisations of the Party are pursuing this or that line. Without
this, a party worthy of the name cannot be built, and we are
building it. We have succeeded in putting the views of our two
currents truthfully, clearly, and distinctly before everyone. Personal
bitterness, factional squabbles and strife, scandals, and splits—all
these are trivial in comparison with the fact that the experience of
two tactics is actually teaching a lesson to the proletarian
masses, is actually teaching a lesson to everyone who is capable of taking
an intelligent interest in politics. Our quarrels and splits will be
forgotten. Our tactical principles, sharpened and tempered, will go down as
corner stones in the history of the working-class movement and socialism in
Russia. Years will pass, perhaps decades, and the influence of one or the
other tendency will be traced in a hundred practical questions of different
kinds. Both the working class of Russia and the whole people know
whom they are dealing with in the case of Bolshevism or Menshevism.


Do they know the Cadets? The entire history of the Cadet Party is one of sheer
political jugglery that keeps silent about what matters most and whose one and
everlasting concern is to keep the truth hidden at all costs.


Do they know the Socialist-Revolutionaries? Will the S.R.’s tomorrow
again enter into a bloc with the Social-Cadets? Are they not in that bloc
today? Do they dissociate themselves from the “individualist
mud” of the Trudoviks

    

or are they filling their party more and more with this mud? Do they still
adhere to the theory of unity of the national opposition? Did they adopt
that theory only yesterday? Will they abandon it tomorrow for a few weeks?
No one knows. The S.R.’s themselves do not know it, because the entire
history of their party is one of systematically and continuously
obscuring, confusing, and glossing over their differences by means of
words, phrases and still more phrases.


Why is that? It is not because the S.R.’s are bourgeois careerists like the
Cadets. No, their sincerity, as a circle, cannot be doubted. Their
trouble is that it is impossible for them to create a mass party, impossible for
them to become the party of a class. The objective position is such
that they have to be merely a wing of peasant democracy, an
unindependent, unequal appendage, a “subgroup” of the Trudoviks, and
not a self-contained whole. The period of storm and stress did not help the
S.R.’s to rise to their full stature. It threw them into the clutching arms of
the Popular Socialists, a clutch so strong that not even a split can unlock
them. The period of the counter-revolutionary war did not strengthen their
connection with definite social strata—it merely gave rise to new
waverings and vacillations (which the S.R.’s are now trying hard to conceal)
about the socialist nature of the muzhik. And today, on reading the passionate
articles of Znamya Truda about the heroes of S. R. terrorism, one
cannot help saying to oneself: your terrorism, gentlemen, is not the outcome of
your revolutionism. Your revolutionism is confined to terrorism.


No, these judges are far from being able to judge Social-Democracy!


 
Notes
 

[1]
Lenin gives this word in English.—Tr.  

[2]
Mr. Shevich retreated somewhat in face of this resentment on
the part of a Popular Socialist who had lost his equanimity and “corrected
himself”—p. 63—saying, “by way of personal [!!]
explanation”:“I had no intention of suggesting that the speaker
was a member of the liberal party”.  —Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. II, pp. 456-74.—Ed.  
 



[4]
Znamya Truda (Banner of Labour)—the central
organ of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, published in Paris from July
1907 to April 1914.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Preface to the Pamphlet by Voinov (A. V. Lunacharsky) on the Attitude of the Party Towards the Trade Unions









Lenin: Preface to the Pamphlet by Voinov (A. V. Lunacharsky) on the Attitude of the Party Towards the Trade Unions







V. I.  

      Lenin
Preface to the Pamphlet by Voinov (A. V. Lunacharsky) on the Attitude of the Party Towards the Trade Unions[5]




Written: Written in November 1907 

Published:

      First published in 1933 in Lenin Miscellany XXV.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 161-168.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

Comrade Voinov s pamphlet on the attitude of the socialist
party of the proletariat towards the trade unions is open to a good deal of
misconstruction. There are two reasons for this. In the first place, the
author, in the ardour of his fight against a narrow and incorrect
conception of Marxism, against an unwillingness to take into consideration
the new needs of the working-class movement and take a broader and more
profound view of the matter, often ex presses himself in too general
terms. He attacks orthodoxy—true, orthodoxy in inverted commas,
i.e., pseudo-orthodoxy—or German Social-Democracy in general, when,
as a matter of fact, his criticism is aimed only at the vulgarisers
of orthodoxy, only at the opportunist wing of Social-Democracy. Secondly,
the author writes for the Russian public, but hardly takes into
consideration the various shadings in the formulation under Russian
conditions of the questions he examines. Comrade Voinov’s point of
view is very far removed from the views of the Russian syndicalists,
Mensheviks, and Socialist-Revolutionaries. The inattentive or
unconscientious reader, however, can easily cavil at one or another phrase
or idea of the writer, seeing that the latter had before his eyes chiefly
Frenchmen and Italians and did not undertake the task of
dissociating him self from all kinds of Russian muddleheads.


As an example of the latter we would mention the Socialist-Revolutionaries. In
Znamya Truda, No. 5, they declare with their usual presumption: ”The
Socialist International

    

approved the point of view on the trade-union movement which we [!] have
always [!] maintained.” Let us take the Collected Articles,
No. 1 (1907), published by Nasha Mysl. Mr. Victor Chernov takes
Kautsky to task, but is silent about the Mannheim resolution and
Kautsky’s struggle against the opportunist neutralists!
Kautsky’s article, which the S. R. hack writer attacks, was written
on the eve of

Mannheim.[6] In Mannheim Kautsky opposed the neutralists. The Mannheim
resolution “makes a considerable breach in trade-union
neutrality” (Kautsky’s expression in an article on the Mannheim
Congress published in

Die Neue Zeit[7] for October 6,1906). And now, in
1907, along comes a critic, who poses as a revolutionary and calls
Kautsky “a great dogmatist and inquisitor of Marxism”, accusing
him—quite in unison with the opportunist neutralists!—of
tendentiously belittling the role of the trade unions, of a desire to
“subordinate” them to the party, and so on. If we add to this
that the S.R.’s always stood for non-Party trade unions, and that
Znamya Truda, No. 2 for July 12, 1907 carried an editorial saying
that “party propaganda has its place outside the
union”, we shall get a full picture of the S.R.’s revolutionism.


When Kautsky combated opportunist neutralism and further developed and deepened
the theory of Marxism, moving the trade unions leftwards, these gentlemen fell
upon him, repeating the catchwords of the opportunists and continuing on the sly
to advocate non-partisanship of the trade unions. When the same Kautsky
moved the trade unions still further leftwards by amending Beer’s
resolution at Stuttgart and laying stress in this resolution on the socialist
tasks of the trade unions, the gentlemen of the S. B. fraternity started
shouting: the Socialist International has endorsed our point of view!


The question arises, are such methods worthy of members of the Socialist
International? Does not such criticism testify to presumption and lack of
principle?


A specimen of such presumption among the Social-Democrats is the former
revolutionary Plekhanov, who is deeply respected by the liberals. In a preface
to the pamphlet We And They he declares with inimitable, incomparable
complacency that the Stuttgart resolution (on the trade

    

unions) with my amendment deprives the London resolution (that of the
London Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.) of its significance. Probably many readers,
upon reading this declaration of our magnificent Narcissus, will believe that
the struggle at Stuttgart was fought precisely over this amendment of
Plekhanov’s and that generally speaking this amendment had some serious
significance.


In reality, this amendment (“unity of the economic struggle should always
be borne in mind”) had no serious significance whatever. It even had no
bearing on the essence of the questions in dispute at Stuttgart, on the
essence of the differences of opinion in international socialism.


As a matter of fact, Plekhanov’s raptures over “his”
amendment have a very vulgar significance—to mislead the
reader by drawing his attention away from the really disputable
questions of the trade-union movement and to conceal the defeat of
the idea of neutralism in Stuttgart.


The Stockholm Congress of the B.S.D.L.P. (1906), at which the Mensheviks won the
day, adhered to the point of view of trade-union neutrality. The London Congress
of the R.S.D.L.P. took a different stand and proclaimed the necessity of
working towards partisanship of the unions. The Stuttgart International Congress
adopted a resolution, which “puts an end to neutrality once and for
all”, as Kautsky rightly

    expressed it.[1]

Plekhanov went into the
Commission of the Stuttgart Congress to defend neutrality, as described in
detail by Voinov. And Clara Zetkin wrote in Die Gleichheit, the
mouthpiece of the women’s labour movement of Germany, that
“Plekhanov attempted by rather unconvincing arguments to justify
a certain limitation of this

     principle”[2]

(i.e., the principle of close
alignment of the unions with the Party).


Thus, the principle of neutrality which Plekhanov advocated was a
failure. His arguments were considered “unconvincing” by the
German revolutionary Social-Democrats.

    

And he, self-admiringly, declares: “my” amendment was adopted and the
resolution of the London Congress loses its significance....


Yes, yes, but, on the other hand, the Nozdrev

presumption[8] of a socialist respected by the liberals apparently does
not lose any of its significance.



Comrade Voinov is wrong, I believe, in saying that the German orthodox
socialists consider the idea of storming harmful and that orthodoxy “had
all but adopted the whole spirit of the new Economism”. This cannot be
said of Kautsky, and Comrade Voinov himself admits the correctness of
Kautsky’s views. While blaming the Germans for “saying too little
about the role of the trade unions as organisers of socialist production”,
Comrade Voinov mentions else where the opinion of Liebknecht senior, who
recognised this role in the most emphatic terms. Another mistake of Comrade
Voinov was to believe Plekhanov when the latter said that Bebel
deliberately omitted mention of the Russian revolution in his speech of
welcome, and that Bebel did not want to speak about Russia. These
words of Plekhanov’s were simply crude buffoonery on the part of a
socialist who is deeply respected by the liberals and should not for a moment
have been taken seriously, should not have evoked even the possibility of
believing that there was an iota of truth in them. For my part I can testify
that during Bebel’s speech, Van Kol, a representative of the socialist
Right wing who sat next to me in the Bureau, listened to Bebel specially to see
whether he would mention Russia. And as soon as Bebel had finished, Van Kol
turned to me with a look of surprise; he did not doubt (nor did a single serious
member of the Congress) that Bebel had forgotten Russia
accidentally. The best and most experienced speakers some times make
slips. For Comrade Voinov to call this forgetfulness on the part of the veteran
Bebel “characteristic”, is, in my opinion, most unfair. It is also
profoundly unfair to speak in general about the
“present-day” opportunistic Bebel. There are no grounds
for such a generalisation.


To avoid misunderstandings, however, let me say at once that if anyone tried to
use these expressions of Comrade

    

Voinov’s against the revolutionary German Social Democrats, this
would be seizing dishonestly oh particular words. Comrade Voinov has
abundantly proved by his whole pamphlet that he is on the side of
the German revolutionary Marxists (like Kautsky), that he is working
together with them to get rid of old prejudices, opportunist
clichés, and short-sighted complacency. That is why even in
Stuttgart, I lined up with Comrade Voinov on all essentials and agree with
him now regarding the entire character of his revolutionary criticism. He
is absolutely right in saying that we must now learn from the Germans and
profit by their experience. Only ignoramuses, who have still learned
nothing from the Germans and therefore do not know the ABC, can infer from
this a “divergence” within revolutionary Social-Democracy. We
must criticise the mistakes of the German leaders fearlessly and openly if
we wish to be true to the spirit of Marx and help the Russian socialists to
be equal to the present-day tasks of the workers’ movement. Bebel was
undoubtedly mistaken at Essen as well when he defended Noske, when he
upheld the division of wars into defensive and offensive, when he attacked
the method of struggle of the “radicals” against. Van
Kol, when he denied (with Singer) the failure and fallacy of the German
delegation’s tactics at Stuttgart. We should not conceal these
mistakes, but should use them as an example to teach the Russian
Social-Democrats how to avoid them and live up to the more rigorous
requirements of revolutionary Marxism. And let not the Russian anarchist
and syndicalist small fry, the liberals, and S.R.’s crow over our criticism
of Bebel. We shall tell these gentlemen: “Eagles sometimes fly lower
than hens, but hens can never fly as high as eagles!”



A little over two years ago Mr. Struve, who at that time defended the
revolution, wrote about the necessity of open revolutionary action and
maintained that the revolution must assume power—this Mr. Struve
wrote in

Osvobozhdeniye,[9]

No. 71 (published abroad): “In comparison with the revolutionism of
Mr. Lenin and his associates the revolutionism of the West-European
Social-Democracy of

    

Bebel, and even of Kautsky, is opportunism”. I answered Mr. Struve at
the time: “When and where did I ever claim to have created any sort
of special trend in international Social-Democracy not identical with the
trend of Bebel and Kautsky?” (Two Tactics, p. 50 of the
Russian

      edition).[3]


In the summer of 1907 in a pamphlet on the question of boycott of the Third
Duma, I had to point out that it would be basically wrong to identify Bolshevism
with boycottism or boyevism.


Now, on the question of the trade unions, equally strong emphasis
should be placed on the fact that Bolshevism applies the tactics of
revolutionary Social-Democracy in all fields of struggle, in all spheres of
activity. What distinguishes Bolshevism from Menshevism is not that the
former “repudiates” work in the trade unions or the
co-operative societies, etc., but that the former takes a different
line in the work of propaganda, agitation, and organisation of the
working class. Today activity in the trade unions undoubtedly assumes
tremendous importance. In contrast to the neutralism of the Mensheviks we
must conduct this activity on the lines of closer alignment of the unions
with the Party, of the development of socialist consciousness and an
understanding of the revolutionary tasks of the proletariat. In Western
Europe revolutionary syndicalism in many countries was a direct and
inevitable result of opportunism, reformism, and parliamentary
cretinism. In our country, too, the first steps of “Duma
activity” increased opportunism to a tremendous extent and reduced
the Mensheviks to servility before the Cadets. Plekhanov, for example, in
his everyday political work, virtually merged with the Prokopovich
and Kuskova gentry. In 1900, he denounced them for Bernsteinism, for
contemplating only the “posterior” of the Russian proletariat
(Vademecum for the editorial staff of Rabocheye Dyelo,
Geneva, 1900). In 1906-07, the first ballot papers threw Plekhanov into the
arms of these gentlemen, who are now contemplating the
“posterior” of Russian liberalism. Syndicalism cannot help
developing on Russian soil as a reaction against this shameful conduct of
“distinguished” Social-Democrats.

 

Comrade Voinov, therefore, is quite correct in taking the line of
calling upon the Russian Social-Democrats to learn from the example
of opportunism and from the example of syndicalism. Revolutionary
work in the trade unions, shifting the emphasis from parliamentary trickery
to the education of the proletariat, to rallying the purely class
organisations, to the struggle outside parliament, to ability to use (and
to prepare the masses for the possibility of successfully using) the
general strike, as well as the “December forms of

struggle”,[10] in the Russian revolution—all this
comes very strongly into prominence as the task of the Bolshevik trend. And
the experience of the Russian revolution immensely facilitates this task
for us, provides a wealth of practical guidance and historical data making
it. possible to appraise in the most concrete way the new methods of
struggle, the mass strike, and the use of direct force. These methods of
struggle are least of all “new” to the Russian Bolsheviks, the
Russian proletariat. They are “new” to the opportunists, who
are doing their utmost to erase from the minds of the workers in the West
the memory of the Commune, and from the minds of the workers in Russia the
memory of December 1905. To strengthen these memories, to make a scientific
study of that great

     experience,[4]

to spread its lessons among the masses and the realisation of its
inevitable repetition on a new scale— this task of the revolutionary
Social-Democrats in Russia opens up before us prospects infinitely richer
than the one-sided “anti-opportunism” and
“anti-parliamentarism” of the syndicalists.


Against syndicalism, as a special trend, Comrade Voinov levels four
accusations (p. 19 onwards of his pamphlet), which show up its falsity with
striking clearness: (1) the

    

"anarchistic looseness of the organisation”;

(2) keeping the workers keyed up instead of creating a firm
“stronghold of class organisation”;

(3) the petty-bourgeois-individualistic features of its ideal and of the
Proudhon. theory;

(4) a stupid “aversion to politics”.


There are here not a few points of resemblance to the old
“Economism” among the Russian Social-Democrats. Hence I am not so
optimistic as Comrade Voinov in regard to a “reconciliation” with
revolutionary Social—Democracy on the part of those Economists who have
gone over to syndicalism. I also think that Comrade Voinov’s proposals
for a “General Labour Council as a superarbiter, with the participation
in it of Socialist-Revolutionaries, are quite unpractical. This is mixing up
the “music of the future” with the organisational forms of the
present. But I am not in the least afraid of Comrade Voinov’s perspective,
namely:

“subordination of political organisations to a class social
organisation” ... “only when [I am still quoting
Comrade Voinov, stressing the important words]... all trade-unionists
will have become socialists”. The class instinct of the
proletarian mass has already begun. to be manifested in Russia
with full force. This class instinct already provides tremendous guarantees
both against the petty-bourgeois woolliness of the
Socialist-Revolutionaries and against the Mensheviks’ servility to the
Cadets. We can already boldly assert that the mass workers’
organisation in Russia (if it were to be created and in so far as it is for
a minute created, if only by elections, strikes, demonstrations, etc.)
is sure to be closer to Bolshevism, to revolutionary
Social-Democracy.


Comrade Voinov rightly regards the “labour congress” adventure as a
“frivolous” affair. We shall work hard in the trade unions, we shall
work in all fields to spread the revolutionary theory of Marxism among the
proletariat and to build up a “stronghold” of class
organisation. The rest will come of itself.

 

Notes
 

[1]
Vorwärts, 1907, No. 209, Beilage,
Kautsky’s report to the Leipzig workers on the Congress in
Stuttgart. See Kalendar dlya vsekh, 1908, Zerno Publishers,
p. 173, my article on the International Socialist Congress in
Stuttgart. (See pp. 87-88 of this volume.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[2]
See Kalendar dlya vsekh, p. 173, as well as the collected
articles of Zarnitsky (St. Petersburg, 1907), which gives a
complete translation of this article from Die Gleichheit.  —Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 9, p. 66.—Ed.  

[4]
It is natural that the Cadets should be eagerly studying the history of
the two Dumas. It is natural that they should regard the platitudes and
betrayals of Rodichev-Kutlerov liberalism as gems of creation. It is
natural that they should falsify history by drawing a veil of silence over
their negotiations with the reaction, etc. It is unnatural for the
Social-Democrats not to eagerly study October-December 1905, if only
because each day of that period meant a hundred times more to the destinies
of all the peoples or Russia and the working class in particular than
Rodichev’s “loyal” phrases in the Duma.  —Lenin
 



[5]
The Preface to the Pamphlet by Voinov (A. V. Lunacharshy)
on the Attitude of the Party Towards the Trade Unions was written by
Lenin in November 1907. Lunacharsky’s pamphlet was never published.

 



[6]
This refers to the Mannheim Congress of the German Social-Democratic
Party held September 23-29 (new style), 1906. The chief item on the agenda
was the question of the mass political strike, which the German
Social-Democrats, at their Jena Congress in 1905, recognised as the most
important method of political struggle.

   

Mention was made in this connection of the trade unions, which rejected the
idea of a mass political strike as being anarchistic. The Mannheim Congress
did not openly condemn the opportunist position of the trade unions, but
recommended all party members to join trade-union organisations, and
trade-union members to join the S D. Party “in order to infuse the
spirit of Social-Democracy into the trade-union movement”.





[7]
Die Neue Zeit—the theoretical journal of the German
Social-Democratic Party, published in Stuttgart from 1883 to 1923. Up to
October 1917 it was edited by Karl Kautsky and subsequently by Heinrich
Cunow. Some of the works of Marx and Engels were first published in its
columns, among them Marx’s Critique of the Gotha Programme
and Engels’s Contribution to the Critique of the Draft
Social-Democratic Programme of 1891. Engels regularly helped the
editors with suggestions and advice and often criticised them for
departures from Marxism. Contributors included August Bebel, Wilhelm
Liebknecht, Rosa Luxemburg, Franz Mehring, Clara Zetkin, Paul Lafargue,
G. V. Plekhanov, and other leading figures in the German and international
labour movement of the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries. Beginning with the late nineties, after the death of Engels, the
Neue Zeit made a regular practice of publishing articles by
revisionists, notably Bern stein’s series “Problems of
Socialism”, which launched the revisionists’ campaign against
Marxism. During the First World War the journal adopted a Centrist stand,
in effect supporting the social-chauvinists.

 



[8]
Nozdrev—a character from Gogol’s Dead
Souls, typifying a bullying landlord and cheat.

 



[9]
Osvobozhdeniye (Emancipation)—a fortnightly
journal published abroad from June 18 (July 1), 1902 to October 5 (18),
1905 under the editorship of P. Struve. It was the organ of the Russian
liberal bourgeoisie and expounded the ideas of moderate monarchist
liberalism. In 1903, the Osvobozhdeniye League was formed around
the journal, taking definite shape in January 1904 and existing until
October 1905. Together with the Zemstvo constitutionalists, the
Osvobozhdeniye liberals formed. the core of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party (the Cadets), which was founded in October
1905, and became the chief party of the liberal-monarchist bourgeoisie in
Russia.

 



[10]
This refers 16 the armed uprising of the workers against the autocracy
in December 1905.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”









Lenin: The Agrarian Question and the 'Critics of Marx'








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”[1]




Written: Written in the autumn of 1907 

Published:

      First published in 1908: Chapters X-XI in the miscellany: Vl. Ilyin, The Agrarian Question, Part I, St. Petersburg, and Chapter XII in the collection Current Life, St. Petersburg.

      Published according to the text in the miscellany and the collection.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 169-216.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents




X.


The “Work” of the German Bulgakov, E. David
  171

XI.


Livestock in Small and Large Farms
  182

XII.


The “Ideal Country” from the Standpoint of the Opponents of Marxism on the Agrarian Question[10101010 10101010] 
  194

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”
was written between 1901 and 1907. The first four chapters were published
in Zarya, Nos. 2-3, for December 1901, under the title “The
‘Critics’ on the Agrarian Question (First Essay)”; the contribution bore
the signature of N. Lenin. The chapters were published legally in Odessa



in 1905 by the Burevestnik Publishers as a separate pamphlet
entitled The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of
Marx”. This title was retained by the author for subsequent
publications of the essay, in whole or in part.  

Chapters V-IX were first published in February 1906 in the legal
magazine Obrazovaniye (Education), No. 2, where they were
given subtitles; Chapters I-IV, published in Zarya and in the 1905
edition, had none.  

The nine chapters .with two additional ones (X and XI) were first
published together in 1908 in St. Petersburg in The Agrarian
Question, Part I, by Vi. Ilyin (V. I. Lenin), Chapters I-IV having
subtitles; some editorial changes were made in the text and some notes
added.  

Chapter XII (the last) was first published in 1908 in the collection
Current Life.  

The first nine chapters are given in Vol. 5, pp. 103-222 of the present
edition. Volume 13 contains Chapters X, XI, XII, written in 1907.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## X









Lenin: 1907/agrarcom: The 'Work' of the German Bulgakov, E. David







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”



    

    


X
The “Work” of the German Bulgakov, E. David

Ed. David’s book, Socialism and Agriculture, is an
exceptionally clumsy and cumbrous summary of all the erroneous methods and
arguments which we have seen in the works of Bulgakov, Hertz, and
Chernov. We could, there fore, completely ignore David; but since his
“work” is undoubtedly at the present time the principal work of
revisionism on the agrarian question, we think it necessary once again to
show how the revisionist fraternity write learned treatises.


To the question of machinery in agriculture David devotes the whole of Chapter
IV of his book (pp. 115-93 of the Russian translation), apart from numerous
references to the same subject in other chapters. The politico-economic essence
of the matter is completely submerged in hundreds of technicalities
which the author examines in minute detail. Machinery does not play the same
role in agriculture as in industry; in agriculture there is no central motor;
most of the machines are only temporarily employed; some machines make no saving
in production costs, and so on and so forth. David regards such conclusions (see
pp. 190-93, the question of machinery summed up) as a refutation of Marxist
theory! But this merely obscures the question instead of clarifying it. That
agriculture is backward compared with manufacturing industry is not open to
the slightest doubt. This backwardness requires no proof. By examining, point
by point, the various ways in which that backwardness is displayed, by piling
example upon example and case upon case, David merely pushes into the back
ground the actual subject of the research, namely: is the use

    

of machines of a capitalist character? Is the increased use of machines due
to the growth of capitalist agriculture?


David utterly fails to understand how the question should be presented
by a Marxist. David’s standpoint is essentially that of the petty
bourgeois, who consoles himself with the relatively, slow progress of
capitalism and is afraid to look at social evolution as a whole. Thus, on
the question of agricultural machinery, David quotes Bensing, quotes him
innumerable

times[13] (pp. 125, 135, 180, 182, 184, 186, 189, 506, and others of the
Russian translation). David can positively be said to exasperate the reader
by passing from detail to detail without sifting his material, without
coherence, without a reasoned presentation of the question, without
aim. Consequently, David provides no summing up of Bensing’s
conclusions. What I said in 1901 in opposition to Mr. Bulgakov fully
applies to

David.[1]

First, a summary of Bensing’s conclusions shows the in disputable
advantage which farms using machines have over those that do not use
them. None of the “corrections” to Bensing in minor details,
with which David has stuffed his book, can alter this conclusion. David
passes over this general conclusion in silence in exactly the same
way as Mr. Bulgakov did! Secondly, while quoting Bensing without
end, without reason, without coherence, David, like Mr. Bulgakov,
failed to note Bensing’s bourgeois views concerning
machinery in both industry and agriculture. In short, David does not even
understand the socio-economic aspect of the question. He is unable to
generalise and connect the factual data showing the superiority of
large-scale over small-scale production. As a result, nothing remains but
the reactionary lamentations of the petty bourgeois who places his hopes in
technical backwardness, in the slow development of capitalism. In the
matter of theory, the Right-wing Cadet and “Christian” renegade
Mr. Bulgakov is quite on a level with the opportunist Social-Democrat
David.


David fails, hopelessly fails to understand the socio economic aspect of other
questions as well. Take his fundamental thesis, his pet idea, the
“kingpin” of the whole

    

work: the viability of small-scale production in agriculture and its
superiority to large-scale production. Ask David:

What is small-scale production?


On page 29, footnote, you will find a neat answer: “Wherever we refer to
small-scale production we mean the economic category which functions without
regular outside assistance and without an auxiliary occupation.” Though
clumsily expressed and poorly translated by Mr. Grossman, this is more or less
clear. After that we have a right to expect David to outline the conditions of
small-scale (in area) farming from the standpoint of the
employment of hired labour, or the sale of the latter by the farmer.


Nothing of the kind.


Nothing brings out David’s bourgeois nature so strongly as his complete
disregard of the question of the employment of hired labour by
“small” farmers and of the conversion of the latter into
wage-labourers. Complete disregard— that is literally true. Statistical
data on this are to be found in German statistics; Kautsky quotes them briefly
in his Agrarian Question(I have quoted them in

detail[2]

).

David knows those statistics, but he does not analyse them. He gives a
mass of references to separate monographs, but completely ignores the
data they contain on this question. In short, this is a case of a petty
bourgeois completely passing over in silence the question of the
“farm-hands” employed by the thrifty muzhik.


Here are examples:


On page 109 we read: “On the whole, in market gardening as in agriculture,
small-scale production flourishes.”


You look for proof. All you are given is the following:


“According to the industrial

     statistics[3]

for 1895, out of 32,540 orchards and vegetable gardens 13,247=40 per cent
were of an area less than 20 ares; 8,257=25 per cent ranged from 20 to 50
ares; 5,707=14 per cent from 50 ares to one hectare; 3,397=10 per cent
ranged in area from 1

    

to 2 hectares, and only 1,932=6 per cent occupied an area of 2 hectares and
over.”


That is all. And this is supposed to prove that small-scale production is
flourishing in market gardening. This is supposed to be a scientific work by a
man well versed in agronomics. If it is, then we do not know what charlatanry
in science is.


Only 6 per cent have an area of 2 hectares and over, says David. In the very
same statistics from which he takes those figures there are figures showing the
amount of land which these 6 per cent occupy. David ignores those
figures. He ignores them because they demolish his theory. “But more
than half of this area (51.39 per cent),” I wrote concerning those very

       figures,[4]

“is concentrated in the hands of 1,932 proprietors, or 5.94 per
cent of all the market gardeners.” Of these 1,932 market gardeners
1,441 have vegetable gardens ranging from two to five hectares, making
an average of 2.76 hectares per farm and total land amounting to an
average of 109.6 hectares per farm; 491 farmers have vegetable gardens of five
hectares or more, making an average of 16.54 hectares per farm, and total
land amounting to. an average of 134.7 hectares per farm (ibid.).


Thus, only 6 per cent of the market gardeners concentrate in their
hands 51.39 per cent of the total market garden land. They are big capitalists
for whom vegetable gardens are supplementary to capitalist agriculture
(farms of 100 to 135 hectares). Consequently, market gardening is enormously
concentrated capitalistically. But David has the


temerity to assert that “small-scale production is flourishing”,
i.e., production not using hired labour. As to what size farms in market
gardening require hired labourers he gives no information.


That is how the scholarly David handles statistics. An example of the way in
which he handles monographs is provided by

Hecht,[14] the same notorious Hecht quoted by Bulgakov, Hertz, and

      Chernov.[5]

In his “work” David
paraphrases Hecht for the space of two pages (pp. 394-95). But how
does he paraphrase him? Not a word about hired
    

labour. Not a word about the fact that Hecht embellishes the
“settled state” of the factory worker who has a plot of
land, lumping together workers and well-to-do peasants. Not a word about the
fact that while a small number of well-to-do peasants are
“flourishing”, the conditions of the bulk of the peasants are such
that they even have to sell their milk and use cheaper margarine as a
substitute.


David not only says nothing about this; he even declares that “Hecht
quotes extremely interesting data on the high living standards of these
peasants” (p. 395). A grosser example of bourgeois apologetics is
difficult to imagine.


Incidentally, about Hecht’s statement that the peasants sell their milk in
order to buy cheaper margarine. One would think that this is a generally known
fact among economists. As far back as 1847, Marx in The Poverty of
Philosophy referred to the deterioration of the people’s diet under

capitalism.[15] In Russia, ever since the time of

Engelhardt[16] (the 1870s), this fact has been noted very many times by
all who have made a more or less conscientious study of the progress of
capitalism in dairy farming. The “scholarly” David failed to
notice this. He even sneers when socialists point to it.


On pages 427-28 of David’s book we read scoffing remarks about Kautsky,
who says that the amalgamated dairies, which promote the sale of milk by the
peasants, cause a deterioration in the latter’s diet. To enable the
reader to judge the German Narodnik David at his true worth we shall quote his
own words:



   “...All other people are in the habit, when receiving a larger income,
   of using some part of it for the benefit of their stomachs. It is only
   human nature that a man should want to eat something better, if only he has
   a little money to enable him to do so. It is, therefore, very strange that
   the peasant who, as is generally admitted, is getting more money than
   before for his milk and pigs, thanks to the co-operative, should behave
   differently from other mortals,” and so on and so forth.  


This buffoonery of a reactionary petty bourgeois is not worth answering, of
course. It is sufficient to exhibit him to the reading public; it is sufficient
to drag him into the light of day from under the heap of disconnected agronomic
quotations scattered through five hundred and fifty pages.

    

It is sufficient to note that even the bourgeois apologist Hecht,
quoted by David, admits as a fact the deterioration in
diet as a consequence of the substitution of cheap margarine for marketed
milk. This applies to South Germany, the region where small-peasant farming
predominates. Concerning another region, East Prussia, we have the very
similar statement of

Klawki[6]

that the small peasants “consume very little butter and whole
milk”.


David’s bourgeois apologetics can be traced in absolutely all the
questions he deals with. Thus, he extols the dairy co-operatives of Germany and
Denmark in over a score of pages (413-35 and others). He also quotes
statistics... but only on the numerical growth of the co-operatives! He does
not quote the German statistics showing the concentration of
“co-operative” dairy farming iii the hands of big capitalist

       farms.[7]

The Davids have a blind eye for such data in the statistics they
handle!


“The Danish peasants organised in co-operatives,” says David,
“have even excelled the privately owned farms of the big landed
proprietors.” Then follows an example: a quotation from the 46th Report of
a test laboratory to the effect that the butter produced by the co-operatives is
of better quality than that manufactured by the landlord. And David continues:



   “Such results have been achieved by peasants who at one time, on
   their small farms, produced only inferior grades of butter for which they
   obtained only half the price paid for that of the big
   proprietors. Moreover, by and large, we are dealing here with middle
   and small peasants [David’s italics]. In 1898, there were in
   Denmark 179,740.cow-sheds of which only 7,544 or 4 per cent contained 30 or
   more cows each; 49,371 or 27.82 per cent, each contained from 10 to 29
   cows; 122,589, or 68.97 per cent contained less than 10 cows each. More
   than half of these cow-sheds, namely, 70,218, comprising 39.85 per cent of
   the total, contained only from 1 to 3 cows each, i.e., they belonged to
   quite small farms. That the great majority of these small farms belong to
   co-operative organisations is shown by the fact that in 1900 the milk of
   approximately 900,000 cows out of Denmark’s 1,110,000 milch cows was
   delivered to dairy co-operatives” (p. 424).  


Thus argues the scholarly David. He avoids quoting precise data on the
distribution of the cows among the farms

    

in the various groups; that is distasteful to him. But even the fragmentary
figures he does quote show that. he completely distorts the reality. By
comparing the total number of cows with the distribution of cow-sheds according
to the number of cattle in them we get the following picture, which, though
an approximate

      one,[8]

undoubtedly, on the whole, corresponds to the reality:









Denmark
Number of farms (thousands)
Number of cows in them (thousands)
Number of cows per farm




 Farms with 1 to 3 cows
70 
100   
1.43  


 " "  4 to 9 " 
52 
250   
4.81  


 " " 10 to 29 " 
49 
550   
11.22 


 " " 30 or more " 
8  
200   
25.00 


Total
179 
1,100 
6.14  




From these figures it is seen, first, that the concentration of dairy
farming in Denmark is very high. 750,000 cows out of 1,100,000,
i. e., over two-thirds of the total, belong to the big
farms—57,000 out of 179,000, i. e., less than a third of the
total number of farmers. Since each of these farms has ten or more cows,
they certainly do not dispense with hired labour. Thus, David “failed
to notice” that the size of the farms which keep livestock is by no
means small here; Danish farms must not be judged by area of land. David
“failed to notice” that here, as everywhere and always in
capitalist agriculture, a vast number of

    

small farms account for an insignificant share of the total production. The
small farmers number 70,000, i.e., nearly 40 per cent; but they own
one-eleventh of the total number of cows.


Secondly, the figures quoted show that both in Denmark and in Germany the
benefits of co-operation are enjoyed mainly by the
capitalists. If out of 1,100,000 cows the milk of 900,000 is delivered to
the dairy co-operatives, it follows that 200,000 cows remain outside
the “beneficial” scope of co-operative marketing. These are mainly
the cows of the smallest farmers, for we have seen from the figures for Germany
that of the farms up to two hectares, only 0.3 per cent of the total belong to
dairy co-operatives, but of the farms of 100 hectares and over, 35.1 per cent
belong to such co-operatives. Consequently, all this leads us to assume that the
small farmers (70,000 owning 100,000 cows) least enjoy the benefits of
co-operative marketing.


The example of Denmark completely refutes David, since it proves that not the
small, and not the medium, but the big farms predominate in the production of
dairy produce.


To put some life into these lifeless figures and tables and show the
class character of bourgeois agriculture (which the obtuse petty bourgeois
David totally ignores) we shall quote an outstanding fact from the history
of the working-class movement in Denmark. In 1902, the Danish shipowners
reduced the wages of the stokers, who answered by going on strike. The
union to which all the dock workers belonged supported the stokers and also
ceased work. But ... they were unable to make the strike a general one, to
extend it to all the ports of Denmark. “Port Esbjerg [on the west
coast of Denmark, important for trade with England], which plays such a
great part in the. export of Danish agricultural produce, could not be
drawn into the strike because the Danish agricultural co-operatives
declared that they would immediately send the required number of their
members to work on loading the ships, that the Danish peasants would not
allow a stoppage in the export of their

      produce.”[9]


Thus, the Danish co-operatives took the side of the shipowners

    

against the workers and made the strike a failure. It is quite
understandable, of course, that capitalist farmers, owning ten and more cows
each, should support their fellow-capitalists against the workers. What is not
understandable is that writers like David, who gloss over the class struggle,
call themselves socialists.


On the question of combining farming with technical-crop industries (sugar
refining, distilling, etc.) David makes the very same mistake as
Mr. Bulgakov. Like the Russian professor, the German “learned”
opportunist simply copied the tables given in the German enquiry,
without stopping to think what these tables refer to! Kautsky asserts that
sugar production is an example of agricultural large-scale industry. To
refute this David, like Bulgakov, quotes figures showing that there are more
small farms connected with technical-crop industries than big ones (pages 406,
407, and 410 of David’s book). The learned statistician forgot that, in
general, there are more small farms than big ones. Instead of showing what
percentage of the farms in each group is combined with technical industries he
copied a table giving the percentage of such farms in each group in relation to
the total number of farms. I have already dealt in detail with this mistake
made by Mr.

      Bulgakov.[10]

It only remains for me to point out that the equally
scientifically conscientious Ed. David equally failed to take the trouble to
glance at the figures showing what share of the land under sugar beet
is in the hands of capitalists.


What a comical degree of soul affinity exists between the German opportunist and
the Russian liberal professor can be seen from the fact that not only do they
both handle statistics with the same carelessness and lack of skill, but both
quote Marx with the same carelessness. Like Bulgakov David recognises the
“law of diminishing returns”. True, he tries to expound it with
special limitations, to surround it with special conditions, but that does not
improve matters in the least. For example, on page 476, David says that
“this law does not at all concern the change of productivity in the
transition from one scientific-technical stage

    

of agriculture to another. It concerns exclusively the change of
productivity at one and the same scientific-technical stage.” This is
exactly the limitation of the notorious law that I mentioned when
opposing Mr.

      Bulgakov,[11]

and I at once added that this makes the “law” “so
relative that it cannot be called a law, or even a cardinal
specific feature of agriculture”.


Nevertheless, David continues to elevate this law to a specific feature of
agriculture. The result is a hopeless muddle, for if
“scientific-technical” conditions remain unchanged, additional
investments of capital are extremely restricted in industry too.


“The backwardness of agriculture,” says David in the concluding
chapter, “is due, in the first place, to the conservatism of organic
nature, which finds expression in the law of diminishing returns”
(501). This conclusion throws overboard the very thesis that has just been put
forward, namely, that the “law” does not apply to transitions to a
higher technical stage! “The conservatism of organic nature” is
simply a verbal subterfuge of reactionary philistinism, which is incapable of
understanding the social conditions that hinder particularly the
development of agriculture. David shows that he does not understand that among
those social conditions are, first, the survivals of feudalism in
agriculture, the inequality of rights of agricultural labourers, and so on and
so forth; and secondly, ground rent, which inflates prices and
embodies high rents in the price of land.


“We think,” writes David, “that German agriculture today could
not produce the total quantity of grain required at the level of productivity
which, thanks to overseas production, is considered normal from the standpoint
of world economy. The law of diminishing returns does not permit an unlimited
increase in the quantity of products on a limited area of land without a
diminution in productivity” (519)—the last sentence is in italics
in David’s book.


Take a look, if you please, at this economist! He declares that the
“law” of diminishing returns deals exclusively with

    

the change of productivity at one and the same scientific-technical stage
(476). Yet he draws the conclusion: “the law does not permit an
‘unlimited’ increase in the quantity of products!” (519). Why, then, does
it follow that German agriculture could not be raised to the next
“scientific technical stage” if this were not prevented by the
private ownership of the land, by inflated rent, by the lack of rights, the
downtrodden state, and degradation of the agricultural labourer, by the
barbarous medieval privileges of the Junkers?


The bourgeois apologist naturally tries to ignore the social and historical
causes of the backwardness of agriculture and throws the blame on the
“conservatism of organic nature” and on the “law of
diminishing returns”. That notorious law contains nothing but apologetics
and obtuseness.


To cover up his shameful retreat to the old prejudices of bourgeois political
economy David, exactly like Bulgakov, presents us with a falsified quotation
from Marx. David quotes the same page of Volume III of
Capital (III. B., II. Teil, S. 277) which Mr. Bulgakov quotes! (See
page 481 of David’s book and our previous criticism of Mr.

      Bulgakov.[12]

)



What I have said about the scientific conscientiousness of
Mr. Bulgakov applies wholly to David as well. Mr. Bulgakov garbled a
passage from Marx. David con fined him self to quoting the first words of the
same passage: “Concerning decreasing productiveness of the soil with
successive investments of capital, see Liebig” (Das Kapital,
III. B., II. Teil,

S. 277).[17] Like Bulgakov, David distorted Marx, making it appear to the
reader that this is the only reference by Marx. Actually, we repeat, anyone
who has read Volume III of Capital (and the second part of Volume
II of Theorien über

den Mehrwert[18]) knows that the opposite is the case. Marx points
out dozens of times that he regards cases of diminished
productivity of additional investments of capital as being quite as
legitimate and quite as possible as cases of increased
productivity of additional investments of capital.

 

In a footnote on page 481 David promises in the future to examine the
connection between this law and rent, and also “to examine critically
Marx’s attempt to develop and extend the theory of rent, while
rejecting the basis given by Malthus and Ricardo”.


We venture to predict that David’s critical examination will be a
repetition of bourgeois prejudices à la Mr. Bulgakov, or...
à la Comrade Maslov.


Let us now examine another radically erroneous thesis of David’s. To refute his
apologetics or his distortion of statistics is a very thankless task. On the
question we are now about to deal with we have some new data which enable us to
contrast a factual picture of reality with the theories of present-day
philistinism.

 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 133-34.—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 194-95.—Ed.  

[3]
Evidently, this is the way Mr. Grossman, the editor of the translation,
translated the word Betriebsstatistik. That’s the trouble
with Russian translations! It should have been translated: “statistics of
agricultural enterprises”.  —Lenin

[4]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 162-67.—Ed.  

[5]
See present edition, Vol. 5, p. 215.—Ed.  

[6]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 176-77.—Ed.  

[7]
Ibid., p. 216.—Ed.  

[8]
These figures are approximate, first, because the number of cows is
given for 1900, while the number of farms is given for 1898; secondly,
because we had to determine the number of cows in each group approximately,
since David does not give exact figures. We have put the big farms share
lower than it actually is: 7,544 farms have 30 or more cows each. Thus,
even if we take the minimum, i. e., 30 cows per farm, we get
7,544x30=226,32O cows. We have taken a smaller figure, otherwise
the size of the small farms would approach too closely to the minimum and
not to the maximum limits of the groups.  —Lenin

[9]
Emil Helms, Die socialdemokratische und gewerkschaftliche Bewegung
in Dänemark, Leipzig, 1907, S. 138.  —Lenin

[10]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 209-10.—Ed.  

[11]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 108-09.—Ed.  

[12]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 116-19.—Ed.  
 



[13]
Lenin is referring to the book by Franz Bensing Der Einfluss der
landwirtschaftlichen Maschinen auf Volks- und Privatwirtschaft,
Breslau, 1897.

 



[14]
Lenin is referring to M. Hecht’s book Drei Dörfer der
badischen Hard, Leipzig, 1895.

 



[15]
See Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Moscow, pp. 68-70.

 



[16]
Lenin is referring to the letter of the well-known Narodnik publicist
A. N. Engelhardt “From the Countryside” published in the
journal Otechestvenniye Zapiski (Fatherland Notes).

 



[17]
See Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959,
p. 727. Lenin’s references are to Vol. III of the German edition of
1894 and he gives all quotations in his own translation.

 



[18]
See Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert, 2. Teil,
Berlin, Dietz Verlag, 1959.

 

 
  


|

Livestock in Small and Large Farms

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## XI









Lenin: 1907/agrarcom: Livestock in Small and Large Farms







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”



    

XI
Livestock in Small and Large Farms

The “critics” or Bernsteinians in the agrarian question, when
defending small-scale production, very often refer to the following
circumstance. Small farmers keep far more cattle on a given unit of land than
big farmers. Consequently, they say, the small farmers manure their land
better. Their farms are on a technically higher level, for manure plays a
decisive role in modern agriculture, and the manure obtained from cattle kept on
the farm is far superior to any artificial fertilisers.


Ed. David in his book Socialism and Agriculture attaches decisive
significance to this argument (pp. 326, 526, and 527 of the Russian
translation). He writes in italics:

“manure is the soul of agriculture” (p. 308), and makes this truism
the main basis of his defence of small-scale farming. He quotes German
statistics showing that the small farms keep far more cattle per unit of land
than the big ones. David is convinced that these figures definitely decide in
his favour the question of the advantages of large-scale or small-scale
production in agriculture.


Let us examine this theory and the manurial soul of agriculture more closely.

 

The main argument advanced by David and his numerous adherents among
the bourgeois economists is a statistical one. They compare the number of
cattle (per unit of land) on different-sized farms, it being tacitly
assumed that identical quantities are compared, i. e., that an equal number
of cattle of a particular kind represents an equal agricultural value, so
to speak, on both big and small farms. It is assumed that an equal number
of cattle provides an equal quantity of manure, that the cattle on big and
small farms have more or less the same qualities, and so forth.


Obviously, the cogency of the argument in question depends entirely
upon whether this usually tacit assumption is correct. Is this postulate
correct? If we pass from the bare and rough, indiscriminate statistics to
an analysis of the socio-economic conditions of small-scale and large-scale
agricultural production as a whole we shall find at once that that
postulate takes for granted the very thing that has still to be
proved. Marxism affirms that the conditions under which cattle are kept
(and also, as we have seen, the tending of the land and the conditions of
the agricultural worker) are worse in small-scale than in
large-scale farming. Bourgeois political economy asserts the opposite, and
the Bernsteinians repeat this assertion, namely, that thanks to the
diligence of the small farmer, cattle are kept under far better
conditions on a small farm than on a big one. To find data which would
throw light on this question requires quite different statistics
from those with which David operates. It requires a statistical study not
of the number of cattle on different-sized farms, but of their
quality. Such a study exists in German economic literature, and perhaps
more than one. It is highly characteristic that David, who filled his book
with a mass of irrelevant quotations from all kinds of works on agronomics,
completely ignored the attempts to be found in the literature to reveal the
internal conditions of small-scale and large-scale farming by means of
detailed research. We shall acquaint the reader with one of those
researches undeservedly ignored by David.


Drechsler, a well-known German writer on agricultural questions, published the
results of a monographic “agricultural

    

statistical investigation”, which, he rightly said, “for the
accuracy of its results is surely without equal”. In the Province of
Hanover, 25 settlements were investigated (22 villages and three landlord
estates), and data showing not only the amount of land and number of
cattle, but also the quality of the cattle were collected
separately for each farm. To determine the quality of the cattle a
particularly accurate method was adopted: the

 live weight[1]

of each animal was ascertained in kilogrammes “on the basis of the
most careful possible appraisal of the individual animals—an
appraisal made by experts”. Data were obtained giving the live weight
of each type of animal on different-sized farms. The investigation was
carried out twice: the first in 1875, the second in 1884. The figures were
published by

      Drechsler[2]

in rough form for each of three estates and for three groups of villages,
the peasant farms in the villages being divided into seven groups according
to the amount of land (over 50 hectares; 25 to 50; 12.5 to 25; 7.5 to 12.5;
2.5 to 7.5; 1.25 to 2.5, and up to 1.25 hectares). Considering that
Drechsler’s figures relate to eleven different types of animals, the
reader will realise how complicated all these tables are. To obtain
summarised figures which will enable us to draw general and basic
conclusions, we shall divide all the farms into five main
groups: (a) big estates; (b) peasant farms having over 25 hectares of
lands; (c) 7.5 to 25 hectares; (d) 2.5 to 7.5 hectares; and (e) less than
2.5 hectares.


The number of farms in these groups and the amount of land in them in 1875 and
in 1884 were as follows:

    

    



 
1875
1884


 
Num-beroffarms
Amountofland
Landperfarm
Num-beroffarms
Amountofland
Landperfarm


 
(Hectares)




(a) Estates
3
689
229
3
766
255


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
51
1,949
38
58
2,449
42


(c) " 7.5 to 25 ha
274
3,540
13
248
3,135
12


(d) " 2.5 to 7.5 "
442
1,895
4.3
407
1,774
4.3


(e) " up to 2.5 "
1,449
1,279
0.88
1,109
1,027
0.9


Total
2,219
9,352
4.2
1,825
9,151
5.0




To explain these figures we shall deal first of all with the economic
types of the different-sized farms. Drechsler considers that all the farms
of 7.5 hectares and over employ hired labour. Thus, we get (in 1875) 325
peasant farms employing workers. All the farmers having up to 2.5 hectares
have to hire themselves out. Of the farmers having 2.5 to 7.5 hectares
(average=4.3 ha) half, according to Drechsler’s calculations, do not
employ labour, while the other half have to provide hired labourers. Thus,
of the total peasant farms, 325 are capitalist farms, 221. are small
“Trudovik” farms (as our Narodniks would call them) which do
not employ labour nor provide hired labourers, and 1,670 are
semi-proletarian, which provide hired labourers.


Unfortunately, Drechsler’s grouping differs from that of the general
German statistics, which regard as middle peasants those having from 5 to 20
hectares. Nevertheless, it remains an undoubted fact that the majority of these
middle peasants do not dispense with hired workers. The “middle
peasants” in Germany are. small capitalists. The peasants who do not hire
labour and do not hire themselves out constitute an insignificant minority: 221
out of 2,216, i.e., one-tenth.


Thus, the groups of farms which we have selected according to their economic
type are characterised as follows:

(a) big capitalist;

(b) middle capitalist

(“Grossbauer”);

(c) small capitalist;

(d) small peasant; and

(e) semi-proletarian.

 

The total number of farms and the total amount of land they occupied
diminished between 1875 and 1884. This decrease mainly applied to the small
farms: the number of farms occupying up to 2.5 hectares dropped from
1,449 to 1,109, i. e., by 340, or nearly one-fourth. On the other
hand, the number of the biggest farms (over 25 hectares) increased from 54
to 61, and the amount of land they occupied increased from 2,638 to 3,215
hectares, i.e., by 577 hectares. Consequently, the general improvement in
farming and the raising of agricultural standards in the given area, about
which Drechsler goes into raptures, signify the concentration of
agriculture in the hands of a diminishing number of owners:
“Progress” has pushed out of agriculture nearly 400 farmers out
of 2,219 (by 1884 there remained 1,825), and raised the average amount of
land per farm among the remainder from 4.2 to 5 hectares. In one locality
capitalism concentrates the given branch of agriculture and pushes a number
of small farmers into the ranks of the proletariat. In another locality the
growth of commercial farming creates a number of new small farms (for
example dairy farming in suburban villages and in entire countries which
export their produce, such as Denmark). In still other localities the
splitting up of the medium farms increases the number of small
farms. Indiscriminate statistics conceal all these processes, for the study
of which detailed investigations must be made.


The progress of agriculture in the locality described found particular
expression in the improvement of livestock rearing, although the total head of
livestock diminished. In 1875, there were 7,208 head of livestock (in terms of
cattle); in 1884 there were 6,993. Going by the gross statistics, this decrease
in the total number of livestock would be a sign of decline in livestock
breeding. Actually, there was an improvement in the quality of the stock, so
that, if we take not the number of animals, but their total “live
weight”, we shall get 2,556,872 kilogrammes in 1875 and 2,696,107
kilogrammes in 1884.


Capitalist progress in livestock rearing shows itself not only, sometimes even
not so much, in an increase in numbers as in an improvement in quality, in the
replacement of inferior by better cattle, increase in fodder, etc.

    

    
Average Number of Livestock per Farm


 
1875
1884


 
Cattle
Otherlive-stock
Total
Cattle
Otherlive-stock
Total


 
(in terms of cattle)




 (a) Estates
105
69
174
110
41
151


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
13.2
11.0
24.2
13.7
10.5
24.2


(c) " 7.5 to 25 ha
5.4
3.8
9.2
4.9
4.2
9.1


(d) " 2.5 to 7.5 "
2.2
1.4
3.6
2.2
1.8
4.0


(e) " up to 2.5 "
0.3
0.6
0.9
0.4
0.7
1.1


Total
1.7
1.5
3.2
2.0
1.8
3.8




On the biggest farms the number of cattle diminished. In the smallest the number
grew, and the smaller the farm the more rapid was the increase. This seems to
show progress in small-scale and regression in large-scale production, that is,
confirmation of David’s theory, does it not?


But we have only to take the figures of the average weight of the
cattle for this illusion to be dispelled.





 
Average weight per animal (kilogrammes)


 
1875
1884


 
Cattle
Otherlive-stock[3]

Total
Cattle
Otherlive-stock
Total




(a) Estates
562
499
537
617
624
619


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
439
300
376
486
349
427


(c) " 7.5 to 25 ha
409
281
356
432
322
382


(d) " 2.5 to 7.5 "
379
270
337
404
287
352


(e) " up to 2.5 "
350
243
280
373
261
301


Average 
412
256
354
446
316
385



 

The first conclusion to be drawn from these figures is that the bigger the
farm the better the quality of the cattle. The difference in this respect
between the capitalist farms and the small-peasant, or semi-proletarian,
farms is enormous. For example, in 1884, this difference between the
biggest and smallest farms was over one hundred per cent: the
average weight of the average animal on the big capitalist farms was 619
kilogrammes; on the semi-proletarian farms it was 301 kilogrammes, i.e.,
less than half! One can judge from this how superficial are the arguments
of David and those who think like him when they assume that the quality of
the cattle is the same on large and small farms.


We have already mentioned above that cattle are generally kept worse in small
farms. Now we have factual confirmation of this. The figures for live weight
give us a very accurate idea of all the conditions under which the
cattle are kept: feeding, housing, work, care—all this is summarised, so
to speak, in the results which found statistical expression in Drechsler’s
monograph. It turns out that for all the “diligence” displayed by
the small farmer in care for his cattle—a diligence extolled by our

Mr. V.V.[9] and by the German David—he is unable even
approximately to match the advantages of large-scale production, which
yields products of a quality twice as good. Capitalism condemns the small
peasant to eternal drudgery, to a wasteful expenditure of labour, for with
insufficient means, insufficient fodder, poor quality cattle, poor housing,
and so forth, the most careful tending is a sheer waste of labour. In its
appraisal bourgeois political economy puts in the forefront not this ruin
and oppression of the peasant by capitalism, but the
“diligence” of the toiler (toiling for the benefit of
capital under the worst conditions of exploitation).  

The second conclusion to be drawn from the figures quoted above is that the
quality of cattle improved during the ten years both on the average and in all
the categories of farms. But as a result of this general improvement, the
difference in the conditions of livestock rearing in the large and small farms
became not less, but more glaring. The general improvement widened
rather than narrowed the gulf between the large and small farms, for in this
process

    

of improvement large-scale farming outstrips small-scale farming. Here is a
comparison of the average weight of the average animal by groups in 1875
and in 1884.





 
Average weight ofaverage ani-mal in
    kilo-grammes
In-crease
Percentin-crease


1875
1884




(a) Estates
537
619
+82
+15.2


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
376
427
+51
+13.6


(c) " ” 7.5 to 25 ha
356
382
+26
+7.3


(d) " " 2.5 to 7.5 "
337
352
+15
+4.4


(e) " " up to 2.5 "
280
301
+21
+7.5


Average
354
385
+31
+8.7




The improvement is greatest on the big capitalist farms, then come the
medium-sized capitalist farms; it is entirely negligible on the small peasant
farms and very inconsiderable in the rest. Like the great majority of
agronomists who write on problems of agricultural economics, Drechsler noted
only the technical aspect of the matter. In the fifth conclusion he draws from
the comparison between 1875 and 1884 he says: “A very considerable
improvement in.the keeping of

      livestock[4]

has taken place: a reduction in the
number of cattle and an improvement in quality; the aver age live weight per
animal increased considerably in each of the three groups of

      villages.[5]

That
shows that the marked improvement in cattle rearing, feeding, and tending of
cattle was more or less general (ziemlich allgemein).”

 

The words “more or less general”, which we have underlined,
show precisely that the author ignored the socio-economic aspect of the
question; “more” applies to the big farms, “less”
to the small ones. Drechsler overlooked this, because he paid attention
only to the figures concerning the groups of villages and not groups of
farms of different types.


Let us now pass to the figures on draught animals, which throw light on farming
conditions in the narrow sense of the term “agriculture”. In regard
to the number of draught animals the farms under review are characterised by
the following figures:





 
Average number of draught animals per farm


1875
1884




(a) Estates
27
44


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
4.7
5.5


(c) " " 7.5.to 25 ha
2.1
2.4


(d) " " 2.5 to 7.5 "
1.3
1.5


(e) " " up to 2.5 "
0.07
0.16


Average
0.7
1.0




Thus, the overwhelming majority of the semi-proletarian farms (up to 2.5
hectares; in 1884, they numbered 1,109 out of 1,825) had no draught animals at
all. They cannot even be regarded as agricultural farms in the real sense of the
term. In any case, as regards the use of draught animals, there can be no
comparison between the big farms and those farms of which 93 or 84 per cent
employ no draught animals at all. If, however, we compare the big capitalist
farms with the small peasant farms in this respect, we shall find that the
former (group a) have 132 draught animals to 766 hectares of land, and the
latter (group d) 632 to 1,774 hectares (1884), i.e., the former has one draught
animal to approximately six hectares, and the latter one to
approximately three hectares. Obviously, the small farms spend twice as

    

much on the keeping of draught animals. Small-scale production implies
dispersion of the technical means of farming and a squandering of labour as a
result of this dispersion.


This dispersion is partly due to the fact that the small farmers are obliged to
use draught animals of an inferior quality, that is, to use cows as
draught animals. The percentage of cows in relation to the total number of
draught animals was as follows:





 
1875
1884




(a) Estates
–
–


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
–
2.5%


(c) " " 7.5 to 25 ha
6.3%
11.4%


(d)" ” 2.5 to 7.5 "
60.7%
64.9%


(e)" ” up to 2.5 "
67.7%
77.9%


Average 
27.0%
33.4%




From this it is clearly evident that the use of cows in field work is
increasing, and that cows are the principal draught animals on the
semi-proletarian and small-peasant farms. David is inclined to regard this as
progress in exactly the same way as Drechsler, who takes entirely the bourgeois
standpoint. In his conclusions Drechsler writes:

“A large number of the small farms have gone over to the use of cows as
draught animals, which is more expedient for them.” It is “more
expedient” for the small farmers because it is cheaper. And it is
cheaper because inferior draught animals are substituted for better ones. The
progress of the small peasants which rouses the admiration of the Drechslers
and Davids is quite on a par with the progress of the vanishing hand weavers,
who are going over to worse and worse materials, waste products of the mills.


The average weight of draught cows in 1884 was 381

     kilogrammes,[6]

that of draught horses being 482 kilogrammes,

    

and oxen 553 kilogrammes. The latter type of draught animal, the strongest,
accounted in 1884 for more than half of the total draught animals of the
big capitalist farmers, for about a fourth of those of the medium and
small capitalists, for less than a fifth of those of the small peasants,
and for less than a tenth of those of the semi-proletarian
farmers. Consequently, the bigger the farm the higher the quality of the
draught animals. The average weight of an average draught animal was as
follows:









 
1875
1884




(a) Estates
554
598


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
542
537


(c) " 7.5 to 25 ha 
488
482


(d) " 2.5.to 7.5 "
404
409


(e) " up to 2.5 "
377
378


Average
464
460




Consequently, on the whole, the draught animals have
deteriorated. Actually, in the large capitalist farms we see a
considerable improvement;.in all the others there was either no change, or a
deterioration. As regards the quality of draught animals, the difference between
large-scale and small-scale production also increased between 1875 and
1884. The use of cows as draught animals by the small farmers has become general
practice in

       Germany.[7]

Our figures show with documentary accuracy that this practice denotes a
deterioration of the conditions of agricultural production, the increasing
poverty of the peasantry.


To complete our survey of the data in Drechsler’s mono graph, we shall
quote an estimate of the number and weight of all animals per unit of land area,
i. e., the estimate which

    

David made on the basis of the general statistics of German agriculture:





 
Per hectare of land there were


Total number oflivestock (in termsof
    cattle) 
Weight of totallivestock inkilogrammes


1875
1884
1875
1884




(a) Estates
0.77
0.59
408
367


(b) Farms of 25 ha and over
0.63
0.57
238
244


(c)" ” 7.5 to 25 ha
0.71
0.72
254
277


(d)" ” 2.5 to 7.5 "
0.85
0.94
288
328


(e) " " up to 2.5 "
1.02
1.18
286
355


Average
0.77
0.76
273
294




The figures of the number of livestock per hectare of land are the figures to
which David confines himself. In our example, as in German agriculture as a
whole, these figures show a reduction in the number of livestock per
unit of land area in the big farms. In 1884, for example, the semi-proletarian
farms had exactly twice as many cattle per hectare as the big capitalist farms
(1.18 as against 0.59). But we are already aware that this estimate seeks to
compare the incomparable. The actual relationship between the farms is shown by
the figures for weight of livestock: in this respect, too, large-scale
production is in a better position than small-scale, for it has the
maximum of livestock in weight per unit of land area, and consequently,
also the maximum of manure. Thus, David’s conclusion that, on the
whole, the small farms are better supplied with manure is the very opposite of
the truth. Moreover, it must be borne in mind, first, that our figures do not
cover artificial fertilisers, which only well-to-do farmers can afford to buy;
and secondly, that comparing the amount of livestock by weight puts cattle and
smaller animals on the same level, for example, 45,625 kilogrammes—the
weight of 68 head of cattle in the big farms and 45,097 kilogrammes—the
weight of 1,786 goats in the small farms (1884). Actually,

    

the advantage the big farms enjoy as regards supplies of manure is greater
than that shown in our

       figures.[8]


Summary: by means of the phrase “manure is the soul of agriculture”,
David evaded socio-economic relations in livestock farming in particular and
presented the matter in an utterly false light.


Large-scale production in capitalist agriculture has a tremendous advantage over
small-scale production as regards the quality of livestock in general, and of
draught animals in particular, as regards the conditions under which the,
livestock is kept, its improvement, and its utilisation for providing manure.

 

Notes
 

[1]
David is well aware of this method, employed by agronomists, of
ascertaining the live weight of animals. On page 367 he tells us in detail
the live weight of different breeds of beef and dairy cattle,
draught animals, etc. He copies these data from the agronomists. It never
occurs to him that what matters to an economist in general, and to a
socialist in particular, is not the difference in the breeds of cattle, but
the difference in the conditions under which they are kept in
small and large farms, in “peasant” and in capitalist farming.
—Lenin

[2]
For 1875 in Schriften des Vereins für Sozialpolitik, Band
XXIV, S. 112 (“Bäuerliche Zustände”, B. III), and for
1884 in Thiel’s landwirtschaftliche Jahrbücher, Band XV
(1886).  —Lenin

[3]
The various other types of livestock are expressed in terms of cattle
according to the usual standards. For one year, and for one of the eleven
types of animals, the number given is approximate: the figures refer only
to weight, not to the number of cattle.  —Lenin

[4]
Drechsler speaks here of all cattle except draught animals (called
Nutzvieh). Further we quote figures on draught animals
separately. The general conclusion remains the same, whatever type or type
groups of animals we take.  —Lenin

[5]
Drechsler divides the 22 villages into three groups according to
geographical location and other farming conditions. We have taken only the
summarised data in order not to overburden this article with figures. The
conclusions remain the same, whatever groups of villages we take.  —Lenin

[6]
The average weight of cows not employed for field work was 421
kilogrammes.  —Lenin

[7]
Concerning this see above, Chapter VIII, “General Statistics of
German Agriculture”. (See present edition, Vol. 5,
pp. 194-205—Ed.)  —Lenin

[8]
Let us recall the statement made by Klawki, quoted above (Chapter VI)
(see present edition, Vol. 5, p. 171.—Ed.).  “The
small farmers have inferior manure, their straw is shorter, it is largely
used as fodder (which also means that the feed is inferior), and less straw
is used for bedding.”  —Lenin
 



[9]
V. V.—pseudonym of V. Vorontsov, the ideologist of the
liberal Narodism of the eighties and nineties of the last century.



 
  

The “Work” of the German Bulgakov, E. David

|

The “Ideal Country” from the Standpoint of the Opponents of Marxism on the Agrarian Question[10101010 10101010] 

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## XII









Lenin: 1907/agrarcom: The 'Ideal Country' from the Standpoint of the Opponents of Marxism on the Agrarian Question[10101010 10101010] 







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”



    

XII
The “Ideal Country” from the Standpoint of
the Opponents of Marxism on the Agrarian

      Question[1]


Agrarian relations and the agrarian system in Denmark are especially interesting
for the economist. We have already

seen[2]

that Ed. David, the
principal representative of revisionism in contemporary literature on the
agrarian question, strongly stresses the example of the Danish agricultural
unions and Danish (supposedly) “small peasant” farming. Heinrich
Pudor, whose work Ed. David uses, calls Denmark “the ideal country of
agricultural

       co-operation”.[3]

In Russia, too, the exponents of liberal and Narodnik

    

views no less frequently resort to Denmark as their “trump
card” against Marxism in support of the theory of the vitality of
small-scale production in agriculture—take, for example, the speech of the
liberal Hertzenstein in the First Duma and that of the Narodnik Karavayev in the
Second Duma.


Compared with other European countries, “small-peasant” farming
is indeed most widespread in Denmark; and agriculture, which has managed to
adapt itself to the new requirements and conditions of the market, is most
prosperous there. If “prosperity” is possible for small-scale
farming in countries with commodity production, then, of course, of all European
countries, Denmark is most favourably situated in that respect. A close study of
the agrarian system in Denmark is, therefore, doubly interesting. We shall see
from the example of a whole country what methods are employed by the
revisionists in the agrarian question, and what the main features of the
capitalist agrarian system really are in the “ideal” capitalist
country.


Denmark’s agricultural statistics are compiled on the model of those of
other European countries. In some respects, however, they give more detailed
information and more elaborate figures, which enable one to study aspects of the
question that usually remain in the shade. Let us start with the general data on
the distribution of farms by groups according to area. We shall calculate the
“hartkorn”, the customary measure of land in Denmark, in terms of
hectares, counting 10 hectares to one hartkorn, as indicated in the Danish
agricultural

     statistics.[4]


Danish agricultural statistics give information on the distribution of farms for
the years 1873, 1885, and 1895. All the farms are divided into 11 groups, as
follows: owning no land; up to 0.3 hectares (to be more precise: up to
1/32 of a hartkorn); 0.3 to 2.5 ha; 2.5 to 10 ha; 10 to 20 ha;
20 to 40 ha; 40 to 80 ha; 80 to 120 ha; 120 to 200 ha; 200 to 300 ha; 300 ha
and over. To avoid the attention of the reader

    

being excessively dispersed, we shall combine these groups into six larger
groups.

    

    







 
1873
1885
1895


No.offarms
Percent
Hect-ares
Percent
No.offarms
Percent
Hect-ares
Percent
No.offarms
Percent
Hect-ares
Percent




Owning no land
31,253
13.3
—
—
35,329
13.6
—
—
32,946
12.4
—
—


Up to 2.5 ha 
65,490
27.9
54,340
1.5
82,487
31.8
62,260
1.7
92,656
34.8
63,490
1.8


2.5 to 10 " 
65,672
27.9
333,760
9.1
67,773
26.2
345,060
9.5
66,491
25.0
341,020
9.4


10 to 40 " 
41,671
17.7
928,310
25.5
43,740
16.9
966,850
26.5
44,557
16.8
981,070
26.8


40 to 120 " 
29,288
12.5
1,809,590
49.6
27,938
10.8
1,722,820
47.1
27,301
10.3
1,691,950
46.4


120 ha and over
1,856
0.7
522,410
14.3
1,953
0.7
551,530
15.2
2,031
0.7
568,220
15.6


Total
235,230
100.0
3,648,410
100.0
259,220
100.0
3,648,520
100.0
265,982
100.0
3,645,750
100.0





The main conclusion to be drawn first of all from these data—one which
bourgeois political economists and the revisionists who follow in their
footsteps usually lose sight of—is that the bulk of the land in Denmark is
owned by farmers engaged in capitalist agriculture. There can be no doubt that
not only farmers owning 120 hectares and over run their farms with the aid of
hired labour, but also those owning 40 hectares or more. These two higher groups
accounted for only 11 per cent of the total number of farms in 1895, but they
owned 62 per cent, or more than three-fifths of the total land. The basis of
Danish agriculture is large-scale and medium capitalist
agriculture. All the talk about a “peasant country” and
“small-scale farming” is Sheer bourgeois apologetics, a distortion
of the facts by various titled and untitled ideologists of capital.


It should be mentioned in this connection that in Den mark, as in other European
countries where the capitalist system of agriculture is fully established, the
share of the higher capitalist groups in the whole national economy changes only
slightly in the course of time. In 1873, 13.2 per cent of the capitalist farms
occupied 63.9 per cent of all the land; in 1885, 11.5 per cent of the farms
occupied 62.3 per cent of the land. This stability of large-scale farming must
always be borne in mind when comparing the data for different years; for it is
often possible to notice in the literature that the main features of
the given socio economic system are glossed over by means of such comparisons
concerning changes in details.


As in other European countries, the mass of small farms in Denmark account for
an insignificant part of the total agricultural production. In 1895, the number
of farms with areas of up to 10 hectares accounted for 72.2 per cent of the
total number of farms, but they occupied only 11.2 per cent of the land. In the
main, this ratio was the same in 1885 and in 1873. Often the small farms belong
to semi proletarians—as we have seen, the German statistics bore this out
fully in regard to farms of up to two hectares, arid partly also in regard to
farms of up to five hectares. Later

    

on, when quoting figures of livestock owned by the farms in the various groups,
we shall see that there can be no question of any really independent and more or
loss stable agriculture as far as the bulk of these notorious representatives of
“small-scale farming” are concerned. 47.2 per cent, i. e., nearly
half of the farms are proletarian or semi-proletarian (those owning no land and
those owning up to 2.5 hectares); 25 per cent, i.e., a further quarter of the
farms (2.5 to 10 hectares), belong to needy small peasants— such is the
basis of the “prosperity” of agricultural capitalism in
Denmark. Of course, land area statistics can give us only a general idea in
total figures of a country with highly developed commercial livestock
farming. As the reader will see, however, the figures of livestock, which we
examine in detail below, only strengthen the conclusions that have been
drawn.


Now let us see what changes took place in Denmark between 1873 and 1895 in the
distribution of land as between big and small farms. What strikes us immediately
here is the typically capitalist increase at the extremes, and the diminution in
the proportion of medium farms. Taking the number of agricultural farms (not
counting farms with out land), the proportion of the smallest farms, those up to
2.5 hectares, increased 27.9 per cent in 1873, 31.8 per cent in 1885,
and 34.8 per cent in 1895. The proportion diminished in all
the medium groups, and only in the highest group, 120 hectares and
over, did it remain unchanged (0.7 per cent). The percentage of the total land
occupied by the largest farms, 120 hectares and over, increased, being
14.3 per cent, 15.2 per cent, and 15.6 per cent in the respective years; there
was also an increase, but not to the same extent, among the medium
peasant farms (those from 10 to 40 hectares: 25.5 per cent, 26.5 per cent, and
26.8 per cent for the respective years), while the total number of farms in this
group diminished. There is an irregular in crease in the farms of 2.5
to 10 hectares (9.1 per cent, 9.5 per cent, and 9.4 per cent for the respective
years) and a steady increase in the smallest farms (1.5 per cent, 1.7
per cent, and 1.8 per cent). As a result, we have a very clearly marked tendency
towards growth of the biggest and smallest farms. To obtain a clearer idea of
this phenomenon we

    

must take the average area of farms according to groups for the respective
years. Here are the figures:





Groups of farms
Average area of farms (hectares)


1873
1885
1895




Up to 2.5 ha
0.83
0.75
0.68


2.5 to 10 "
5.08
5.09
5.13


40 to 40
22.28
22.08
22.01


40 to 12O
61.00
61.66
61.97


120 ha and over
281.40
282.30
279.80


Average
15.50
14.07
13.70




From these statistics we see that in the majority of groups the area of farms is
extremely stable. The fluctuations are insignificant, being one to two per cent
(for example:

279.8 to 282.3 hectares, or 22.01 to 22.28 hectares, etc.). The
only exception is seen in the smallest farms, which are
undoubtedly splitting up: a decrease in the average area of those
farms (up to 2.5 hectares) by ten per cent between 1873 and 1885 (from 0.83
hectares to 0.75 hectares) and also between 1885 and 1895. The general
increase in the total number of farms in Denmark is proceeding with almost
no change in the total area of land (between 1885 and 1895 there was even a
slight decrease in the total area of land). The increase in the main
affects the smallest farms. Thus, between 1873 and 1895 the total number of
farms increased by 30,752, while the number of farms up to 2.5 hectares
increased by 27,166. Clearly, this decrease in the average area of all
farms in Denmark (15.5 hectares in 1873, 14.1 in 1885, and 13.7 in 1895)
really signifies nothing more than the splitting-up of the
smallest farms.


The phenomenon we have noted becomes still more striking when we take the
smaller divisions of groups. In the preface to the Danish agricultural
statistics for 1895 (Dan marks Statistik, etc. Danmarks Jordbrug,
4-de Raekke,

    

Nr. 9,

       litra C)[5]

the compilers show the following changes in the number of
farms according to groups:





Groups of farms
Per cent increase or decrease 


1885 to 1895
1873 to 1885




300 ha and Over
+4.2
+5.0


200 to 300 ha
0
+6.1


120 to 200 "
+5.2
+5.1


80 to 120 "
—1.5
—2.1


40 to 80 "
—2.4
—5.0


20 to 40 "
+1.0
+3.6


10 to 20 "
+2.8
+6.5


2.5 to 10 "
—1.9
+3.2


0.3 to 2.5 "
+2.1
+17.8


0 to 0.3 "
+25.1
+37.9




Thus, the increase takes place in dwarf farms, which are either farms
devoted to the cultivation of special crops or wage workers’
“farms”.  

This conclusion is worth noting, because apologist professorial
“science” is inclined to deduce from the decrease in the
average area of all farms that small-scale production is beating
large-scale production in agriculture. Actually we see progress in the
largest scale agriculture, stability in the sizes of farms in all groups
except the very smallest, and the splitting-up of the farms in
this last group. This splitting-up must be ascribed to the decline and
impoverishment of small-scale farming: another possible explanation,
namely, the transition from agriculture in the narrow sense of the word to
livestock farming, cannot be applied to all the smallest farms, for this
transition is taking place in all groups, as we shall see in a
moment. For the purpose of judging the scale on which farming is conducted
in a country like Denmark, statistics on livestock farming are far more
important than statistics on farm areas, be cause farming on different
scales can be conducted on the same area of land when livestock and dairy
farming are developing at a particularly fast rate.  
 

It is well known that it is just this phenomenon that is observed in
Denmark. The “prosperity” of Danish agriculture is due mainly
to the rapid successes of commercial livestock rearing and the export of
dairy produce, meaty eggs, etc., to Britain. Here we meet with the solemn
statement by Pudor that Denmark “owes the colossal development of
her dairy farming to the decentralisation of her cattle-breeding
and livestock farming” (loc. cit., p. 48, Pudor’s
italics). It is not surprising that a man like Pudor, an out-and-out
huckster in his whole system of views, who totally fails to understand the
contradictions of capitalism, should take the liberty of distorting facts
in this way. It. is highly characteristic, however, that the petty
bourgeois David, who, by some misunderstanding, passes as a socialist,
uncritically trails along in his wake!  

As a matter of fact, Denmark serves as a striking example of the
concentration of livestock farming in a capitalist country. That
Pudor arrived at the opposite conclusion is due only to his crass ignorance
and to the fact that he distorted the scraps of statistics which
he quotes in his pamphlet. Pudor quotes, and David slavishly repeats after
him, figures showing the distribution of the total number of livestock
farms in Denmark according to the number of animals per farm. According to
Pudor, 39.85 per cent of the total number of farms having
livestock have only from one to three animals each; 29.12 per cent
have from four to nine animals each, etc. Hence, Pudor concludes, most of
the farms are “small”; “decentralisation”, etc.


In the first place Pudor quotes the wrong figures. This has to be
noted, because Pudor boastfully declares that in his book one may find all the
“latest” figures; and the revisionists “refute Marxism”
by referring to ignorant bourgeois scribblers. Secondly, and this is most
important, the method of argument employed by the Pudors and Davids is
too often repeated by our Cadets and Narodniks for us to refrain from dealing
with it. Following such a method of argument we should inevitably come
to the conclusion that industry in the most advanced capitalist
countries is becoming “decentralised”; for everywhere and
always the percentage of very small and small establishments is highest,
and the percentage of large establishments is insignificant.

    

The Pudors and the Davids forget a “trifle”: the concentration
of by far the greater part of total production in large enterprises which
constitute only a small percentage of the total number of enterprises.  The
actual distribution of the total cattle in Denmark according to the last
census, taken on July 15, 1898, is shown in the following

table.[6]





Farms having
Numberof farms
Percent
Totalcattle
Percent




1 head of cattle            
18,376
10.2
18,376
1.0


2 " " "                     
27,394
15.2
54,788
3.1


3 " " "                     
22,522
12.5
67,566
3.9


4 to 5 " " "                
27,561
15.2
121,721
7.0


6 to  " " "                
26,022
14.4
188,533
10.8


10 to 14 " " "              
20,375
11.3
242,690
13.9


15 to 29 " " "              
30,460
16.9
615,507
35.3


30 to  49  " " "            
5,650
3.1
202,683
11.6


50 to  99  " " "            
1,498
0.8
99,131
5.7


100 to 199 " " "            
588
0.3
81,417
4.7


200 head of cattle and over 
195
0.1
52,385
3.0


Total 
180,641
100.0
1,744,797
100.0




We see from this what role in the total livestock farming in Denmark is
played by the numerous small farms and the few big farms, and what the
famous “decentralisation” of production in the “ideal
country” really amounts to. Small farms having one to three head of
cattle number 68,292, or 37.9 per cent of the total; they have 140,730
head, i. e., only 8 per cent of the total. An almost equal number, 133,802,
or 7.7 per cent, is owned by 783 big farmers comprising 0.4 per cent of
the total number of farmers. Those in the first group have on an average a
little over two head of cattle each, i.e., an obviously inadequate number
with which to carry on commercial livestock farming; dairy and meat

    

products can only be sold by cutting down household consumption (let us recall
well-known facts: butter is sold and cheaper margarine is purchased for home
use, etc.). Those in the second group have on an average 171 head of cattle
each. They are the biggest capitalist farmers, “manufacturers” of
milk and. meat; “leaders” of technical progress and of all sorts of
agricultural associations, about which petty-bourgeois admirers of “social
peace” wax so enthusiastic.


If we add together the small and medium farmers we shall get a total of 121,875
farmers, or two-thirds of the total (67.5 per cent), who own up to nine head of
cattle each. They own 450,984 head of cattle, or one-fourth of the total (25.8
per cent). An almost equal number, i.e., 435,616 (25 per cent) is owned by
farmers having 30 and more head of cattle each. Those farmers number 7,931, or
4.3 per cent of the total. “Decentralisation” indeed!


By combining the small divisions of Danish statistics given above into three
large groups we get the following:





Farms having
Numberof farms
Percent
Numberof cattle
Percent
Aver-ageperfarm




1 to 3 head of cattle
68,292
37.9
140,730
8.0
2.1


4 to 9 " " "
53,583
29.6
310,254
17.8
5.8


10 head and over
58,766
32.5
1,293,813
74.2
22.0


Total
180,641
100.0
1,744,797
100.0
9.7




Thus, three-fourths of the total livestock farming in Denmark
is concentrated in the hands of 58,766 farmers, that is, less than
one-third of the total number of farmers. This one-third enjoys
the lion’s share of all the “prosperity” of capitalism in
Danish agriculture. It should be borne in mind that this high percentage of
well-to-do peasants and rich capitalists (32.5 per cent, or nearly
one-third) is obtained by an artificial method of calculation which
eliminates all farmers who own no livestock. Actually, the percentage

    

is much lower. According to the census of 1895, as we have seen, the total
number of farmers in Denmark is 265,982; and the livestock census of July
15, 1898, puts the total number of farmers at 278,673. In relation to this
actual total number of farmers, the 58,766 well-to-do and rich farmers
represent only 21.1 per cent, i.e., only one-fifth. The number of
“farmers” who own no land is 12.4 per cent of the total number
of farmers in Denmark (1895:

32,946 out of 265,982), while the farmers who own no

      livestock[7]
   

represent 35.1 per cent of the total number of farmers in Denmark,
i.e., more than one-third (1898: 98,032 out of 278,673). One can judge
from this the “socialism” of gentlemen of the David type who
fail to see that the capitalist prosperity of Danish agriculture is based
on the mass
    

proletarianisation of the rural population, on the fact that the
mass of the “farmers” are deprived of the means of production.


Agriculture and Livestock Farming in Denmark
According to the Census of July 15, 1898


Groups of farms
Number of farms
Percent
Hectares
Percent
Horses
Percent
Cows
Percent
Total cattle
Percent
Sheep
Percent
Pigs
Percent
Poultry
Percent




Owning no land
13,435
4.8
—
—
1,970
0.5
3,707
0.3
4,633
0.3
8,943
0.8
8,865
0.8
220,147
2.5


Amount of land unknown
45,898
16.5
?
?
28,909
6.4
28,072
2.6
42,150
2.4
42,987
4.0
42,699
3.7
780,585
8.9


Up to 2.5 ha 
80,582
28.9
55,272
1.5
24,540
5.5
66,171
6.2
88,720
5.1
99,705
9.3
94,656
8.1
1,649,452
18.8


2.5 to 10 
63,420
22.8
323,430
8.9
54,900
12.2
175,182
16.4
247,618
14.2
187,460
17.5
191,291
16.4
1,871,242
21.4


10 to 40 
45,519
16.3
984,983
27.0
133,793
29.8
303,244
28.5
515,832
29.6
383,950
35.7
308,863
26.4
1,957,726
22.3


40 to 120
27,620
9.9
1,692,285
46.4
168,410
37.5
361,669
33.9
639,563
36.6
310,686
28.9
409,294
35.0
1,998,595
22.8


120 ha and over
2,201
0.8
588,318
16.2
36,807
8.1
129,220
12.1
206,281
11.8
40,682
3.8
112,825
9.6
289,155
3.3


Total
278,673
100.0
3,644,288
100.0
449,329
100.0
1,067,265
100.0
1,744,797
100.0
1,074,413
100.0
1,168,493
100.0
8,766,902
100.0


 



Note: The figures for 1898 differ from those for 1895 in
      regard to the distribution of farms according to the
      amount of land. This may be due both to changes in time and to
      somewhat different methods of collecting information. But the
      general relation between the groups remains the same. The census
      of 1895 takes into account

   

      45,860 hectares of undistributed land in addition to 3,645,750
      hectares of distributed land. The group of farms with “amount of
      land unknown” (1898) consists largely of the lower groups,
      which is proved by tile number of livestock.  





We shall now pass to the figures characterising agriculture and
livestock farming in Denmark as a whole. The census of July 15, 1898 gives
detailed information on the number of livestock of the various groups of
farmers owning certain amounts of land. The number of these groups in the
Danish statistics is particularly large (14 groups:

with no land; with up to 1/32 of a hartkorn; 1/32 to 1/16; 1/16 to 1/8; 1/8
to 1/4; 1/4 to 1/2; 1/2 to 1; 1 to 2; 2 to 4; 4 to 8; 8 to 12; 12 to 20; 20
to 30; 30 and over); but we have reduced them to 6 large groups, as we did
with the preceding figures.  
 

From these figures we see first of all how great is the concentration of
livestock farming as a whole in Denmark. Big capitalist farmers
owning over 40 hectares of land constitute only one-tenth of the
total number of farmers (10.7 per cent); but they concentrate in their
hands more than three-fifths of all the land (62.6 per cent) and
nearly half of all the livestock: 45.6 per cent of all the horses,
48.4 per cent of all the cattle, 32,7 per cent of all the sheep, and 44.6
per cent of all the pigs.  

If to these capitalist farmers we add the well-to-do peas ants, i. e., those
owning from 10 to 40 hectares, we shall get a little over a quarter of the total
number of farmers (27.0 per cent) who concentrate in their hands nine-tenths of
all the land, three-fourths of all the horses, four-fifths of all the cattle,
seven-tenths of all the. pigs, and nearly half of all the poultry. The great
bulk of the “farmers”, nearly three-fourths (73 per cent), own less
than 10 hectares of land each and, on the whole, represent the proletarianised
and semi-proletarianised mass, which plays an insignificant part in the sum
total of the country’s agricultural and livestock economy.


As far as the distribution of the various types of animals is concerned, sheep
and pig breeding deserve special attention. The first is a declining branch of
livestock farming, unprofitable for the majority of European countries at the
present time owing to market conditions and over seas competition. The state of
the international market calls for other forms of livestock farming to take the
place of sheep farming. On the other hand, pig breeding is a particularly
profitable and rapidly developing branch of livestock farming for meat in
Europe. Statistics show that sheep farming is also declining in Denmark, whereas
pig breeding is increasing very rapidly. From 1861 to 1898, the number of sheep
in Denmark dropped from 1,700,000 to 1,100,000. The number of cattle increased
from 1,100,000 to 1,700,000. The number of pigs increased from 300,000 to
1,200,000, i.e., almost a fourfold increase.


Comparing the distribution of sheep and pigs among the small and big farms we
thus clearly see in the former the maximum of routine, the least adaptability to
the requirements

    

of the market, and slowness in readjusting the farm to the new
conditions. The big capitalist farms (40 to 120 hectares, 120 hectares and over)
cut down unprofitable sheep farming most (28.9 per cent and 3.8 per cent of
sheep, as against 33-37 per cent and 8-12 per cent of other types of live
stock). The small farms were less adaptable: they still keep a larger number of
sheep; for example, farms up to 2.5 hectares have 9.3 per cent of the total
number of sheep, as against 6-5 per cent of the other types of livestock. They
possess 8.1 per cent of the pigs—a smaller proportion than of
sheep. The capitalists have 35 and 9.6 per cent, i.e., a larger share
than of sheep. Capitalist agriculture is much better able to adapt itself to the
requirements of the inter national market. In regard to the peasant, we still
have to say, in the words of Marx: the peasant turns merchant and industrialist
without the conditions enabling him to become a real merchant and

industrialist.[10] The market demands of every farmer,
as an absolute necessity, submission to the new conditions and speedy
adjustment to them. But this speedy adjustment is impossible without
capital. Thus, under capitalism small-scale farming is condemned
to the utmost of routine and backwardness and the least adaptability to the
market.  

To envisage more concretely the real economic features of this needy
mass and of the small wealthy minority, we shall quote figures of the
average amount of land and livestock on the farms of the various groups. It
is natural for bourgeois political economy (and for the revisionist gentry)
to gloss over capitalist contradictions; socialist political economy must
ascertain the difference in types of farms and standard of living
between the prosperous capitalist farmers and the needy small farmers. See
table, page 208.  
   

    
Average per Farm


Groups of farms
Hec-tares
Horses
Cows
Totalcattle
Sheep
Pigs
Poul-try




Owning no land
”
0.1
0.3
0.3
0.7
0.7
16.4


Amount of land unknown
?
0.6
0.6
0.9
0.9
0.9
17.0


Up to 2.5 ha
0.6
0.3
0.8
1.1
1.2
1.2
20.4


2.5 to 10 "
5.1
0.9
2.7
3.9
2.9
3.0
29.5


10 to 40 "
21.6
2.9
6.6
11.3
8.4
6.8
43.0


40 to 120 "
61.3
6.1
13.8
23.1
11.2
14.9
72.4


120 ha and over "
267.3
16.7
58.7
93.7
18.5
51.2
131.3


Average
13.1
1.6
3.8
6.3
3.9
4.2
31.5





These figures clearly show that all three lower groups, comprising half the
total number of farms, belong to poor peasants. “Farmers”
owning no horses and no cows predominate. Only in the group with land up to 2.5
hectares is there one whole head of cattle, one sheep, and one pig per
farm. Obviously, there can be no question of this half of the total
number of farms making any profit out of dairy and meat livestock farming. For
this half, the prosperity of Danish agriculture means dependence upon the big

    




farmers, the necessity of seeking “auxiliary employment”, i.e., of
selling their labour power in one way or another, perpetual poverty and
semi-ruined farms.


Of course, this conclusion holds good only for the whole mass of those
poorest farms. We have already shown with the aid of German, French, and Russian
agricultural statistics that even among the farms having a small amount of land
there are big livestock owners, tobacco growers, and so forth. The
differentiation is deeper than can be imagined from the returns of Danish
statistics. But this differentiation, by singling out in each group an
insignificant minority of farms growing special crops, only emphasises
the poverty and want of the majority of the farmers in the poorest
groups.


Further, it is also evident from the figures quoted that even the group of small
peasants owning from 2.5 hectares to 10 hectares cannot be regarded as being at
all secure and economically well established. Let us recall the fact that in
this group there are 63,000 farms, or 22.8 per cent of the total, and that the
average is 0.9 horses per farm. The horseless farmers probably use their cows
for draught, thus worsening the conditions of both agricultural farming
(shallower ploughing) and livestock farming (weakening the cattle). The average
number of cows in this group is

    

2.7 per farm. Even if the household consumption of milk and meat products
is reduced—and such a reduction is it self a direct sign of bitter
need—this number of cows could provide only a very small quantity of
products for sale. The share such farms with an average of 2.7 cows and 3
pigs per household enjoy in the “prosperity” of the
“national” sale of milk and meat to Britain can only
be very in significant. With farms of this size, commercial
agriculture and livestock farming mean, partly, selling what is necessary
for the family, poorer diet, increased poverty, and partly, selling in very
small quantities, i. e., under the most disadvantageous conditions, and the
impossibility of having money put by to meet inevitable extra expenses. And
the natural economy of the small peasant under the conditions prevailing in
modern capitalist countries is doomed to stagnation, to a slow painful
death; it certainly cannot prosper. The whole “trick” of
bourgeois and revisionist political economy lies in not making a separate
study of the conditions of this particular type of small farm, which is
below the “average” (the “average” Danish farmer has 1.6
horses and 3.8 cows), and which represents the overwhelming
majority of the total number of farms. Not only is this type of farm
not specially studied; it is glossed over by references exclusively to
“average” figures, to the general increase in
“production” and “sales”, and by saying nothing
about the fact that only the well-to-do farms, which represent the small
minority, can sell profitably.  

It is only among the farmers having from 10 to 40 hectares that we see
a sufficient number of livestock to create the possibility of
“prosperity”. But these farms represent only 16 per cent of the
total. And it is questionable whether they manage entirely without hired
labour, since they have on an average 21.6 hectares of land per farm. In
view of the high degree of intensive farming in Denmark, farms of such
dimensions probably cannot be carried on without the assistance of
farm-hands or day-labourers. Unfortunately, both Danish statisticians and
the majority of those who write about Danish agriculture adhere entirely to
the bourgeois point of view and do not explore the question of hired
labour, the size of farms requiring its employment, and so forth. From the
Danish census of occupations of 1901

    

we learn only that in the group of “day-labourers”, etc., there
are 60,000 men and 56,000 women, i. e., 116,000 out of a total of 972,000
of the rural population distributed according to occupation. As to whether
these tens of thou sands of wage-workers (and in addition to them small
peasants do “by work” for hire) are employed exclusively by the
30,00O big capitalist farmers (27,620 owning from 40 to 120 hectares and
2,201 owning over 120 hectares each), or whether some of them are also
employed by the well-to-do peasants owning from 10 to 40 hectares, we have
no information.  

Of the two highest groups, the upper Thirty Thousand of Danish agriculture,
there is little to say: the capitalist character of their agriculture and
livestock farming is graphically illustrated by the figures quoted at the
beginning.


Finally, the last data of general interest touched upon and partly analysed in
Danish agricultural statistics are those relating to the question whether the
development of livestock farming, that main foundation of the
“prosperity” of the “ideal country”, is accompanied by a
process of decentralisation or concentration. The statistics for 1898, already
quoted by us, provide extremely interesting data compared with those for 1893;
and for one type of livestock, the most important, it is true, namely, total
cattle, we can also make a comparison between the figures for 1876 and
1898.

Between 1893 and 1898 the branch of livestock farming which made most progress
in Denmark was pig breeding. Iii this period the number of pigs increased from
829,000 to 1,168,000, or by 40 per cent; while the number of horses increased
only from 410,000 to 449,000, of cattle from 1,696,000 to 1,744,000, and the
number of sheep even diminished. Who reaped the main benefits of this
tremendous progress of the Danish farmers, united in innumerable co-operative
societies? The compilers of the 1898 statistics answer this by comparing the
returns for 1893 arid 1898. All the pig-owners are divided into four groups: big
owners having 50 and more pigs; medium-big owners with from 15 to 49;
medium-small owners with from 4 to 14; and small owners with from 1 to 3
pigs. The compilers give the following figures for these four groups:

    

    



Groups of farms
1893
1898
Per centincreaseor
    decrease
Per centdistribu-tion of
    to-tal pigs


Number of
Number of


Farms Pigs
Farms Pigs
Farms Pigs
1893 1898




50 head and over 
844
79,230
1,487
135,999
76.2
71.7
9.6
11.6


15 to 49 
20,602
350,277
30,852
554,979
48.2
58.4
42.3
47.5


4 to 14 
38,357
211,868
50,668
282,642
32.1
33.4
25.5
24.2


1 to 3 
108,820
187,756
108,544
194,873
0.3
3.8
22.6
16.7


Total
168,623
829,131
191,551
1,168,493
13.6
40.9
100.0
100.0




These figures clearly show that a rapid concentration of livestock
farming is taking place. The larger the farm, the more it gained from the
“progress” of livestock farming. The big farms increased their
number of livestock by 71.7 per cent; the medium-big farms increased theirs by
58.4 per cent; the medium-small farms by 33.4 per cent; and the small farms only
by 3.8 per cent. The increase in wealth occurred mainly among the small
“upper” minority. The total increase of pigs during the five years
was 339,000; of these 261,000, or, more than three-fourths, were
accounted for by the big and medium-big farms, numbering 32,000 (out of a total
of 266,000-277,000 farms!). Small-scale production in livestock farming of this
type is being ousted by large-scale production: during the five years
there was an increase in the share of the big farms (from 9.6 per cent
to 11.6 per cent) and that of the medium-big farms (from 42.3 per cent to 47.5
per cent); whereas that of the medium-small farms diminished (from
25.5 per cent to 24.2 per cent), and that of the small farms diminished still
more (from 22.6 per cent to 16.7 per cent).


If instead of the hare figures of area we could get statistics of
agricultural farming expressing the scale of production as precisely as the
figures of the number of livestock

    

       express[8]

the scale of livestock farming, there is no doubt that here as well we
would see the process of concentration which the bourgeois
professors and opportunists deny.  

Still more interesting are the corresponding figures of total
cattle. We can supplement the comparison of the figures of 1893 and 1898
made by the compilers of the 1898 statistics with the returns of the census
of July 17, 1876. (Danmarks Statistik. Statistik Tabelvaerk, 4-de
Raekke, litra C, Nr. 1. Kreaturholdet d. 17 juli, 1876, København,
1878.) Here are the figures for the three years.  
    

    



Groups of farms
1876
1893
1898
Per cent increase or decrease
Per cent distribution of total
    cattle


Number of
Number of
Number of
1876 to 1893
1893 to 1898 


Number of
Number of
1876
1893
1891


Farms Cattle
Farms Cattle
Farms Cattle
Farms Cattle
Farms Cattle




50 head and over
1,634
156,728
2,209
221,667
2,281
232,933
35.2
41.4
3.3
5.1
11.8
13.0
13.4


15 to 49
24,096
514,678
35,200
793,474
36,110
818,190
46.1
54.1
2.6
3.1
39.0
46.8
46.8


4 to 14
64,110
504,193
72,173
539,301
73,958
552,944
12.5
6.9
2.5
2.5
38.2
31.8
31.7


1 to 3
78.156
144,930
70,218
141,748
68,292
140,730
10.2
2.2
2.7
0.7
11.0
8.4
8.1


Total
167,996
1,320,529
179,800
1,696,190
180,641
1,744,797
7.0
28.4
0.5
2.9
100.0
100.0
100.0





These figures, covering a longer period of time and a more important type of
livestock, illustrate the process of capitalist concentration as
graphically as those previously quoted. The growth of livestock farming in
Denmark indicates the progress almost exclusively of large-scale
capitalist farming. The total livestock increase between 1876 and 1898 was
424,000 head. Of these, 76,000 belonged to farms having 50 head and more, and
303,000 to farms having from 15 to 49 bead each, i.e., these upper 38,000 farms
gained 379,000 head, or nearly nine-tenths of the total in crease. No
more striking picture of capitalist concentration could be imagined.


The total number of cattle-owning farms increased between 1876 and 1898 by
12,645 (180,641-167,996), or by 7.5 per cent. The total population of Denmark
increased between 1880 and 1901 (i. e., during a slightly shorter period of
time) from 1,969,039 to

     2,449,540,[9]

i. e., by 24.4 per cent. Clearly, the relative number of
“haves”, i. e., owners of livestock, diminished. The
smaller part of the population belongs to the class of
property-owners. The number of smallest owners (one to three head of
livestock) steadily diminished. The number of medium-small owners (with 4
to 14 head) increased very slowly (+12.5 per cent between 1876 and
1893, +2.5 per cent between 1893 and

    

1898) and lagged behind the increase of the population. A real “and
rapid increase is observed only in large-scale capitalist livestock
farming. Between 1876 and 1893 the medium-big farms increased more rapidly
than the big farms; but between 1893 and 1898, the biggest farms increased
more rapidly.  

Taking the figures for 1876 and 1898 for the group of biggest farms, i. e.,
owners of 200 or more head of cattle, we find that in 1876 they numbered 79
(0.05 per cent of the total number of livestock owners) with 18,970 head of
cattle (1.4 per cent of the total); while in 1898, there were twice as many,
viz., 195 (0.1 per cent of the total) with 52,385 head of cattle (3.0 per cent
of the total). The number of the biggest farmers more than doubled and their
output nearly trebled.


The ousting of small-scale production by large-scale production proceeded
steadily between 1876 and 1898. The share of the small farms in the total
number of cattle continually diminished: from 11.0 per cent in 1876 to 8.4
per cent in 1893, and to 8.1 per cent in 1898. The share of the medium farms
also continually diminished, although somewhat more slowly
(38.2—31.8—31.7 per cent). The share of the medium-big farms
increased from 39.0 per cent in 1876 to 46.8 per cent in 1893, but remained at
the same level between 1893 and 1898. Only the share of the biggest farms
steadily increased, pushing aside all the other categories
(11.8—13.0—13.4 per cent).


The more favourable the conditions for livestock farming, the more rapid is the
development and progress of commercial livestock farming, an.d the more intense
is the process of capitalist concentration. For example, in the Copenhagen
district, which had a population of 234,000 in 1880 and 378,000 in 1901, dairy
and meat products were, of course, the most marketable items. The farmers in
that district were richer in cattle than all the other farmers in Denmark, both
in 1876 and in 1898, having on an average 8.5 and 11.6 head of cattle each,
compared with an average of 7.9 and 9.7 for the whole country. And in this
district, in which the conditions are most favourable for the development of
livestock farming, we see the process of concentration is most intense.

 

The following are the figures for this district for 1876 and 1898,
according to the groups which we adopted above: 




 
1876
1898


Number offarms
Number ofcattle
Number offarms
Number ofcattle




50 head and over
44
4,488
86
9,059


15 to 49
1,045
22,119
1,545
35,579


4 to 14 
2,011
16,896
1,900
14,559


1 to 3 
2,514
4,468
1,890
3,767


Total
5,614
47,971
5,421
62,964




During the 22 years even the absolute number of owners diminished! Livestock
wealth was concentrated in the hands of a smaller number of farmers. Both the
small and the middle farmers after 22 years proved to be fewer and to
have fewer livestock. The medium-big farmers increased their
possessions by fifty per cent (from 22,000 to 35,000). The big farmers more
than doubled their possessions. Of the biggest farmers, owning 200 and more
head of cattle, there were in 1876 two who owned 437 head; in 1898, how
ever, there were 10 who owned 2,896 head of cattle.


The concern which the Pudors, Davids, and other voluntary or
involuntary servants of capital show for improved marketing conditions, the
development of farmers’ associations, and technical progress in livestock
farming and agriculture can have only one purpose: to bring about through
out the country and in all branches of agriculture conditions like those in
the Copenhagen district, i. e., particularly rapid concentration of
production in the hands of the capitalists and the expropriation,
proletarianisation of the population, a reduction of the proportion of
property owners to the total population, an increase in the proportion of
those whom capitalism is forcing out of the country into the towns, etc.

 

To sum up; the “ideal country” from the standpoint of the
opponents of Marxism on the agrarian question very clearly reveals (despite
the socio-economic statistics being still at a low level and lacking
analysis) the capitalist agrarian system, the sharply expressed capitalist
contradictions in agriculture and livestock farming, the growing
concentration of agricultural production, the ousting of small-scale
production by large-scale production, and the proletarianisation and
impoverishment of the overwhelming majority of the rural population.  

 
Notes
 

[1]
This article is a chapter (XII) of the author’s book The
Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx” included in
his recently published book The Agrarian Question, Part I
(St. Petersburg, 1908).  Only accidental delay in delivering this chapter
prevented it from being included in the above-mentioned book. Hence, all
the references given in the portion now published are to that book.  —Lenin

[2]
Vl. Ilyin, The Agrarian Question, Part I, article “The
Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’", Chapters X and XI. (See
pp. 171-194 of this volume.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[3]
Dr. Heinrich Pudor, Das landwirtschaftliche Genossenschaftswesen im
Auslande, I. B. S. V, Leipzig, 1904. Pudor is a violent opponent of
Marxism.  —Lenin

[4]

“Danmarks Statistik. Statistik Aarbog”,
8-de aargang, 1903, p. 31, footnote. All the following statistics
apply to Denmark proper, with out Bornholm.  —Lenin

[5]
Danish Statistics, etc., Danish Agriculture, 4th series,
No. 9, Letter C.—Ed.  

[6]
Danmarks Statistik. Statistik Tabelvaerk. Femte Raekke, litra
C, Nr. 2. Kreaturholdet d. 15 juli 1898. KØbenhavn, 1901.  —Lenin

[7]
To be more precise, farmers who own no cattle, for unfortunately the
Danish statistics do not give the number of farmers who own no
   

animals whatever. From these statistics we only learn the number
of owners of each type of animal. But undoubtedly, cattle form the
principal basis of livestock farming in Denmark.  —Lenin

[8]
We showed above, according to Drechsler’s figures, that the
livestock in the big farms are bigger. Here too, therefore, the overall
statistics minimise the degree of concentration.  —Lenin

[9]
In 188O, the urban population constituted 28 per cent, and in
1901, 38 per cent.  —Lenin
 



[10]
See K. Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 791.



 
  

Livestock in Small and Large Farms

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907









Lenin: The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907








V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907[1]




Written: Written in November-December 1907 

Published:

      First published in 1908 (confiscated); published in 1917 in book form by Zhizn i Znaniye.

      Published according to the manuscript. Checked with the text of the 1917 edition.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 217-429.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



Contents




Chapter I.


The Economic Basis and Nature of the Agrarian Revolution in Russia




Chapter I.


1. Landownership in European Russia
  220



2. What is the Struggle About?
  225



3. The Cadet Writers Obscure the Nature of the Struggle
  231



4. The Economic Nature of the Agrarian Revolution and its Ideological Cloaks
  234



5. Two Types of Bourgeois Agrarian Evolution
  238



6. Two lines Of Agrarian Programmes in the Revolution
  243



7. Russia’s Land Area. The Question of the Colonisation
  247



8. Summary of the Economic Deductions of Chapter I
  254

 

  220

Chapter II.


The Agrarian Programmes of the R.S.D.L.P. and Their Test in the First Revolution




Chapter II.


1. What Was the Mistake in the Previous Agrarian Programmes of Russian Social-Democracy?
  255



2. The Present Agrarian Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.
  258



3. The Chief Argument of the Municipalisers Tested by Events
  261



4. The Agrarian Programme of the Peasantry
  267



5. Medieval Landownership and the Bourgeois Revolution
  272



6. Why Had the Small Proprietors in Russia to Declare in Favour of Nationalisation?
  276



7. The Peasants and the Narodniks on the Nationalisation of Allotment Land
  284



8. The Mistake Made by M. Shanin and Other Advocates of Division
  287

 

  255

Chapter III.


The Theoretical Basis of Nationalisation and of Municipalisation




Chapter III.


1. What is Nationalisation of the Land?
  295



2. Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx’s Rough Notes
  300



3. Is it Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute the Narodniks?
  307



4. Is the Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected with the Programme of Municipalisation?
  311



5. Criticism of Private Landownership from the Standpoint of the Development of Capitalism
  313



6. The Nationalisation of the Land and Money Rent
  316



7. Under What Conditions Can Nationalisation Be Brought About?
  318



8. Does Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?
  323

 

  294

Chapter IV.


Political and Tactical Considerations in Questions of the Agrarian Programme




Chapter IV.


1. “A Guarantee Against Restoration”
  325



2. Local Self-Government as a “Bulwark Against Reaction”
  332



3. The Central Authority and the Consolidation of the Bourgeois State
  337



4. The Scope of the Political and of the Agrarian Revolutions
  344



5. A Peasant Revolution Without the Conquest of Power by the Peasantry?
  351



6. Is Land Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible Method?
  355



7. Municipalisation of the Land and Municipal Socialism
  358



8. Some Examples of the Muddle Caused by Municipalisation
  363

 

  325

Chapter V.


Classes and Parties in the Debate on the Agrarian Question in the Second Duma




Chapter V.


1. The Rights and the Octobrists
  368



2. The Cadets
  374



3. The Right Peasants
  380



4. The Non-Party Peasants
  383



5. The Narodnik Intellectuals
  388



6. The Trudovik Peasants (Narodniks)
  394



7. The Socialist-Revolutionaries
  400



8. The “Nationals”
  405



9. The Social-Democrats
  414



Conclusion
  421

 

  366

 
 
 

Notes
 
 



[1]

Lenin’s book The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in
the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907 was written in
November-December 1907. It was included in Part 2, Volume II of the
collection of Lenin’s works entitled Twelve Years, which was
to have been published in 1908, but the book was seized at the printers by
the police and destroyed. Only one copy was saved with several pages



at the end of it missing. The book was first published in 1917 under the
title, VI. Ilyin (N. Lenin), The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy
in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907 (Petrograd, Zhizn i
Znaniye Publishers).  

The 1917 edition of this book was printed from the mutilated copy,
which broke off at the following unfinished sentence: “The
reformative path of creating a Junker-bourgeois Russia presupposes the
preservation of the foundations of the old system of landownership and
their slow”... (See present volume, p. 425.) To this Lenin added the
words: “systematic, and most painful coercion of the mass of the
peasantry. The revolutionary path of creating a peasant-bourgeois Russia
necessarily presupposes the break-up of the old system of landownership,
the abolition of the private ownership of the land.”  

The present edition is reproduced from the manuscript corrected by
Lenin several years after the 1908 edition.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Landownership









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 1. Landownership in European Russia







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

 

The two years of revolution, from the autumn of 1905 to the
autumn of 1907, have furnished a vast amount of experience of historical
value concerning the peasant movement in Russia and the character and
significance of the peasants’ struggle for land. Decades of so-called
“peaceful” evolution (i. e., when millions of people peacefully
allow themselves to be fleeced by the upper ten thousand) can never furnish
such a wealth of material for explaining the inner workings of our social
system as has been furnished in these two years both by the direct struggle
of the peasant masses against the landlords and by the demands of the
peasants, expressed with at least some degree of freedom, at assemblies of
representatives of the people. There fore, the revision of the agrarian
programme of the Russian Social-Democrats in the light of the experience of
these two years is absolutely necessary, particularly in view of the fact
that the present agrarian programme of the Russian Social-Democratic Labour
Party was adopted at the Stockholm Congress in April 1906, i. e., on the
eve of the first public appearance of representatives of the peasantry from
all over Russia with a peasant agrarian programme, in opposition to the
programme of the government and to that of the liberal bourgeoisie.  

The revision of the Social-Democratic agrarian programme must be based on the
latest data on landed property in Russia in order to ascertain with the utmost
precision what actually is the economic background of all the agrarian
programmes of our epoch, and what precisely are the issues in the great historic
struggle. This economic basis of the real struggle must be compared with the
ideological political reflection of this basis that is found in the programmes,
declarations, demands, and theories of the

    

spokesmen of the different classes. This is the course, and the only
course, that a Marxist should take, unlike the petty-bourgeois socialist
who proceeds from “abstract” justice, from the theory of the
“labour principle”, etc., and unlike the liberal bureaucrat
who, in connection with every re form, covers up his defence of the
interests of the exploiters by arguments about whether the reform is
practicable and about the “state” point of view.  

Chapter I
The Economic Basis and Nature
    of the Agrarian Revolution in Russia
1. Landownership in European Russia

The Landed Property Statistics for 19O5, published by the Central
Statistical Committee in 1907, enables us to ascertain precisely the comparative
size of the peasant and landlord holdings in the fifty gubernias in European
Russia. First of all we will give the general data. The whole territory of
European Russia (50 gubernias) is given (see census of January 28, 1897) as
4,230,500 square versts, i. e., 440,800,000 dessiatins. The
landed property statistics for 1905 register a total of 395,200,000 dessiatins
under the following three main headings:





 
Million dessiatins




A. Privately owned land
101.7


B. Allotment land[3]
138.8


C. Land owned by state, church, and various institutions
154.7


Total land in European Russia
395.2




From these general figures it is necessary to deduct, first of all, state lands
situated in the far north and consisting partly of tundra and partly of such
forest land as cannot be expected to be used for agriculture in the near
future. There are 107,900,000 dessiatins of such land in the “northern

    

region” (in the Arkhangelsk, Olonets and Vologda gubernias). Of course,
by deducting all these lands we considerably overestimate the area of land
unsuitable for agriculture. It suffices to point out that such a cautious
statistician as Mr. A. A. Kaufman calculates that in the Vologda and Olonets
gubernias 25,7Q0,000 dessiatins of forest land (with over 25 per cent of forest)
could be utilised for additional allotment to the

      peasants.[1]

However, since we are dealing with general data about the land area,
without giving separate figures for forest land, it will be more correct to
take a more cautious estimate of the land area suit able for
agriculture. After deducting 107,900,000 dessiatins, there will be left
287,300,000 dessiatins, or in round figures, 280,000,000 dessiatins,
leaving out a portion of urban land (the total of which is 2,000,000
dessiatins) and a portion of the state lands in the Vyatka and Perm
gubernias (the total area of state land in these two gubernias is
16,300,000 dessiatins).  

Thus, the aggregate amount of land suitable for agriculture in
European Russia is distributed as follows:





A. Privately owned land
101.7 million dessiatins


B. Allotment land
138.8 “ “


C. State land and land owned by various institutions
39.5 “ “


Total in European Russia
280.0 “ “




Now we must give separate figures for small and large (particularly very large)
holdings in order to obtain a concrete idea of the conditions of the peasant
struggle for land in the Russian revolution. Such figures, however, are
incomplete. Of the 138,800,000 dessiatins of peasant allotment land 136,900,000
dessiatins are classified according to size of holdings. Of the 101,700,000
dessiatins of privately owned land, 85,900,000 dessiatins are so classified;
the remaining 15,800,000 dessiatins are recorded as belonging to
“societies and associations”. Examining the latter we find that
11,300,000 dessiatins are owned by peasant

    

societies and associations, which means that on the whole they are small
holdings, unfortunately not classified according to size. Further,
3,700,000 dessiatins belong to “industrial and commercial,
manufacturing and other” associations, of which there are 1,042. Of
these, 272 own more than 1,000 dessiatins each, the total for the 272 being
3,600,000 dessiatins. These are, evidently, landlord latifundia. The bulk
of this land is concentrated in Perm Gubernia, where nine such
associations own 1,448,902 dessiatins! It is known that the Urals factories
own many thou sand dessiatins of land—a direct survival in bourgeois
Russia of the feudal, seigniorial latifundia.  

We therefore single out 3,600,000 dessiatins from the land owned by societies
and associations as the biggest landed estates. The remainder has not been
classified, but generally it consists of small holdings.


Out of the 39,500,000 dessiatins of state and other lands, only the

crown lands[4]

(5,100,000 dessiatins) lend themselves to classification according to
size. These, too, are very large semi-medieval landed estates. We thus get
a total area of land, both classified and not classified according to size
of holdings, as follows: 




 
Landclassifiedaccording to
Landnot classifiedsize of holdings


(million dessiatins)




A. Privately owned land


 89.5[2]

12.2


B. Allotment land
136.9
1.9


C. State land and land owned by various institutions
5.1
34.4


Total
231.5
48.5


Grand total
} 280.0 {




Let us now classify the allotment land according to size of holdings. By
rearranging the data obtained from our source of information into somewhat
larger groups, we get:

    

    
Allotment Land


Groups of households
Number of households
Total areas of land (dess.)
Average des-siatins per household




Up to 5 dess. inclusive 
2,857,650 }
9,030,333 }
3.1       }


5 to 8 " " 
3,317,601  }
21,706,550 }
6.5        }


Total up to 8 dess. incl. 
6,175,251
30,736,883
4.9


8 to 15 " "
3,932,485
42,182,923
10.7


15 to 30 " " 
1,551,904
31,271,922
20.1


Over 30 " " 
617,715
32,695,510
52.9


Total in European Russia
12,277,355
136,887,238
11.1




From these data it is evident that more than half of the households (6,200,000
out of 12,300,000) have up to 8 dessiatins each, i. e., in general and on the
average, an area of land that is absolutely insufficient to support a
family. Ten million one hundred thousand households possess up to 15 dessiatins
each (making a total of 72,900,000 dessiatins), i. e., over four-fifths of the
total number of house holds are, at the present level of peasant agricultural
technique, on the brink of semi-starvation.Middle and well-to-do
households—according to amount of land owned— umber only 2,200,000
out of 12,300,000, owning altogether 63,900,000 dessiatins out of 136,900,000
dessiatins. Only households having more than 30 dessiatins each can be regarded
as rich; of these there are only 600,000, i. e., one-twentieth of the total
number of households. They possess nearly one-fourth of the total land area:
32,700,000 out of 136,900,000 dessiatins. To give an idea as to which categories of peasants constitute this group of rich households, we shall point out
that first place among them is held by the Cossacks. In the over-30-dessiatins-per-household group, the Cossack households number 266,929 having a total
of 14,426,403 dessiatins, i. e., the overwhelming majority of the Cossacks (in
European Russia: 278,650 households having a total of 14,689,498 dessiatins of
land, i. e., an aver age of 52.7 dessiatins per household).


The only data available for the whole of Russia enabling us to judge how all the
peasant households are approximately

    

classified according to scale of farming and not according to area of
allotments, are those about the number of horses owned. According to the
last army horse censuses of 1888-91, the peasant households in 48 gubernias
of European Russia are classified as follows: 




 
Households




Poor
{ Without horses
2,765,970


{ Owning 1 horse
2,885,192


Middle
{ " 2 horses
2,240,574


{ " 3 "
1,070,250


Well-to-do
" 4 " or more
1,154,674


Total
10,116,660




Broadly speaking, this means that over one-half are poor (5,600,000 out of
10,100,000), about one-third are middle households (3,300,000 with 2 or 3
horses), and slightly over one-tenth are well-to-do (1,100,000 out of
10,100,000).


Let us now examine the distribution of individual private landed
property. The statistics do not give a clear enough idea of the smallest
holdings, but they give extremely detailed data on the biggest latifundia.


Individual Private Landed Property in European Russia


Groups of holdings
Number ofholdings
Total area ofland (dess.)
Average dess.per holding




10 dess. and less
409,864
1,625,226
3.9


 10-50 dess. incl.
209,119
4,891,031
23.4


 50-500 " "
106,065
17,326,495
163.3


 { 500-2,000 " "
21,748 }
20,590,708 }
947 }


 { 2,000-10,000 " "
5,386 } 
20,602,109 } 
3,825 } 


 { Over 10,000 " "
699 } 
20,798,504 } 
29,754 } 


 Total over 500 dess.
27,833
61,991,321
2,227


 Grand total for European Russia
752,881
85,834,073
114




We see here, first, the enormous preponderance of large landownership:
619,000 small holders (up to 50 dessiatins) own only 6,500,000
dessiatins. Secondly, we see vast latifundia: 699 owners have almost 30,000
dessiatins each!

    

28,000 owners have a total of 62,000,000 dessiatins, I. e., 2,227 dessiatins
each. The overwhelming majority of these latifundia are owned by the nobility,
namely, 18,102 estates (out of 27,833) and 44,471,994 dessiatins of land, i.e.,
over 70 per cent of the entire latifundia area. The medieval character of
landlordism is very strikingly revealed by these data.

 

Notes
 

[1]
The Agrarian Question, a collection of articles published by
Dolgorukov and Petrunkevich, Vol. II, Moscow, 1907, p. 305.  —Lenin

[2]

85,900,000 dessiatins of privately owned land plus 3,600,000 dessiatins
of latifundia owned by industrial and commercial associations and
societies.  —Lenin
 



[3]
Allotment land—the plots of land allotted to the
peasants after the abolition of serfdom in Russia in 1861; they belonged to
the village commune and were periodically reallotted. among the peasants
for their use.

 



[4]
Crown lands—land made over in 1797 out of the total of
state lands to the members of the tsarist household as their private
property together with the peasants who worked it; by a ukase of Paul
I. The revenue from the exploitation of the crown-land peasants was used
for the upkeep of the imperial family (including the grand dukes, their
wives, daughters, etc.). These sums were not included in the state budget
and were not subject to control by the state.

 

 
  


|

2. What is the Struggle About?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Is the
    Struggle About?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 2. What is the Struggle About?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

2. What is the Struggle About?

Ten million peasant households own 73,000,000 dessiatins of
land, whereas 28,000 noble and upstart landlords own 62,000,000
dessiatins. Such is the main background of the arena on which the peasants’
struggle for the land is developing. On such a main background amazing
technical backwardness, the neglected state of agriculture, an oppressed
and downtrodden state of the mass of peasantry and an endless variety of
forms of feudal, corvée exploitation are inevitable. Not to wander
too far afield we must confine ourselves to mentioning briefly these
commonly known facts, which have been described at great length in the
extensive literature on peasant agriculture. The size of the landholdings
outlined by us in no way corresponds to the scale of farming. In the purely
Russian gubernias large-scale capitalist farming definitely drops into the
background. Small-scale farming preponderates on large latifundia,
comprising various forms of tenant farming based on servitude and bondage,
labour service (corvée) farming,

“winter hiring”,[4]

bondage for cattle trespassing on the landlords’ pastures, bondage for the
cut-off lands, and so on without end. The mass of the peasants, crushed by
feudal exploitation, are being ruined and some of them let their allotments
to “thrifty” farmers. The small minority of well-to-do peasants
develops into a peasant bourgeoisie, rents land for capitalist farming and
exploits hundreds of thousands of farm-hands and day-labourers.  

Bearing in mind all these facts, which have been fully established by
Russian economic science, we must distinguish, in regard to the present
struggle of the peasants for the land, four basic groups of
landholdings:

(1) a mass of peasant farms crushed by the feudal latifundia and directly

    

interested in the expropriation of these latifundia, an expropriation from
which they stand to gain directly snore than anyone else;

(2) a small minority of middle peasants already possessing an approximately
average amount of land, sufficient to conduct farming in a tolerable way;

(3) a small minority of well-to-do peasants who are becoming transformed
into a peasant bourgeoisie and who are connect ed by a number of
intermediate stages with farming con ducted on capitalist lines, and

(4) feudal latifundia far exceeding in dimensions the capitalist farms of
the present period in Russia and deriving their revenues chiefly from the
exploitation of the peasants by means of bondage and the labour rent
system.  

Of course, the available data on landed property enable us to distinguish these
basic groups only very approximately and sketchily. Nevertheless, we are
obliged to distinguish them if we are to present a complete picture of the
struggle for land in the Russian revolution. And we can safely say in advance
that partial corrections of the figures, partial shifting of the boundary line
between one group and another, cannot substantially alter the general
picture. It is not. partial corrections that are important; what is important is
that a clear contrast be made between small landownership, which is striving
for more land, and the feudal latifundia, which monopolise an enormous amount of
land. The chief falsity of both the government’s (Stolypin’s) and the
liberals’ (the Cadets’) economics lies in the fact that they conceal, or
obscure, this clear contrast.


Let us assume the following sizes of landholdings for the four groups
mentioned:

(1) up to 15 dessiatins;

(2) 15 to 20 dessiatins;

(3) 20 to 500 dessiatins, and

(4) over 500 dessiatins per holding. Of course, in order to present a
complete picture of the struggle for land, we must, in each of these
groups, combine the peasants’ allotments with the private holdings. In our
source of information the latter category is divided into groups: up to 10
dessiatins, and from 10 to 20 dessiatins, so that a group up to 15
dessiatins can be singled out only approximately. Any inaccuracy that may
arise from this approximate calculation and from the round figures that we
give, will be quite negligible (as

    

the reader will soon see) and will not affect the conclusions to be drawn.


Here is a table showing the present distribution of land among these groups
in European Russia:





Group
Number ofholdings(millions)
Total areaof land(million dessiatins)
Averagedess. perholding




(a) Ruined peasantry, crushed by feudal exploitation
10.5
75.0
7.0


(b) Middle peasantry
1.0
15.0
15.0


 (c) Peasant bourgeoisie and capitalist landownership
1.5
70.0
46.7


 (d) Feudal latifundia
0.03
70.0
2,333.0


Total
13.03
230.0
17.6


Not classified according to holdings
–
50
–



Grand total[1]

13.03
280.0
21.4 




Such are the relations which give rise to the peasants’ struggle for
land. Such is the starting-point of the peasants’ struggle (7-15
dessiatins per household plus renting on terms of bondage, etc.) against
the very big landlords (2,333 dessiatins per estate). What is the objective
tendency, the ultimate point of this struggle? Obviously, it is
the abolition of large feudalist estates and the transfer of the land

    

(according to certain principles) to the peasants. This objective tendency
inevitably arises from the predominance of small-scale
cultivation, which is held in bondage by the feudal latifundia. To
depict this tendency in the same graphic way in which we depicted the
starting-point of the struggle, i. e., the present state of affairs, we
must take the best conceivable eventuality, i. e., we must assume
that all the feudalist latifundia, as well as all land not classified
according to holdings, have passed into the hands of the ruined
peasantry. It is this best eventuality which all the participants
in the present agrarian struggle envisage more or less distinctly: the
government talks about “allotting” land to the
“needy”, the liberal official (or Cadet) talks a-bout
supplementary allotments to those who have little land, the peasant
Trudovik talks about increasing holdings to the “subsistence”
or “labour” “norm”, and the Social Democrat, differing on the
question of the form of land tenure, generally accepts the proposal of the
Narodniks about allotting land to the poorest peasants. (In the Second
Duma, 47th sitting, May 26, 1907, Tsereteli accepted the figure of the
value of the 57,000,000 dessiatins of land to be alienated as given by the
Narodnik Karavayev, namely, 6,500,000,000 rubles, of which the poorest
peasants having up to 5 dessiatins account for 2,500,000,000 rubles. See
Stenographic Record, p. 1221.)  In short, however much the landlords, the
officials, the bourgeoisie, the peasantry, and the proletariat may differ
in their view of the aims and terms of the reform, they all outline the
same tendency, namely, the transfer of the large landed estates to the most
needy peasants. With the fundamental differences of opinion among the
classes concerning the extent and terms of such a transfer we shall deal
separately elsewhere. At present we shall supplement our outline of the
starting-point of the struggle with a similar outline of its possible
ultimate point. We have already shown what the situation is
now. We shall show what it may be then. Let us assume
that 30,000 landlords will retain 100 dessiatins each, i. e., a total of
3,000,000 dessiatins, while the remaining 67,000,000 dessiatins and
50,000,000 dessiatins of unclassified land will be transferred to
10,500,000 poor households. We shall then get the following: 
    

    



 
Now
Then


Num-ber ofhold-ings(mill)
Totalarea ofland(mill.dess.)
Averagedess.perhold-ing.
Num-ber ofhold-ings(mill)
Totalarea ofland(mill.dess.)
Averagedess.perhold-ing.




(a) Small ruined peasants 
10.5
75
7.0
—
—
—


(b) Middle peasants 
1.0
15
15.0
11.5
207
18.0


(c) Wealthy peasants and bourgeoisie
1.5
70
46.7
1.53
73
47.7


 (d) Feudal landlords
0.03
70
2,333.0
—
—
—


 Total
13.03
230
17.6
13.03
280
21.4


 Unclassified land
—
50
—
—
—
—


 Grand total
13.03
280
21.4
—
—
—




Such is the economic basis of the struggle for land in the Russian
revolution. Such is the starting-point of this struggle and its tendency, i.e.,
its ultimate point, its result in the best eventuality (from the standpoint of
those engaged in the struggle).


Before proceeding to examine this economic basis and its ideological (and
ideological-political) cloak, let us dwell on possible misunderstandings and
objections as well.


First, it may be said that my picture presupposes the division of the
land, whereas I have not yet examined the question of municipalisation,
division, nationalisation, or socialisation.


That would be a misunderstanding. My picture leaves out altogether the
terms of landownership; it does not deal at all with the terms
of the transfer of the land to the peasants (whether in ownership or in one or
another form of tenure). I have taken only the transfer of the land in
general to the small peasants and there can be no doubt whatever that this
is the trend of our agrarian struggle. The small peasants are fighting, fighting
to have the land transferred to themselves. Small (bourgeois)
cultivation is fighting large-scale (feudal)

    landownership.[2]

At best, the revolution can have no other result than the one I
have drawn.  
 

Secondly, it may be said that I had no right to assume that all the
confiscated lands (or expropriated lands, for I have not yet said anything
about the terms of expropriation) will be transferred to the peasants with
little land. It may be said that owing to economic necessity the lands
must be transferred to the wealthier peasants. But such an
objection would be a misunderstanding. To demonstrate the bourgeois
character of the revolution, I must take the best eventuality from
the standpoint of the Narodniks, I must assume the achievement of
the aim set themselves by those who are fighting. I must take an aspect
that most closely approaches the so-called

General Redistribution[5]

and not the further consequences of the agrarian revolution. If the masses
win the struggle, they will take the fruits of the victory for
themselves. To whom these fruits will ultimately go is another matter.


Thirdly, it may be said that I have assumed an unusually favourable result for
the poor peasantry (that the whole of the poor peasantry will be transformed
into middle peas ants with holdings up to 18 dessiatins per household)
by overestimating the extent of the unoccupied land area. It may ho
said that I should have discounted forests, which, it is said, cannot
be allotted to the peasants. Such objections may, and even inevitably will, be
raised by the economists in the government and Cadet camp, but they will be
wrong. First, one must be a bureaucrat who all his life grovels to the
semi-feudal landlord to imagine that the peasants will not be able to manage
forest land properly and derive an income from it for themselves and
not for the landlords. The standpoint of the police official and of the Russian
liberal is: how to provide the muzhik with an allotment? The standpoint of the
class-conscious worker is: how to free the muzhik from feudal landlordism? How
to break up the feudal latifundia? Secondly I have left out the whole
of the northern region (the Arkhangelsk, Vologda, and Olonets gubernias), as
well as parts of the Vyatka and Perm gubernias, i.e., areas in which it is
difficult to imagine that the agricultural exploitation of land covered by
forests is likely in the near future. Thirdly, a special calculation of the
forest areas would greatly complicate the matter without much altering the
results. For instance,

    

Mr. Kaufman, who is a Cadet, and, consequently, is very cautious
when dealing with landlord estates, calculates that land with over 25 per
cent of forest might go to cover the shortage of land, and he thus obtains
an area of 101,700,000 dessiatins for 44 gubernias. For 47 gubernias I have
estimated a land area of approximately 101,000,000 dessiatins, i. e.,
67,000,000 out of the 70,000,000 dessiatins of the feudal latifundia, and
34,000,000 dessiatins owned by the state and by various
institutions. Assuming that all landed estates of over 100 dessiatins are
to be expropriated, these lands will be increased by another nine or ten
million

     dessiatins.[3]

 

Notes
 

[1]
As already mentioned, this table is. given in round figures. Here are
the exact figures: allotment land: (a) 10,100,000 holdings and 72,900,000
dessiatins; (b)874,000 holdings and 15,000,000 dessiatins. Private landed
property up to 10 dessiatins, 410,000 holdings and 1,600,000 dessiatins;
10-20 dessiatins, 106,000 holdings and 1,600,000 dessiatins, Sum total a+b
of both categories of land: 11,500,000 holdings and 91,200,000
dessiatins. For group (c) the exact. figures are 1,500,000 holdings and
69,500,000 dessiatins. For group (d): 27,833 holdings and 61,990,000
dessiatins of land. To the latter are added, as already mentioned,
5,100,000 dessiatins of crown lands and 3,600,000 dessiatins owned by the
very large industrial and commercial associations. The exact figure of land
not classified according to holdings was given above as 48,500,000
dessiatins. From this the reader may see that all our approximate
calculations and round figures involve quite negligible numerical changes
and cannot affect our conclusions in the least.  —Lenin

[2]
What I have put. in brackets is either ignored or denied by the
petty-bourgeois ideology of the Narodniks. I shall deal with this later on.
—Lenin

[3]
The alienation limit of 500 dessiatins. which I have taken in the text,
is purely hypothetical. If this limit, is taken as 100 dessiatins, which is
also purely hypothetical, the picture of the change will he as follows:





Now
Then


 
Households(millions)
Total area  ofland (milliondessiatins)
 
Households(millions)
Total areaof land(milliondessiatins)
Dess. perhousehold




(a)
10.5
75
(a)
—
—
 


 (b)
1.0
15
(b)
11.5
217
18.8


  (c)
1.4
50
(c)
1.53
63
41.1


  (d)
0.13
90
(d)
—
—
—


  
13.03
230+ 50
 
13.03
280
21.4




The main conclusions about the character and essence of the change are
identical in either case.  —Lenin
 



[4]
Winter hiring—the system practised by the landlords and
kulaks of hiring peasants for summer work in the winter, when the peasants
were badly in need of money and compelled to accept enslaving terms.





[5]
General Redistribution—a slogan expressing the peasants’
urge towards a general redistribution of the land and the abolition of
landlordism.

 

 
  

1. Landownership in European Russia

|

3. The Cadet Writers Obscure the Nature of the Struggle

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Cadet
    Writers Obscure









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 3. The Cadet Writers Obscure the Nature of the Struggle







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

3. The Cadet Writers Obscure the Nature of the Struggle

The data given here on the role of the large landlord estates in the struggle
for land in Russia must be amplified in one respect; A characteristic feature of
the agrarian programmes of our bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie is the fact
that in them the question as to which class is the most powerful
opponent of the peasantry, and which holdings form the bulk of the
expropriable lands are obscured by arguments about “norms”. They
(both the Cadets and the Trudoviks) talk mainly about how much land the
peasants need according to this or that “norm”, instead of dealing
with the more concrete and vital question: how much land is available
for expropriation? The first way of presenting the question obscures the class
struggle, conceals the essence
    

of the matter by hollow pretensions to a “state” point of
view. The second places the chief emphasis on the class struggle, on the
class interests of a definite landowning stratum which largely represents
feudal tendencies.  

We shall revert to the question of “norms” elsewhere. Here
we want to mention one “happy” exception among the Trudoviks,
and one typical Cadet writer.  

In the Second Duma, the Popular Socialist Delarov referred to the
percentage of landowners who would be affect ed by the alienation of land
(47th sitting, May 20, 1907). Delarov spoke of alienation
(compulsory), without raising the question of confiscation, and apparently
accepted the same norm of alienation which I have taken
hypothetically in my table, namely, 500 dessiatins. Unfortunately, in the
stenographic records of the Second Duma this particular passage in
Delarov’s speech (p. 1217) is distorted, unless Mr. Delarov himself
made a mistake. The record says that compulsory alienation would affect 32
per cent of the private estates and 96 per cent of their total area of
land; the rest, 68 per cent of the landowners, it is claimed, have only 4
per cent of the private land. Actually, the figure should be not 32 per
cent, but 3.7 per cent, because 27,833 out of 752,881 landowners constitute
3.7 per cent, whereas the area of land affected—62,000,000 dessiatins
out of a total of 85,800,000 dessiatins—amounts to 72.3 per cent. It
is not clear whether this was a slip on Mr. Delarov’s part, or
whether he got hold of the wrong figures. At all events, of the numerous
speakers in the Duma, he, if we are not mistaken, was the only one who
approached the real issue of the struggle in the most direct and
concrete way.  

A Cadet writer whose “works” one must mention when dealing
with this question is Mr. S. Prokopovich. True, he is, strictly speaking, a
member of the Bez Zaglaviya group, who, like the majority of the
contributors to the bourgeois newspaper Tovarishch, at one moment
poses as a Cadet and at another as a Menshevik Social-Democrat. Lie is a
typical representative of the handful of consistent Bernsteinians among the
Russian bourgeois intellectuals who waver between the Cadets and the
Social-Democrats, who (in most cases) join no party, and in the liberal
press

    

pursue a line slightly to the right of Plekhanov. Mr. Prokopovich must be
mentioned here because he was one of the first to quote in the press figures
from the 1905 landed property statistics, and in so doing actually adopted the
Cadet position on agrarian reform. In two articles which he wrote for
Tovarishch (No. 214 of March 13, 1907, and No. 238 of April 10, 1907),
Mr. Prokopovich argues against General Zolotaryov, the compiler of the official
statistics, who tries to prove that the government can tackle the land reform
quite easily without any compulsory alienation, and that 5 dessiatins per
household are quite sufficient for the peasant to conduct his husbandry!
Mr. Prokopovich is more liberal: he puts the figure at 8
dessiatins per household. He repeatedly makes the reservation,
however, that this amount of land is “quite inadequate”, that this
is a “very modest” calculation, and so forth; nevertheless, he
accepts this figure in order to determine the “degree of the land
shortage” (the title of the first of Mr. Prokopovich’s articles
mentioned above). He explains that he takes this figure “to avoid
unnecessary disputes”—presumably with the Zolotaryovs. Calculating
thus the number of “obviously land-poor” peasant households at one
half the total, Mr. Prokopovich correctly estimates that in order to bring the
peasants’ holdings up to 8 dessiatins, 18,600,000 dessiatins will be required,
and since the government’s total land reserve is alleged to be not more
than 9,000,000 dessiatins, “it will be impossible to avoid compulsory
alienation”.


Both in his calculations and in his arguments, this Menshevik-minded Cadet, or
Cadet-minded Menshevik, admirably expresses the spirit and meaning of the
liberal agrarian programme. The questions of the semi-feudal latifundia, and
of latifundia in general, is quite glossed over. Mr. Prokopovich quoted the
figures only for private hold ings of more than 50 dessiatins.

Thus, the actual issue of this struggle is obscured. The class interests of
a handful, literally a handful, of landlords are concealed behind a veil.

Instead of an exposure of those interests, we are given the “state
point of view”: the state lands “will not
suffice”. Hence, if they did suffice, Mr. Prokopovich, to judge
from his argument, would be quite willing to leave the feudal latifundia
intact....  
 

The peasant’s allotment scale that he takes (8 dessiatins) is a
starvation scale. The amount of land to be “compulsorily
alienated” from the landlords that he allows for is insignificant
(18—9=9 million dessiatins out of 62,000,000 in estates of over 500
dessiatins!). To carry out that kind of “compulsory
alienation”, the landlords will have to use compulsion on
the peasants, as in 1861!  

Whether he meant to or not, wittingly or unwittingly, Mr. Prokopovich
has correctly expressed the landlord nature of the Cadet
agrarian programme. But the Cadets are cautious and sly: they prefer to
say nothing at all about how much land they are inclined to
expropriate from the land lords.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

2. What is the Struggle About?

|

4. The Economic Nature of the Agrarian Revolution and its Ideological Cloaks

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Economic
    Nature of the Agrarian Revolution









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 4. The Economic Nature of the Agrarian Revolution and its Ideological Cloaks







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

4. The Economic Nature of the Agrarian Revolution
    and its Ideological Cloaks

We have seen that the essence of the revolution now in progress amounts to the
break-up of the feudal latifundia and to the creation of a free and (as far as
this. is possible under present circumstances) well-to-do peasantry capable not
only of toiling in misery on the land, but of developing the productive forces
and promoting the progress of agriculture. This revolution does not and cannot
in any way affect the system of small production in agriculture, the
domination of the market over the producer and, consequently, the
domination also of commodity production, since the struggle for the
redistribution of the land. cannot alter the relations of production in
the farming of this land. And we have seen that a feature of this struggle is
the strong development of small-scale farming on the feudal latifundia.


The ideological cloak of the struggle now in progress is furnished by
the theories of the Narodniks. The fact that in the First and Second Dumas
the peasant representatives from all over Russia openly came out with
agrarian programmes has definitely proved that the theories and programmes
of the Narodniks do indeed constitute the ideological cloak of the
peasants’ struggle for land.  

We have shown that the basic and chief component of the distributable land for
which the peasants are fighting

    

are the big feudal estates. We have taken a very high norm of
expropriation—500 dessiatins. But it can easily be seen that our
conclusions hold good however much this norm is reduced, let us say to 100
or to 50 dessiatins. Let us divide group (c)—20-500 dessiatins, into
three subgroups: (aa) 20-50 dessiatins, (bb) 50-100, and (cc) 100-500, and
see what the size of the peasant allotments and private holdings is within
these subdivisions: 




 
[CATEGORY]


Subdivisions
Number of holdings
Total area of land
Average per holding


(dessiatins)




 
Allotment Land


20-50 dess.
1,062,504
30,898,147
29.1


50-100 "
191,898
12,259,171
63.9


  100-500 "
40,658
5,762,276
141.7


 
Private Land


20-50 dess.
103,237
3,301,004
32.0


50-100 "
44,877
3,229,858
71.9


 100-500 "
61,188
14,096,637
230.4


 
Total in European Russia


20-50 dess.
1,165,741
34,199,151
29.3


50-100 "
236,775
15,489,029
65.4


  100-500 "
101,846
19,858,913
194.9




Hence it follows, first, that the confiscation of estates of over 100
dessiatins will increase the distributable land, as already stated above,
by nine to ten million dessiatins, whereas the confiscation of estates of
over 50 dessiatins, as assumed by Chizhevsky, a member of the First Duma,
will increase this land by eighteen and a half million
dessiatins. Consequently, in this case also, the feudal latifundia will
form the basis of the distributable land area. That is the crux of
the present-day agrarian problem. More over, the connection that exists
between these big estates arid the higher bureaucracy is also quite well
known: G. A. Alexinsky in the Second Duma quoted Mr. Rubakin’s data
on the size of the estates owned by higher officials in Russia. Secondly,
it is seen from these data that even after deducting the peasant allotments
and the estates of over 100 dessiatins, the size of the bigger
allotments (and the small estates) still varies considerably. The
revolution already finds the peasants differentiated in regard to size

    

of holdings, and still more in the amount of capital, number of livestock,
the quantity and quality of implements, etc. That the differentiation in
the sphere of non-allotment property, so to speak, is far more considerable
than in the sphere of allotment landownership has been sufficiently proved
in our economic literature.  

What, then, is the significance of the Narodnik theories, which more or
less accurately reflect the views of the peas ants on their struggle for
land? The substance of these Narodnik theories is contained in two
“principles”: the “labour principle” and
“equalisation”. The petty-bourgeois nature of those principles
is so manifest and has been so often and so fully demonstrated in Marxist
literature that there is no need to dwell on it here. It is important,
however, to note a feature of these “principles” that has not
yet been properly appreciated by Russian Social-Democrats. In a vague form
those principles do express something real and
progressive at the present historical moment. Namely, they express
the struggle for the break-up of the feudal latifundia.  

Look at the outline given above of the evolution of our agrarian system
from the present stage to the “ultimate point” of the present,
bourgeois revolution. You will clearly see that the future
“then” is distinguished from the present “now” by
an incomparably greater “equalisation” in owner ship, that the
new distribution of the land conforms far more to the
“labour principle”. And that is not accidental It cannot be
otherwise in a peasant country, the bourgeois development of which
emancipates it from serfdom. In such a country, the break-up of the feudal
latifundia is undoubtedly a condition for the development of
capitalism. But as long as small-scale farming predominates in agriculture,
the break-up of the feudal latifundia inevitably implies greater
“equalisation” in landownership. In breaking up the medieval
latifundia, capitalism begins with a more “equalised”
landownership, and out of that creates large-scale farming on a
new basis, on the basis of wage-labour, machinery and superior agricultural
technique, and not on the basis of labour rent and bondage.  

The mistake all the Narodniks make is that by confining themselves to
the narrow outlook of the small husbandman,

    

they fail to perceive the bourgeois nature of the social relations into
which the peasant enters on coming out of the fetters of serfdom. They
convert the “labour principle” of petty-bourgeois
agriculture and “equalisation”, which are their slogans for
breaking up the feudal latifundia, into something absolute,
self-sufficing, into something implying a special, non-bourgeois order.


The mistake some Marxists make is that, while criticising the Narodnik
theory, they overlook its historically real and historically
legitimate content in the struggle against serfdom. They
criticise, and rightly criticise, the “labour principle” and
“equalisation” as backward, reactionary petty-bourgeois
socialism; but they forget that these theories express
progressive, revolutionary petty bourgeois democracy, that they
serve as the banner of the most determined struggle against the old, feudal
Russia, The idea of equality is the most revolutionary idea in the struggle
against the old system of absolutism in general, and against the old system
of feudal landlordism in particular. The idea of equality is
legitimate and progressive for the petty-bourgeois peasant insofar as it
expresses the struggle against feudal, serf inequality. The idea of
“equalised” landownership is legitimate and progressive insofar
as it expresses the aspirations of ten million peasants, with allotments of
seven dessiatins and ruined by the landlords, for a

  division[1]

of the 2,300-dessiatin feudal latifundia, And in the present historical
situation that idea really expresses such strivings, it gives an
impetus towards consistent bourgeois revolution, while mistakenly
clothing this in vague, quasi-socialist phraseology. He would be a
poor Marxist indeed who, while criticising the falsity of a socialist
disguise for bourgeois slogans, failed to appreciate their historically
progressive significance as the most decisive bourgeois slogans in
the struggle against serfdom, The real content of the revolution
which the Narodnik regards as “socialisation” will be that it
will most consistently

    

clear the way for capitalism, will most resolutely eradicate serfdom. The
outline which I have drawn above indicates precisely the maximum to be
achieved in the abolition of serfdom and the maximum of
“equalisation” to be attained thereby. The Narodnik imagines
that this “equalisation” eliminates the bourgeois element,
whereas, in reality, it expresses the aspirations of the most
radical bourgeoisie. And whatever else there is in
“equalisation” over and above that is nothing but ideological
smoke, a petty-bourgeois illusion.  

The short-sighted and unhistorical judgement of some Russian Marxists
on the significance of Narodnik theories in the Russian bourgeois
revolution is to be explained by the fact that they have not reflected on
the significance of the “confiscation” of the landlord estates
which the Narodniks advocate. One has only to visualise clearly the
economic basis of this revolution under the present conditions of
landownership in our country in order to grasp not only the illusory nature
of the Narodnik theories, but also the truth of the struggle, restricted to
a definite historical task, the truth of the struggle against serfdom,
which represents the real content of those illusory theories.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
We speak here of division not as private property. but for economic
use. Such a division is possible—and, with the predominance of small
farming, inevitable for some time—both under municipalisation and under
nationalisation.  —Lenin
 

 
  

3. The Cadet Writers Obscure the Nature of the Struggle

|

5. Two Types of Bourgeois Agrarian Evolution

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Bourgeois Agrarian
    Evolution









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 5. Two Types of Bourgeois Agrarian Evolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

5. Two Types of Bourgeois Agrarian Evolution

To proceed. We have shown that the Narodnik theories, while
absurd and reactionary from the standpoint of the struggle for socialism
against the bourgeoisie, turn out to be “rational” (in the sense of
being a specific historic task) and progressive in the bourgeois struggle
against serfdom. The question now arises: when we say that serfdom must
inevitably die out in Russian landownership and in the whole social system
in Russia, when we say that a bourgeois-democratic agrarian revolution is
inevitable, does that mean that this can take place only in one definite
form? Or is it possible in various forms?  

That question is of cardinal importance for arriving at correct views
on our revolution and on the Social-Democratic agrarian programme. And
solve this question we must, starting out from the data given above
concerning the economic basis of the revolution.  
 

The pivot of tile struggle is the feudal latifundia which are the most
conspicuous embodiment and the strongest mainstay of the survivals of
serfdom in Russia. The development of commodity production and capitalism
will certainly and inevitably put an end to those survivals. In that
respect Russia has only one path before her, that of bourgeois
development.  

But there may be two forms of that development. The survivals of
serfdom may fall away either as a result of the transformation of landlord
economy or as a result of the abolition of the landlord latifundia, i. e.,
either by re form or by revolution. Bourgeois development may proceed by
having big landlord economies at the head, which will gradually become more
and more bourgeois and gradually substitute bourgeois for feudal methods of
exploitation. It may also proceed by having small peasant economies at the
head, which in a revolutionary way, will remove the “excrescence” of the
feudal latifundia from the social organism and then freely develop without
them along the path of capitalist economy.  

Those two paths of objectively possible bourgeois development we would
call the Prussian path and the American path, respectively. In the first
case feudal landlord economy slowly evolves into bourgeois, Junker landlord
economy, which condemns the peasants to decades of most harrowing
expropriation and bondage, while at the same time a small minority of
Grossbauern (“big peasants”) arises. In the second case
there is no landlord economy, or else it is broken up by revolution, which
confiscates and splits up the feudal estates. In that case the peasant
predominates, becomes the sole agent of agriculture, and evolves into a
capitalist farmer. In the first case the main content of the evolution is
transformation of feudal bondage into servitude and capitalist exploitation
on the land of the feudal landlords—Junkers. In the second case the
main background is transformation of the patriarchal peasant into a
bourgeois farmer.  

In the economic history of Russia both these types of evolution are
clearly in evidence. Take the epoch of the fall of serfdom. A struggle went
on between the landlords and the peasants over tile method of carrying out
the reform.

    

Both stood for conditions of bourgeois economic development (without being
aware of it), but the former wanted a development that would preserve to
the utmost the land lord economies, the landlord revenues, and the landlord
(bondage) methods of exploitation. The latter wanted a development that
would secure for the peasants the greatest degree of prosperity possible
with the existing level of agriculture, the abolition of the landlord
latifundia, the abolition of all serf and bondage methods of exploitation,
and the expansion of free peasant landownership. Needless to say, in the
second case the development of capitalism and the growth of the productive
forces would have been wider and more rapid than by peasant
reform, carried out in the landlords’

 way.[1]

Only caricature Marxists, as the Narodniks, the opponents of Marxism, tried
to depict them, could have believed that the divorcement of the peasantry
from the land in 1861 guaranteed the development of capitalism. On the
contrary, it would have been a guarantee— and so in fact it turned
out to be—a guarantee of bondage, i.e., semi-serf tenant
farming and labour rent, i. e., corvée economy, which exceedingly
retarded the development of capitalism and the growth of the productive
forces in Russian agriculture. The conflict of interests between the peas
ants and the landlords was not a struggle waged by “people’s
production” or the “labour principle” against the
bourgeoisie

    

(as our Narodniks have imagined it to be)—it was a struggle for
the American type of bourgeois development as against the Prussian type of
bourgeois development.


And in those localities of Russia where no serfdom bad existed, where
agriculture was undertaken entirely, or chiefly, by free peasants (for
example, in the steppes of the Trans-Volga area, Novorossia, and the Northern
Caucasus, which were colonised after the Reform), the growth of the productive
forces and the development of capitalism proceeded far more rapidly than in the
central provinces which were burdened by survivals of

       serfdom.[2]


While Russia’s agricultural centre and agricultural borderlands
show us, as it were, the spatial or geographical distribution of the
localities in which one or the other type of agrarian evolution prevails,
the fundamental features of both types of evolution are also clearly
evident in all those localities where landlord and peasant farming
exist side by side. A cardinal mistake of the Narodnik economists was that
they believed that landlord farming was the only source of agrarian
capitalism, while they regarded peasant farming from the point of view of
“people’s production” and the “labour
principle” (that is the view taken even now by the Trudoviks, the
“Popular Socialists”, and the Socialist-Revolutionaries). We
know that this is wrong. Landlord economy evolves in a capitalist way and
gradually replaces the labour rent system by “free
wage-labour”, the three-field system by intensive cultivation, and
the obsolete peasant implements by the improved machinery employed on the
big private farms. Peasant farming also evolves in a capitalist
way and gives rise to a rural bourgeoisie and a rural proletariat. The
better the condition of the “village commune” and the greater
the prosperity of the peasantry in general, the more rapid is the
process of differentiation among the peasantry into the antagonistic

    

classes of capitalist agriculture. Consequently, we see two streams of
agrarian evolution everywhere. The conflict of interests between the
peasants and the landlords which runs like a scarlet thread through the
whole history of post-Reform Russia and constitutes the most important
economic basis of our revolution, is a struggle for one or the other type
of bourgeois agrarian evolution.  

Only by clearly understanding the difference between these two types and the
bourgeois character of both, can we correctly explain the agrarian
question in the Russian revolution and grasp the class significance of the
various agrarian programmes put forward by the different

       parties.[3]

The pivot of the struggle, we repeat, is the feudal latifundia. The
capitalist evolution of these is beyond all dispute, but it is possible in
two forms:, either they will be abolished, eliminated in a revolutionary
manner by peasant farmers, or they will be gradually transformed into
Junker estates (and correspondingly,, the enthralled muzhik will be
transformed into an enthralled Knecht).  
    

     

Notes
 

[1]
In the magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye (May-June 1900), I wrote
on this subject as follows: "... The more the land the peasants
received when they were emancipated, and the lower the price they paid for
it, the faster, wider, and freer would have been the development of
capitalism in Russia, the higher would have been the standard of living of
the population, the wider would have .been the home market, the faster
would have been the introduction of machinery into production; the more, in
a word, would the economic development of Russia have resembled that of
America. I shall confine myself to indicating two circumstances which, in
my opinion, confirm the correctness of the latter view:

(1) land-poverty and the burden of taxation have led to the development
over a very considerable area of Russia of the labour-service system of
private-landowner farming, i. e., a direct survival of
serfdom, and not at all to the development of capitalism;

(2) it is in our border regions, where serfdom was either entirely unknown,
or was feeblest, and where the peasants suffer least from land shortage,
labour-service, and the burden of taxation, that there has been the
greatest development of capitalism in agriculture.” (See, present edition,
Vol. 3, pp. 624-25.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[2]
I have dealt in detail with the importance of the borderlands of Russia
as colonisation lands during the development of capitalism in The
Development of Capitalism in Russia. (St. Petersburg, 1899, pp. 185,
444, et al.) Second edition issued, St. Petersburg, 1908. (See present
edition, Vol. 3, pp.. 257, 561, 590-95.—Ed.) The question of the
importance of the borderlands in regard to the Social-Democratic agrarian
programme will be dealt with separately later on.  —Lenin

[3]
The amount of confusion that reigns at times in the minds of Russian
Social-Democrats about the two paths of bourgeois agrarian evolution in
Russia is demonstrated by P Maslov. In Obrazovaniye (No. 3,1907),
he outlines two paths: (1) “capitalism in process of development” and (2)
“a useless struggle against economic development”. “The first path,”. if
you please, “leads the working class and the whole of society towards
socialism; the second path pushes [!] the working class into the arms [!]
of the bourgeoisie, into a struggle between big and small proprietors, into
a struggle from which the working class has nothing to gain but defeat”
(p. .92). In the first place, the “second path” is an empty phrase, a
dream and not a path; it is a false ideology, and not a real possibility of
development. Secondly, Maslov fails to see that Stolypin and the
bourgeoisie are also leading the peasantry along the capitalist road;
consequently, the real struggle is not about capitalism as such, but about
the type of capitalist development. Thirdly, it is sheer nonsense to talk
as if there can be a path in Russia which will not “push” the working
class under the domination of the bourgeoisie Fourthly, it is equally
nonsensical to allege that there can be a “path” on which there will be
no struggle between small and big proprietors. Fifthly, by the use of terms
descriptive of general European categories (big and small proprietors),
Maslov obscures the historical peculiarity of Russia which is of great
significance in the present revolution: the struggle between
petty-bourgeois and big feudal proprietors.  —Lenin
 

 
  

4. The Economic Nature of the Agrarian Revolution and its Ideological Cloaks

|

6. Two lines Of Agrarian Programmes in the Revolution

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Agrarian
    Programmes









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 6. Two lines Of Agrarian Programmes in the Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

6. Two lines Of Agrarian Programmes in the Revolution

If we now compare the agrarian programmes put forward by the different classes
in the course of the revolution with the economic basis outlined above, we shall
at once perceive two lines in these programmes, corresponding to the two types
of agrarian evolution which we have indicated.


Let us take the Stolypin programme, which is supported by the Right landlords
and the Octobrists. It is avowedly a landlords’ programme. But can it be said
that it is reactionary in the economic sense, i. e., that it precludes, or seeks
to preclude, the development of capitalism, to prevent a bourgeois agrarian
evolution? Not at all. On the contrary, the famous agrarian legislation
introduced by Stolypin under Article 87 is permeated through and through with
the purely bourgeois spirit. There can be no doubt that it. follows the line of
capitalist evolution, facilitates and pushes forward that evolution, hastens the
expropriation of the peasantry, the break-up of the village commune, and the
creation of a peasant bourgeoisie. Without a doubt, that legislation is
progressive in the scientific-economic sense.


But does that mean that Social-Democrats should “sup port” it? It
does not. Only vulgar Marxism can reason in that way, a Marxism whose seeds
Plekhanov and the Mensheviks are so persistently sowing when they sing, shout,
plead, and proclaim: we must support the bourgeoisie in its struggle against the
old order of things. No. To facilitate the development of the productive forces
(this highest criterion of social progress) we must support not bourgeois
evolution of the landlord type, but bourgeois evolution of the peasant type. The
former implies the utmost preservation of bondage and serfdom (remodelled on
bourgeois lines), the least rapid development of the productive forces, and the
retarded development of capitalism; it implies infinitely greater misery and
suffering, exploitation and oppression for the broad mass of the peasantry and,
consequently, also for the proletariat. The second type implies the most rapid
development of the productive forces and

    

the best possible (under commodity production) conditions of existence for
the mass of the peasantry. The tactics of Social-Democracy in the Russian
bourgeois revolution are determined not by the task of supporting the
liberal bourgeoisie, as the opportunists think, but by the task of
supporting. the fighting peasantry.  

Let us take the programme of the liberal bourgeoisie, 1. e., the Cadet
programme. True to the motto: “at your service” (i. e., at the
service of the landlords), they proposed one programme in the First Duma
and another in the Second. They can change their programme as easily and
imperceptibly as all the European unprincipled bourgeois careerists do. In
the First Duma the revolution appeared to be strong, and so the liberal
programme borrowed from it a bit of nationalisation (the “state land
available for distribution”). In the Second Duma the
counter-revolution appeared to be strong, and so the liberal programme
threw the state land available for distribution overboard, swung round to
the Stolypin idea of stable peasant property, strengthened and enlarged the
scope of exemptions from the general rule of compulsory alienation of the
landlords’ land. But we note this two-faced attitude of the liberals only
in passing. The important thing to note here is some thing else, viz., the
principle which is common to both “faces” of
the liberal agrarian programme. That common principle consists of:

(1) redemption payments;

(2) preservation of the landlords’ estates;

(3) preservation of the landlords’ privileges when carrying out the reform.


Redemption payment is tribute imposed upon social development, tribute
paid to the owners of the feudal latifundia. Redemption payment is tile
realisation, ensured by bureaucratic, police measures, of the feudal
methods of exploitation in the shape of the bourgeois “universal
equivalent”. Further, preservation of the landlords’ estates is seen
in one or another degree in both Cadet programmes, no matter how
the bourgeois politicians may try to conceal that fact from the people. The
third point—the preservation of the landlords’ privileges when
carrying out the reform—is quite definitely expressed in the Cadets’
attitude to the election of local land committees on the basis of
universal, direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot.

    

We cannot here go into

       details[1]

which concern another part of our argument. All we need do here is to
define the line of the Cadet agrarian programme. And in this
connection we must say that the question of the composition of the local
land committees is of cardinal importance. Only political infants
could be taken in by the sound of the Cadet slogan of
“compulsory alienation”. The question is, who will
compel whom? Will the landlords compel the peasants (to pay an exorbitant
price for inferior land), or will the peasants compel the landlords? The
Cadet talk “about equal representation of the conflicting
interests” and about the undesirability of “one-sided
violence” reveals as clear as clear can be the essence of the matter,
namely, that the Cadet idea of compulsory alienation means that the land
lords will compel the peasants!  

The Cadet agrarian programme follows the line of Stolypin progress,
i. e., landlord bourgeois progress. That is a fact. Failure to appreciate
this fact is the fundamental mistake made by those Social-Democrats who,
like some of

    

the Mensheviks, regard the Cadet agrarian policy as being more progressive
than the Narodnik policy.  

As for the spokesmen of the peasantry, i. e., the Trudoviks, the
Social-Narodniks, and partly the Socialist-Revolutionaries, we find that,
in spite of considerable vacillation and wavering, they, in both
Dumas, adopted a very clear line of defending the interests of the
peasantry against the landlords. For instance, vacillation is observed in
the programme of the Trudoviks on the question of redemption payments, but,
in the first place, they frequently interpret that as something in the
nature of public relief for disabled

      landlords[2]

;

secondly, in the records of the Second Duma one can find a number of
exceedingly characteristic speeches by peasants repudiating
redemption payments and proclaiming the slogan: all the land to all the

       people.[3]

On the question of the local land committees—this all-important
question as to who will compel whom—the peasant deputies are the
originators and supporters of the idea of having them elected by universal
suffrage.  

We are not, for the time being, dealing with the content of the
agrarian programmes of the Trudoviks and Socialist-Revolutionaries, on the
one hand, and the Social-Democrats, on the other. We must first of all note
the incontrovertible fact that the agrarian programmes of all the
parties and classes which came out openly in the Russian revolution can be
clearly divided into two basic types, corresponding to the two
types of bourgeois agrarian evolution. The dividing line between the
“Right” and “Left” agrarian programmes does not run
between the Octobrists

    

and the Cadets, as is frequently and mistakenly assumed by the Mensheviks
(who allow themselves to he taken in by the sound of
“constitutional-democratic” words and substitute analysis of
the respective titles of the parties for a class analysis). The dividing
line runs between the Cadets and the Trudoviks. That line is determined by
the interests of the two principal classes in Russian society
which are fighting for the land, viz., the landlords and the peasantry. The
Cadets stand for the preservation of landlordism and for a civilised,
European, but landlord bourgeois evolution of agriculture. The
Trudoviks (and the Social-Democratic workers’ deputies), i.e., the
representatives of the peasantry and the representatives of the
proletariat, advocate, a peasant bourgeois evolution of
agriculture.  

A strict distinction must be drawn between the ideological cloak of the
agrarian programmes, their different political details, etc., and the
economic basis of those programmes. The present difficulty does not lie in
understanding the bourgeois character of the agrarian demands and
programmes of both the landlords and the peasants: that was
already explained by the Marxists before the revolution, and the revolution
has confirmed the correctness of their explanation. The difficulty lies in
understanding fully the basis of the struggle between the two classes
with in the framework of bourgeois society and bourgeois
evolution. The fact that this struggle is a normal social phenomenon will
not be understood unless it is seen as part and parcel of the objective
tendencies of the economic development of capitalist Russia.  

Now, having shown the connection between the two types of agrarian
programmes in the Russian revolution and the two types of bourgeois
agrarian evolution, we must pass on to the examination of a new, extremely
important aspect of the question.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See the records of the First Duma, 14th sitting, May 24, 1906, which
show that the Cadets Kokoshkin and Kotlyarevsky, hand in hand with the
(then) Octobrist Heyden, resorted to the basest sophistry to repudiate the
idea of local land committees. In the Second Duma:

the evasions by the Cadet Savelyev (16th sitting. March 26, 1907) and the
open opposition to the idea of local committees by the Cadet Tatarinov
(24th sitting, April 9,1907, p. 1783 of Stenographic Record). The newspaper
Rech, No. 82, for May 25, 1906. contained a noteworthy leading
article which is reprinted in Milyukov’s A Year of Struggle,
No. 117, pp. 457-59. Here is the decisive passage from this Octobrist in
disguise: “We believe that setting up these commit tees on the basis of
universal suffrage would mean preparing them not for the peaceful solution
of the land problem in the local areas, but for something entirely
different. Control of the general direction of the reform ought to be left
in the hands of the state.... The local commissions should consist as
equally as possible [sic!] of representatives of the conflicting
interests which can be reconciled without impairing the state importance of
the proposed reform, and without turning it into an act of one-sided
violence”... (p. 459). In the Cadet Agrarian Question, Vol. II,
Mr. Kutler published the text of his Bill which ensures to the
landlords, plus the officials, preponderance over the peasants in
all the principal, gubernia and uyezd land commissions and
committees (pp. 640-41), while Mr. A. Chuprov—a “liberal”!— defends on
principle the same despicable plan of the landlords to swindle the peasants
(p. 33).  —Lenin

[2]
See Sbornik “Izvestii Krestyanskikh Deputatov” i “Trudovoi
Rossii” (The Symposium of “Peasant Deputies’ News” and “Toiling
Russia”), St. Petersburg, 1906, a collection of newspaper
articles by the Trudoviks in the First Duma; for instance, the article
entitled “Grants, Not Redemption Payments” (pp. 44-49), et al.  —Lenin

[3]
See the speech made by the Right-wing peasant deputy
Petrochenko in the Second Duma (22nd sitting, April 5, 1907): Kutler, he
said, proposed good conditions.... “Of course, being a wealthy man he has
named a high figure, and we, poor peasants, cannot pay such a price”
(p. 1616). Thus, the Right-wing peasant is more to the
left than the bourgeois politician who is playing at being a
liberal. See also the speech of the non-party peasant deputy
Semyonov (April 12, 1907), which breathes the spirit of the spontaneous
revolutionary struggle of the peasants, and many other speeches.  —Lenin
 

 
  

5. Two Types of Bourgeois Agrarian Evolution

|

7. Russia’s Land Area. The Question of the Colonisation

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Russia's Land
    Area









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 7. Russia's Land Area. The Question of the Colonisation







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

7. Russia’s Land Area. The Question of the Colonisation

We have pointed out above that on the question of
capitalism in Russia the economic analysis compels us to distinguish
between the central agricultural provinces with

    

their plentiful survivals of serfdom, and the borderlands where those
survivals are absent, or weak, and which bear the features of free-peasant
capitalist evolution.  

What do we mean by the borderlands? Obviously, lands which are unpopulated, or
sparsely populated, and which have not been completely drawn into
agriculture. And we must now pass from European Russia to the whole of the
Russian Empire in order to form an exact idea of these “borderlands”
and of their economic significance.


In the pamphlet written by Prokopovich and Mertvago, How Much Land There Is
in Russia and How We Use It (Moscow, 1907), the latter of those authors
tries to summarise all the statistical data available in our literature on the
amount of land in the whole of Russia and the economic use to which the
known amount of land is put. For the sake of clarity, we shall quote
Mr. Mertvago’s figures in the form of a table, and add the statistics of
the population according to the census of 1897.

    

    







 
Land area of the whole of Russia
Population ac-cording to cen-sus of 1897


Total land area
Of which
Of which


Squareversts(thou-sands)
Dessia-tinsmillions)
Nodataavail-able
Registeredlandareas
Arableland
Mead-ows
For-ests
Total
Total(thou-sands)
Aver-ageper sqverst


Millions ofdessiatins
Millions of dessiatins




10 gubernias of the Kingdom of Poland
111.6
11.6
–
11.6
7.4
0.9
2.5
10.8
9,402.2
84.3


38 gubernias west of the Volga
1,755.6
183.0
–
183.0
93.6
18.7
34.0
146.3
–
–


12 gubernias north and east of the Volga
2,474.9
258.0
–
258.0
22.3
7.1
132.0
161.4
–
–


Total for 50 gubernias of European Russia
4,230.5
441.0
–
441.0
115.9
25.8
166.0
307.7
93,442.9
22.1


Caucasus
411.7
42.9
22.
1
20.8
6.5
2.2
2.5
11.2
9,289.4
22.6


Siberia
10,966.1
1,142.6
639.7
502.9
4.3
3.9
121.0
129.2
5,758.8
0.5


Central Asia
3,141.6
327.3
157.4
169.9
0.9
1.6
8.0
10.5
7,746.7
2.5


Total for Asiatic Russia
14,519.4
1,512.8
819.2
693.6
11.7
7.7
131.5
150.9
–
–


Total for Russian

Empire[1]

18,861.5
1,965.4
819.2
1,146.2
135.0
34.4
300.0
469.4
125,640.0
6.7





These figures plainly show how vast is the land area of Russia and how little we
know about the borderlands and their economic importance. Of course, it would be
absolutely wrong to regard those lands at the present time, and in their
present state, as being suitable for satisfying the land needs of the Russian
peasantry. All calculations of that kind, frequently made by reactionary

       writers,[2]

are of no scientific value whatever. In this respect Mr. A. A. Kaufman is
quite right when he ridicules the search for vacant lands for colonisation
on the basis of statistics of square versts. Undoubtedly he is also right
when he points out how little land is suitable for colonisation in the
border lands of Russia at the present time, and how wrong it is

    

to presume that the land hunger of the Russian peasantry can be satisfied by

      migration.[3]


These correct arguments of Mr. Kaufman, the liberal, contain, nevertheless, a
very serious mistake. Mr. Kaufman argues in this way: “Considering the
type of people who now migrate, their present degree of prosperity, and their
present cultural level” (p. 129 of the book mentioned), the amount of land
available for satisfying the needs of the Russian peasants by means of
migration is absolutely in sufficient. Consequently, he concludes in defence of
the Cadet agrarian programme, compulsory alienation of private land in European
Russia is essential.


That is the usual argument of our liberal and liberal-Narodnik
economists. It is so constructed as to lead to the conclusion that if there
were sufficient land suitable for migration, the feudal latifundia could be
left intact! The Cadets and other politicians of the same kind are
thoroughly permeated with the ideas of the well-meaning official; they
claim to stand above classes and above the class struggle. The feudal
latifundia must be done away with not be cause they imply the feudal
exploitation and bondage of millions of the population and retard the
development of the productive forces, but because millions of families
cannot be immediately packed off to, say, Siberia or Turkestan! The stress
is laid not upon the feudal class character of the latifundia in Russia,
but upon the possibility of reconciling the classes, of satisfying the
peasant without injuring the landlord; in short, upon the possibility of
bringing about the notorious “social peace”.  

The arguments of Mr. Kaufman and his innumerable followers among the Russian
intelligentsia have to be turned upside down to be put right. Since the
Russian peasant is crushed by the feudal latifundia, for that reason
both the free settlement of the population over the territory of Russia and the
rational economic use of the bulk of her borderlands are incredibly
retarded. Since the feudal latifundia

    

are keeping the Russian peasantry in a downtrodden state, and perpetuate,
through the labour-service system and bondage, the most backward forms and
methods of land cultivation, for that reason both the technical
progress and the mental development of the mass of the peasants are hindered, as
also their activity, initiative, and education, which are essential for the
economic utilisation of a far larger area of the Russian land
reserves than is utilised today. For the feudal latifundia and the predominance
of bondage in agriculture imply, also a corresponding political
superstructure—the predominance of the Black-Hundred landlord ill the
state, the disfranchisement of the population, the prevalence of Gurko-Lidval
methods of

administration,[7] and so on and so forth.


That the feudal latifundia in central agricultural Russia are having a
disastrous effect upon the whole social system, upon social development as
a whole, upon the-en tire condition of agriculture, and upon the whole
standard of living of the masses of the peasantry, is a matter of common
knowledge. I only have to refer here to the vast Russian economic
literature which has proved the prevalence in Central Russia of
labour-service, bondage, rack rent, “winter hiring”, and other
charming aspects of

     medievalism.[4]


The fall of serfdom created conditions which (as I pointed out in
detail in The Development of Capitalism) caused the population to
flee from those haunts of the last descend ants of the
serf-owners. The population fled from the central agricultural area to the
industrial gubernias, to the capitals, and to the southern and eastern
borderlands of European Russia, and settled in hitherto uninhabited
lands. In the pamphlet I have mentioned, Mr. Mertvago quite truly remarks,
by the way, that the conception of what sort of land is unsuitable for
agriculture is liable to undergo rapid change.  

"‘TheTaurida steppes,’” hewrites,
"‘owing to the climate and the
scarcity of water, will always be one of the poorest and least suitable
regions for cultivation.’ That

    

was the opinion expressed in 1845 by such authoritative observers of nature
as Academicians Beer and Helmersen. At that time the population of Taurida
Gubernia, a half of what it is now, produced 1,800,000 chetverts of grain
of all kinds.... Now, after a lapse of 60 years, the population has
doubled, and in 1903, it produced 17,600,000 chetverts, i. e., nearly ten
times as much” (p. 24).  

That is true not only of Taurida Gubernia, but of a number of other
gubernias in the southern and, eastern border lands of European Russia. The
southern steppes, and also the gubernias on the left bank of the Volga,
which in the sixties and seventies lagged behind the central black-earth
gubernias in the output of grain, outstripped those provinces in
the eighties (The Development of Capitalism,

       p. 186).[5]

Between 1863 and 1897 the population of the whole of European Russia
increased by 53 per cent—48 per cent in the case of the rural and 97
per cent in the case of the urban population—whereas in Novorossia,
the Lower Volga, and eastern gubernias, the population increased during the
same period by 92 per cent—87 per cent increase in the rural
population and 134 per cent increase in the urban population (ibid.,

      p. 446).[6]


“We have no doubt,” Mr. Mertvago continues, “that the
present bureaucratic estimate of the economic importance of our land
reserves is not less mistaken than that of Beer and Helmersen concerning
Taurida Gubernia in 1845” (ibid.).  

That is correct. But Mr. Mertvago fails to see the source of
Beer’s mistakes, and of the mistakes of all bureaucratic
estimates. The source of those mistakes is that while taking into
consideration the given level of technique and culture, no allowance is
made for the advance of this level. Beer and Helmersen did not foresee the,
technical changes that became possible after the fall of
serfdom. And there cannot be the least doubt now that a tremendous
increase In the productive forces, a tremendous rise in the technical and
cultural level will inevitably follow the break-up of the feudal
latifundia in European Russia.  
 

This aspect of the matter is overlooked by many students of the
agrarian problem in Russia. The prerequisite for the wide utilisation of
the vast Russian lands available for colonisation is the creation in
European Russia of a really free peasantry, completely liberated from the
oppression of feudal relations. A considerable portion of these lands is
unsuitable at the present time, not so much because of the natural
properties of this or that borderland, but be cause of the social
conditions of agriculture in Russia proper, which doom technical methods to
stagnation and the population to a rightless status, downtroddenness,
ignorance, and helplessness.  

It is this exceedingly important aspect of the matter that Mr. Kaufman
overlooks when he declares: “I say in advance: I do not know whether
it will be possible to settle one, three, or ten million on those lands"
(ibid., p. 128). He goes on to point out that the term unsuitable land is
only relative: “The alkali soils, far from being absolutely hopeless,
can, with the application of certain technical methods, be made very
fertile” (ibid., p. 129). In Turkestan, with a population density of
3.6 to the square verst, “vast areas are still uninhabited”
(ibid., p. 137). “The soil of many of the ‘hungry deserts’ of
Turkestan consists of the famous Central Asiatic loess which becomes highly
fertile if sufficiently irrigated.... The existence of irrigable lands is a
question that is not even worth while discussing: it is sufficient to cross
the country in any direction to see the ruins of numerous villages and
towns, abandoned centuries ago, frequently surrounded for scores of square
versts by networks of ancient irrigation canals and ditches. The total area
of loess desert awaiting. irrigation undoubtedly amounts to many millions
of dessiatins” (ibid., p. 137).  

All these millions of dessiatins in Turkestan, as well as in many other
parts of Russia, are “awaiting” not only irrigation and
reclamation of every kind. They are also “awaiting” the
emancipation of the Russian agricultural population from the survivals of
serfdom, from the yoke of the nobility’s latifundia, and from the
Black-Hundred dictatorship in the state.  

It is idle to speculate on the actual amount of land in Russia that could be
converted from “unsuitable” into suitable

    

land. But it is necessary clearly to appreciate the fact, which is
demonstrated by the, whole economic his tory of Russia, and which is an
outstanding feature of the bourgeois revolution in Russia, viz., that
Russia possesses a gigantic amount of land available for colonisation,
which will be rendered accessible to the population and accessible to
culture, not only by every technical advance of agriculture, but also by
every advance in the emancipation of the Russian peasantry from the yoke of
serfdom.  

This forms the economic basis for the bourgeois evolution of Russian
agriculture on the American model. In the countries of Western Europe, which our
Marxists so often draw upon for thoughtless and stereotyped comparisons, all the
land was already occupied in the epoch of the bourgeois-democratic
revolution. The only new thing brought about by every technical advance in
agriculture was that it became possible to invest more labour and capital in the
land. In Russia, the bourgeois-democratic revolution is taking place under
conditions in which every technical advance in agriculture, and every advance in
the development of real liberty for the population, not only creates the
possibility for additional investment of labour and capital in old lands, but
also the possibility for utilising “boundless” tracts of adjacent
new lands.

 

Notes
 

[1]
Exclusive of Finland.—Lenin

[2]
Also by reactionary deputies. In the Second Duma the Octobrist
Teterevenkov cited from Shcherbina’s investigations figures of
65,000,000 dessiatins of land in the steppe region, and further figures of
the amount of land in the Altai territory—39,000,000 dessiatins— to
prove that there is no need for compulsory alienation in European
Russia. Here is an example of a bourgeois joining bands with the feudal
landlord for joint “progress” in the Stolypin spirit. (See Stenographic
Record, Second Duma, 39th sitting, May 16, 1907, pp. 658-61.)  —Lenin

[3]
The Agrarian Question, published by Dolgorukov and
Petrunkevich, Vol. I, article by Mr. Kaufman: “Migration and Its Role in
the Agrarian Programme”. See also the work by the same author:
Migration and Colonisation, St. Petersburg, 1905.  —Lenin

[4]
See The Development of Capitalism, Chapter III, on the
transition from corvée to capitalist economy and the spread of the
labour-service system. (See present edition, Vol. 3,
pp. 191-251.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[5]
See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 257.—Ed.  

[6]
See present edition, Vol. 3, p. 563.—Ed.  
 



[7]
Gurko-Lidval methods of administration—this refers to
the embezzlement, profiteering, and extortion that reigned among the higher
tsarist officials and government contractors. Gurko was Deputy Minister of
the Interior; in 1906, he was involved in embezzlement and profiteering in
connection with grain consignments for the famine-stricken areas. The
contractor for this grain was the swindler and profiteer Lidval.



 
  

6. Two lines Of Agrarian Programmes in the Revolution

|

8. Summary of the Economic Deductions of Chapter I

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Summary of the
    Economic Deductions









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 8. Summary of the Economic Deductions of Chapter I







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

8. Summary of the Economic Deductions of Chapter I

Let us sum up the economic deductions which are to serve as
an introduction to the re-examination of the question of the
Social-Democratic agrarian programme.  

We have seen that the “pivot” of the agrarian struggle in our
revolution is the feudal latifundia. The peasants’ struggle for the land is,
first and foremost, a Struggle for the abolition of these latifundia. Their
abolition and their complete transfer to the peasantry undoubtedly coincide with
the line of the capitalist evolution of Russian agriculture. Such a path of
this evolution would mean the most rapid development of productive forces, the
best conditions of labour for the mass of the population, and the most rapid
development of capitalism, with the conversion of

    

the free peasants into farmers. But another path of bourgeois evolution of
agriculture is possible, viz., the preservation of the landlord farms and
latifundia and their slow conversion from farms based on serfdom and
bondage into Junker farms. It is these two types of possible bourgeois
evolution that form the basis of the two types of agrarian programmes
proposed by different classes in the Russian revolution. Moreover, a
special feature of Russia, a feature that is one of the economic
foundations for the possibility of the “American” evolution, is
the existence of vast lands available for colonisation. While entirely
unsuitable for emancipating the Russian peasantry from the yoke of serfdom
in European Russia, these lands will become more extensive and more
accessible in proportion to the freedom enjoyed by the peasantry in Russia
proper, and to the scope of development of the productive forces.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

7. Russia’s Land Area. The Question of the Colonisation

|

1. What Was the Mistake in the Previous Agrarian Programmes of Russian Social-Democracy?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Previous Agrarian
    Programmes









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 1. What Was the Mistake in the Previous Agrarian Programmes of Russian Social-Democracy?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

Chapter II
The Agrarian Programmes of the R.S.D.L.P. and Their
    Test in the First Revolution

Let us pass to an examination of the Social-Democratic agrarian programme. I
outlined the chief historical stages in the evolution of the views of Russian
Social-Democrats on the agrarian question in the first section of the pamphlet
Revision of the Agrarian Programme of the Workers’

      Party[1]

We must explain more fully the nature of the mistake contained in the
previous agrarian programmes of Russian Social-Democracy, i. e., in the
programmes of 1885 and 1903.  
1. What Was the Mistake in the Previous Agrarian
       Programmes of Russian Social-Democracy?

In the draft issued by the Emancipation of Labour group in 1885, the agrarian
programme was outlined as follows:

“A radical revision of our agrarian relations, i. e., of the terms on which
the land is to be redeemed and allotted to the peasant communities. The right to
refuse their allotments

    

and to leave the commune to be granted to those peasants who may find it
advantageous to do so, etc.”  

That is all. The error of that programme is not that its principles or partial
demands were wrong. No. Its principles are correct, while the only partial
demand it puts forward (the right to refuse allotments) is so incontestable that
it has now been carried out by Stolypin’s peculiar legislation. The error
of that programme is its abstract character, the absence of any concrete view of
the subject. Properly speaking, it is not a programme, but a Marxist declaration
in the most general terms. Of course, it would he absurd to put the blame for
this mistake on the authors of the programme, who for the first time laid down
certain principles long before the formation of a workers’ party. On the
contrary, it should be particularly emphasised that in that programme the
inevitability of a “radical revision” of the Peasant Reform was
recognised twenty years before the Russian revolution.


Theoretically that programme should have been developed by clarifying the
economic basis of our agrarian programme, the facts upon which the demand for a
radical revision, as distinct from a non-radical, reformist revision
can and should he based, and finally, by concretely defining the nature of this
revision from the standpoint of the proletariat (which differs essentially from
the general radical standpoint). Practically the programme should have been
developed by taking into account the experience of the peasant
movement. Without the experience of a mass— indeed, more than
that—of a nation-wide peasant movement, the programme of the
Social-Democratic Labour Party could not become concrete; for it would
have been too difficult, if not impossible, on the basis of theoretical
reasoning alone, to define the degree to which capitalist disintegration had
taken place among our peasantry, and to what extent the latter was capable of
bringing about a revolutionary-democratic change.


In 4903, when the Second Congress of .our Party adopted the first agrarian
programme of the R.S.D.L.P., we did not yet have such experience as would enable
us to judge the character, breadth, and depth of the peasant movement. The
peasant risings in South Russia in the spring of 1902 remained

    

sporadic outbursts. One can therefore understand the restraint shown by the
Social-Democrats in drafting the agrarian programme: it is not the
proletariat’s business to “devise” such a programme for
bourgeois society, and the extent to which the peasant movement against the
survivals of serfdom, a movement worthy of proletarian support, was likely
to develop was still unknown.  

The 1903 programme attempts to define concretely the nature and
terms. of the “revision” about which the Social-Democrats in 1885
spoke only in a general way. That at tempt—in the main item of the
programme, dealing with the cut-off lands—was based upon a tentative
distinction between lands which serve for exploitation by means of serfdom
and bondage (“lands ‘cut off’ in 1861”) and lands which are
exploited in a capitalist manner. Such a tentative distinction was quite
fallacious, because, in practice, the peasant mass movement could not be
directed against particular categories of landlord estates, but only
against landlordism in general. The programme of 1903 raised a
question which had not yet been raised in 1885, namely, the question of the
conflict of interests between the peasants and the landlords at the moment
of the revision of agrarian relations, which all Social-Democrats regarded
as inevitable. But the solution given to this question in the programme of
1903 is not correct, for, instead of contraposing the consistently peasant
to the consistently Junker method of carrying out the bourgeois revolution,
the programme artificially sets up something intermediate. Here, too, we
must make allowance for the fact that the absence of an open mass movement
at that time made it impossible to solve this question on the basis of
precise data, and not on the basis of phrases, or innocent wishes, or
petty-bourgeois utopias, as the Socialist-Revolutionaries did. No one could
say in advance with certainty to what extent disintegration among the
peasantry had progressed as a result of the partial transition of the
landlords from the labour-service system to wage-labour. No one could
estimate how large was the stratum of agricultural labourers which had
arisen after the Reform of 1861 and to what extent their interests had
become separated from those of the ruined peasant masses.  
 

At all events, the fundamental mistake in the agrarian programme of 1903
was the absence of a clear idea of the issue around which the agrarian
struggle could and should develop in the process of the bourgeois
revolution in Russia—a clear idea of the types of
capitalist agrarian evolution that were objectively possible as the result
of the victory of one or other of the social forces engaged in this
struggle.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 169-74.—Ed.  
 

 
  

8. Summary of the Economic Deductions of Chapter I

|

2. The Present Agrarian Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Present
    Agrarian Programme









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 2. The Present Agrarian Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

2. The Present Agrarian Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.

The present agrarian programme of the Social-Democratic
Party, which was adopted at the Stockholm Congress, marks a great step
forward in comparison with the preceding one in one important respect,
viz., by recognising confiscation of the

   landlords’[1]

estates, the Social-Democratic Party resolutely took the path of
recognising the peasant agrarian revolution. The words in the
programme:

“... supporting the revolutionary actions of the peasantry, including the
confiscation of the landlords’ estates”, quite definitely express
that idea. In the course of the discussion at the Stockholm Congress, one of
the reporters, Plekhanov, who together with

John[3] sponsored that programme, spoke frankly about the necessity of
ceasing to be afraid of a “peasant agrarian
revolution”. (See Plekhanov’s report. Minutes of the
Stockholm Congress, Moscow, 1907, p. 42.)  

One would have thought that this admission—that our bourgeois
revolution in the sphere of agrarian relations must be regarded as a
“peasant agrarian revolution”—would have put an end to
the major differences of opinion among Social-Democrats on the question of
the agrarian programme. Actually, however, differences arose over the
question whether Social-Democrats should support division of the landlords’
estates among the peasants. as private property, or municipalisation of the
landlords’ estates, or nationalisation of all the land. First of all,
therefore, we must definitely establish the fact, all too often forgotten
by Social-Democrats, that these questions can be correctly answered

    

only from the standpoint of the peasant agrarian revolution in
Russia. Of course, it is not a question of Social-Democracy refraining from
independently defining the interests of the proletariat, as a separate
class, in this peas ant revolution. No. It is a question of having a clear
idea of the character and significance of the peasant agrarian revolution
as. one of the forms of the bourgeois revolution in general. We cannot
“invent” any particular reform “project”. We must
study the objective conditions of the peasant agrarian revolution in
capitalistically developing Russia; on the basis of this objective
analysis, we must separate the erroneous ideology of the different classes
from the real content of the economic, changes, and determine what, on the
basis of those real economic changes, is required for the development of
the productive forces and for the proletarian class struggle.  

The present agrarian programme of the R.S.D.L.P. recognises (in a
special form) the conversion of the confiscated lands into public property
(nationalisation of forests, waters and lands for colonisation, and
municipalisation of privately owned lands), at any rate in the event of the
“victorious development of the revolution”. In the event
of “unfavourable conditions”, the principle of
dividing the landlords’ lands among the peasants as private
property is adopted. In all cases, the property rights of the peasants and
small landowners generally to their present holdings are
recognised. Consequently, the programme provides for a dual system
of land tenure in a renovated bourgeois Russia: private ownership of land,
and (at least in the event of the victorious development of the revolution)
public, ownership in the form of municipalisation anti nationalisation.


How did the authors of the programme account for this duality? First of all, and
above all, by. the interests and demands of the peasantry, by the fear of
drifting apart from the peasantry, the fear of setting the peasantry against
the proletariat and against the revolution. By advancing such an
argument the authors and the supporters of the programme took the stand of
recognising the peasant agrarian revolution, the stand of proletarian
support for definite peasant demands. And that argument was advanced by the most
influential supporters of the programme, headed

    

by Comrade John! To become convinced of this, it is sufficient to glance at
the Minutes of the Stockholm Congress.  

That argument was directly and categorically advanced by Comrade John
in his report. “If the revolution,” he.said, “were to
lead to an attempt to nationalise the peasants’ allotments, or to
nationalise the lands confiscated from the landlords, as Comrade. Lenin
suggests, such a measure would lead to a counter-revolutionary movement,
not only in the borderlands, but also in the central part of the
country. We would have not one

Vendée,[4] but a general revolt of the peasantry against
attempts by the state to interfere with the peasants’ own
[John’s italics] allotments, against attempts to nationalise the
latter.” (Minutes of the Stockholm Congress, p. 40.)  

That seems clear, does it not? The nationalisation of the peasants’
own lands would lead to a general revolt of the peasantry! That is
the reason why Comrade X’s original municipalisation scheme, which had
proposed to transfer to the Zemstvos not only the private lands,
but “if possible” all the lands (quoted by me in the pamphlet
Revision of the Agrarian Programme of the Workers’

      Party[2]

),

was replaced by Maslov’s municipalisation scheme, which proposed
to exempt the peasants’ lands. Indeed, how could they ignore the
fact, discovered after 1903, about the inevitable peasant revolt against
attempts at complete nationalisation? How could they refrain from adopting
the stand point of another noted Menshevik,

Kostrov,[5] who exclaimed in Stockholm:


“To go to the peasants with it [nationalisation] means
antagonising them. The peasant movement will go on apart from or against
us, and we shall find ourselves thrown over board in the
revolution. Nationalisation deprives Social-Democracy of its strength,
isolates it from the peasantry and thus also deprives the revolution of its
strength” (p. 88).  

One cannot deny the force of that argument. To try to nationalise the
peasants’ own land against their wishes in a peasant agrarian
revolution! Since the Stockholm Congress believed John and Kostrov, it is
not surprising that it rejected that idea.  
 

But was not the Congress wrong in believing them?  

In view of the importance of the question of an all-Russian
Vendée against nationalisation, a brief reference to history will
not be out of place.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
The text of the programme (Point 4) speaks of privately owned
lands. The resolution appended to the programme (the second part of the
agrarian programme) speaks of confiscation of the landlords’
estates.  —Lenin

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp, 165-95.—Ed.  
 



[3]
John—the Menshevik P. P. Maslov.

 



[4]
Vendáe—a department in Western France where,
during the French bourgeois revolution in the late eighteenth century, a
counter-revolutionary

   

insurrection of the ignorant and reactionary peasantry took place, directed
against the Republic. The insurrection was staged by the Catholic clergy,
the nobles, and royalist émigrés, and supported by England.


Vendée became a synonym for reactionary revolts and hot-beds of
counter-revolution.

 



[5]
Kostrov—Noah Jordania, leader of the Caucasian
Mensheviks.

 

 
  

1. What Was the Mistake in the Previous Agrarian Programmes of Russian Social-Democracy?

|

3. The Chief Argument of the Municipalisers Tested by Events

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Chief
    Argument of the Municipalisers









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 3. The Chief Argument of the Municipalisers Tested by Events







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

3. The Chief Argument of the Municipalisers Tested by Events

The above-quoted categorical assertions of John and Kostrov
were made in April 1906, i. e., on the eve of the First Duma. I argued (see
my pamphlet Revision,

 etc.[1]

)

that the peasantry was in favour of nationalisation, but I was told that
the decisions of the congresses of the Peasant

Union[4] did not prove anything, that they were in spired by the
ideologists of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, that the masses of the
peasants would never support such demands.  

Since then this question has been documentarily answered by the First,
and Second Dumas. The representatives of the peasantry from all parts of
Russia spoke, in the First and particularly in the. Second Duma. No one,
with the possible exception of the publicists of

Rossiya[5] and Novoye Vremya, could deny that the
political and economic demands of the peasant masses found
expression in both those Dumas. One would have thought that the idea of
nationalising the peasants’ lands should be finally buried now, after the
independent declarations made by the peasant deputies in the presence of
the other parties. One would have thought that the supporters of John and
Kostrov could easily have got the peasant deputies to raise an outcry in
the Duma against nationalisation. One would have thought that
Social-Democracy, led by the Mensheviks, should really have
“isolated” from the revolution the advocates of nationalisation
who are rousing an all-Russian counter-revolutionary Vendée.  

As a matter of fact, something different happened. In the First Duma it
was Stishinsky and Gurko who showed. concern for the peasants’ own
(John’s italics) lands. In both Dumas it was the extreme
Right-wingers who, jointly

    

with the spokesmen of the government, defended private ownership of the
land and were opposed to any form of public ownership of land, whether by
municipalisation, nationalisation, or socialisation. In both Dumas it was
the peasant deputies from all parts of Russia who declared for
nationalisation.  

Comrade Maslov wrote in 1905: “Nationalisation of the land as a
means of solving [?] the agrarian problem in Russia at the present time
cannot be accepted, first of all [note this “first of all”] because
it is hopelessly utopian. Nationalisation of the land presupposes the
transfer of all the land to the state. But will the peasants, and
particularly the homestead. peasants, voluntarily agree to transfer their
land to anyone?” (P. Maslov, A Critique of Agrarian
Programmes, Moscow, 1905, p. 20.)  

Thus, in 1905, nationalisation was “first of all”
hopelessly utopian because the peasants would not agree to it.  

In 1907, in March, the same Maslov wrote: “All the Narodnik
groups [the Trudoviks, the Popular Socialists, and the
Socialist-Revolutionaries] are advocating nationalisation of the land in
one form or another.” (Obrazovaniye, 1907, No. 3, p. 100.)


There’s your new Vendée! There’s your all-Russian
revolt of the peasants against nationalisation!  

But instead of pondering over the ridiculous position in which the
people who spoke and wrote about a peasant Vendée against
nationalisation now find themselves, in the light of the experience of the
two Dumas, instead of trying to explain the mistake which he made in 1905,
P. Maslov behaved like Ivan the Forgetful. He preferred to forget
the words I have just quoted, and the speeches at the Stockholm Congress!
Moreover, with the same light-heartedness with which he, in 1905, asserted
that the peasants would not agree, he now asserts the
opposite. Listen: 

...“The Narodniks, reflecting the interests and hopes of the small
proprietors [listen to this!], had to declare in favour of
nationalisation” (ibid.).  

There you have a sample of the scientific scrupulousness of our municipalisers!
In solving a difficult problem before the elected representatives of
the peasants from the whole of Russia made their political declarations, the

    

municipalisers, on behalf of the small proprietors, asserted one thing,
and after those declarations in the two Dumas they assert, on behalf
of the very same “small proprietors”, the very opposite.


It should be mentioned, as a particular curiosity, that Maslov explains this
tendency towards nationalisation. on the part of the Russian peasants as being
due not to any special conditions of the peasant agrarian revolution, but to the
general characteristics of the small proprietor in capitalist
society. That is incredible, but it is a fact:


“The small proprietor,” Maslov announces, “is most of all
afraid of the competition and domination of the big proprietor, of the
domination of capital”.... You are mixing things up, Mr. Maslov. To put
the big (feudal) landowner on a par with the owner of capital means
repeating the prejudices of the petty bourgeoisie. The peasant is fighting so
energetically against the feudal latifundia precisely because at the present
historical moment he represents the free, capitalist evolution of agriculture.



   ... “Being unable to contend with capital in the economic field,
   the small proprietor puts his faith in government authority, which should
   come to the aid of the small proprietor against the big one.... The reason
   the Russian peasant has hoped for centuries to be protected from the
   landlords and government officials by the central authority, the reason
   Napoleon in France, relying for support on the peasants, was able to crush
   the Republic, was the hope the peasants entertained of receiving aid from
   the central authority.” (Obrazovaniye, p. 100.)  


How magnificently Pyotr Maslov argues! In the first place, what has
nationalisation of the land to do with the fact that at the present historical
moment the Russian peasant is displaying the same characteristics as the
French peasant under. Napoleon? The French peasant under Napoleon was not and
could not be in favour of nationalisation. You are rather incoherent,
Mr. Maslov!


Secondly, what has the struggle against capital to do with it? We are comparing
peasant ownership of land with the nationalisation of all the land, including
that of the peasants. The French peasant under Napoleon clung fanatically to
the small property as a barrier against capital, but the Russian
peasant.... Once again, my dear fellow,

    

where is the connection between the beginning and the end of your argument?.


Thirdly, in speaking about the hopes placed in government authority, Maslov
makes it appear that the peasants do not understand the harmfulness of
bureaucracy, do not understand the importance of local self-government, where as
he, the progressive Pyotr Maslov, does appreciate all this. This criticism of
the Narodniks is much too simplified. A reference to the famous Land Bill (the
Bill of the 104), which the Trudoviks introduced in the First and Second Dumas,
will suffice to show the falsity of Maslov’s argument (or hint?). The
facts show, on the contrary, that the principles of local
self-government and of hostility towards a bureaucratic solution of the land
problem are more clearly expressed in the Trudovik Bill than in the
programme of the Social-Democrats written according to Maslov! In our programme
we speak only about “democratic principles” in electing local bodies,
whereas the Trudovik Bill (Clause 16) distinctly and directly provides for the
election of local self-governing bodies on the basis of “universal, equal
and direct suffrage by secret ballot”. Moreover, the Bill provides for
local land committees—which, as is known, the Social-Democrats
support—to be elected in the same. way, and which are to organise the
discussion on the land reform and make preparations for carrying it out (Clauses
17-20). The bureaucratic method of carrying out, the agrarian reform was
advocated by the Cadets, and not by the Trudoviks, by the liberal
bourgeoisie, and not by the peas ants. Why did Maslov have to distort these
well-known facts?


Fourthly, in his remarkable “explanation” of why the small
proprietors “had to declare in favour of nationalisation”, Maslov
lays stress on the peasants’ hope of receiving, protection from the
central authority. That is the point. of distinction between
municipalisation and nationalisation: in the one case there are local
authorities, in the other case, the central authority. That is Maslov’s
pet idea, the economic and political implications of which we shall deal with in
greater detail further on. Here we will point out that Maslov is
dodging the question put to him by the history of our revolution,
namely, why the peasants are
    

not afraid of the nationalisation of their own land. That
is the crux of the question!  

But that is not all. A particularly piquant feature of Maslov’s attempt to
explain the class roots of the Trudovik policy of nationalisation as against
municipalisation is the, following: Maslov conceals from his readers
the fact that on the question of the actual disposal of the land the Narodniks
were also in favour of local self-governing bodies! Maslov’s talk
about the peasants placing their “hopes” in the central
authority is mere intellectualist tittle-tattle about the peasants. Read Clause
16 of the Land Bill that the Trudoviks introduced in both Dumas. Here is the
text of this clause:



   “The management of the national land fund must be entrusted to
   local self-governing bodies, elected by universal, equal, and direct
   suffrage by secret ballot, which shall act independently within the limits
   laid down. by the law.”  


Compare this with the corresponding demand made in our programme: “...The
R.S.D.L.P. demands: ...(4) the confiscation of privately owned lands, except
small holdings, which shall be placed at the disposal of large local
self-governing bodies (comprising urban and rural. districts, as per Point 3)
to be elected on democratic principles”....


What is the difference here from the point of, view of the comparative rights
of central and local authorities? In what way does “management”
differ from “disposal”?


Why, in speaking about the attitude of the Trudoviks towards nationalisation,
did Maslov have to conceal from his readers—and perhaps from himself
too—the contents of this Clause 16? Because it completely
shatters the whole of his absurd “municipalisation” theory.


Examine the arguments in favour of this municipalisation that Maslov advanced
before the Stockholm Congress, read the Minutes of that Congress; you will find
innumerable allusions to the impossibility of suppressing nationalities, of
oppressing the borderlands, of ignoring the differences of local interests,
etc., etc. Even prior to the Stockholm Congress, I had pointed out to Maslov
(see Revision, etc.,

p. 18[2]

)

that all arguments of this kind are a “sheer mis-

    

understanding” because our programme— I said— already
recognised the right of self-determination of nationalities as well as
wide local and regional self-government. Consequently,
from that aspect, there was no need, nor was it possible, to
devise any additional “guarantees” against excessive
centralisation, bureaucracy, and regulation, be cause that would be either
devoid of content or would be interpreted in an anti-proletarian,
federalist spirit.  

The Trudoviks have demonstrated to the municipalisers that I was
right. 

Maslov must admit now that all the groups that voice the interests and
the point of view of the peasantry have declared in favour of nationalisation
in a form that will ensure the rights and powers of the local
self-governing bodies no less than in Maslov’s programme! The law defining
the powers of the local self-governing bodies is to be passed by the central
parliament. Maslov does not say that, but such ostrich-like tactics will be of
no avail, be cause no other procedure is conceivable.


The words “placed at the disposal” introduce the utmost
confusion. Nobody knows who are to be the

   owners[3]

of the lands confiscated from the landlords! That being the case, the owner
can only be the state. What does “disposal” consist
of? What are to be its limits, forms, and conditions? That, too, will have
to be determined by the central parliament. That is self-evident,
and, moreover, in our Party’s programme special mention is shade of
“forests of national importance” and of “lands available,
for colonisation”. Obviously, only the central state authority is in
a position to single out the “forests of national
importance” from the general mass of forest land, and, the
“lands available for colonisation” from the total land area.


In short, the Maslov programme, which, in a particularly distorted form, has now
become the programme of our Party, is quite absurd in comparison with
the Trudovik programme.

    

No wonder Maslov found it necessary, in talking about nationalisation,
to drag in even the Napoleonic peasant in order to conceal from the public the
absurd position we have put ourselves in before the representatives of bourgeois
democracy by our muddled “municipalisation”!


The only difference between the two—a real essential difference—is
the attitude towards the peasants’ allotment lands. Maslov singled these out
only because he was afraid of a “Vend6e”. And it turned out that the
peasant deputies who were sent to the First and Second Dumas laughed at the
fears of the tail-ist Social-Democrats and declared in favour of the
nationalisation of their own lands!


The municipalisers should now oppose the Trudovik peasants and
urge them not to nationalise their lands. The irony of history has
brought the arguments of Maslov, John, Kostrov, and Co. tumbling down upon their
own heads.

 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 172—Ed.  

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 182,—Ed.  

[3]
At the Stockholm Congress the Mensheviks rejected an amendment
to substitute for the words “placed at the disposal”, the words “made
the private property” (Minutes, p. 152). Only in the resolution on
tactics is it said, “in possession”, in the event of the
“victorious development of the revolution”, but it does not define more
precisely what that means.  —Lenin
 



[4]
The All-Russian Peasant Union— a
revolutionary-democratic organisation founded in 1905. The programme and
tactics of the Union were adopted at its first and second congresses held
in Moscow in August and November 1905. The Peasant Union demanded political
freedom and the immediate convocation of a constituent assembly, and
adhered to the tactics of boycotting the First Duma. The Union’s
agrarian programme called for the abolition of private ownership of the
land, and the transfer of monastery, crown and state lands to the peasants
without compensation. The Union, however, pursued a hall-hearted
vacillating policy. While demanding the abolition of landlordism, it agreed
to partial compensation for the landlords. From the very beginning of its
activities the Union was persecuted by the police. It ceased to exist early
in 1907.

 



[5]
Rossiya (Russia)—a police-sponsored,
Black-Hundred newspaper, published in St. Petersburg from 1905 to
1914. From 1906 it was the official organ of the Ministry of the
Interior.

 

 
  

2. The Present Agrarian Programme of the R.S.D.L.P.

|

4. The Agrarian Programme of the Peasantry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Agrarian
    Programme of the Peasantry









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 4. The Agrarian Programme of the Peasantry







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

4. The Agrarian Programme of the Peasantry

We shall try to analyse the question (as to why all the political groups which
reflect the interests and hopes of the small proprietors should have spoken in
favour of nationalisation) in regard to which P. Maslov flounders so helplessly.


First of all, let us see to what extent the Land Bill of the 104, i. e., of the
Trudoviks in the First and Second Dumas, really expresses the demands of the
peasantry of the whole of Russia. That it does is borne out by the nature of the
representation in both Dumas, as well as by the nature of the political,
struggle on the agrarian question which developed in the
“parliamentary” arena among the spokes men of the different
classes. The idea of landownership in general, and of peasant ownership in
particular, far from being pushed into the background in the Duma, was, on the
contrary, constantly brought to the fore by certain parties. The idea was
supported by the government, in the shape of Stishinsky. Gurko, and all the
ministers, as well as all the official press, addressing especially the peasant
deputies. The political parties of the Right, too, beginning with the
“famous” Svyatopolk-Mirsky in the Second Duma,

    

kept dinning into the peasants’ ears about the blessings of peasant
proprietorship. The actual alignment of forces on this question has been
depicted by such a wealth of data that there can be no doubt as to its
correctness (from the standpoint of class interests). The Cadet Party in
the First Duma, when the liberals regarded the revolutionary people as a
force and tried to woo them, was also swept along by the general current
in the direction of land nationalisation. As is known, the Cadet Land Bill
introduced in the First Duma contained a clause about a “state land
reserve” to include all alienated land and from which land would be
granted on long-term leases. Of course, the Cadets in the First Duma did
not put that demand forward on any grounds of principle—it would be
ridiculous to speak of the Cadet Party having principles. No. That demand
of the liberals sprang up as a feeble echo of the demands of the peasant
masses. Already in the First Duma the peasant deputies at once began to
form a separate political group, and the Land Bill of the “104”
served as the chief and basic platform of the whole of the Russian
peasantry, which came forward as a conscious social force. The speeches of
the peasant deputies in the First and Second Dumas and the articles in the
Trudovik papers (Izvestia Krestyanskikh Deputatov, Trudovaya
Rossiya) showed that the Bill of the 104 faithfully expressed the
interests arid hopes of the peas ants. That Bill must, therefore, be dealt
with in somewhat greater detail.  

It is interesting, by the way, to look at the composition of the group of
deputies who signed the Bill. In the First Duma it was. signed by 70 Trudoviks,
17 non-party deputies, 8 peasants who supplied no information as to their party
affiliation,

      5 Cadets,[1]

 3 Social-Democrats,[2]

and 1 Lithuanian Autonomist. In the Second Duma the Bill of the
“104” had 99 signatures, and after deducting duplicates, 91
signatures, namely, 79 Trudoviks, 4 Popular Socialists, 2
Socialist-Revolutionaries, 2 deputies from the Cossack

    

group, 2 non-party deputies, 1 deputy more to the left than the Cadets
(Peterson), and 1 Cadet (Odnokozov, a Peasant). There was a preponderance of
peasants among the signatories (no fewer than 54 out of 91 in the Second Duma,
and no fewer than 52 out of 104 in the First). It is interesting that
P. Maslov’s special expectations regarding the home stead
peasants (referred to

above[3]

)

who; he said, could not agree to nationalisation,
were also completely defeated by the attitude of the peasant deputies in both
Dumas. For instance, in Podolsk Gubernia nearly all the. peasants are
homestead peasants (in 1905 there were 457,134 homestead peasants and
only 1,630 members of village communes); nevertheless, 13 Podolsk
deputies (mainly peasant farmers) signed the Land Bill of the
“104” in the First Duma, and 10 in the Second Duma! Among other
gubernias with homestead landownership we will mention Vilna, Kovno, Kiev,
Poltava, Bessarabia, and Volhynia, deputies from which signed the Land Bill of
the “104”. The distinction between village commune members and homestead
peas ants as regards land nationalisation may appear important and material
only to those who share Narodnik prejudices and those prejudices, by the way,
were dealt a hard blow when the peasant deputies of the whole of Russia first
came forward with a land programme. As a matter of fact, the demand for the
nationalisation of the land is called forth not by any specific form of
landownership, not by the “communal habits and instincts” of the
peasants, but by the general conditions of the whole system of small peasant
landownership (both communal and homestead) which is crushed by the feudal
latifundia.


Among the deputies in the First and Second Dumas who sponsored the
nationalisation Bill of the 104 we see representatives from all parts of
Russia, not only from the central agricultural and the industrial
non-black-earth gubernias, not only from the northern (Arkhangelsk and
Vologda— in the Second Duma), eastern and southern borderlands (Astrakhan,
Bessarabia, Don, Ekaterinoslav, Kuban, Taurida, and Stavropol gubernias
and regions), but also from the gubernias of Little Russia, the South-west,
North-west,

    

Poland (Suvalki) and Siberia (Tobolsk). Obviously, the plight of the small
peasant under the oppression of feudal landlordism, which is most
forcefully and clearly demonstrated in the purely Russian agricultural
centre, is felt throughout Russia, and causes the small farmers everywhere
to support the struggle for the nationalisation of the land.  

The nature of that struggle bears all the earmarks of petty-bourgeois
individualism. In this respect special stress must be laid on the fact, all too
frequently ignored in our socialist press, that the greatest blow to the
“socialism” of the Socialist-Revolutionaries was struck by the very
first entry of the peasants into the open, all-Russian political arena with an
independent land programme. The Socialist-Revolutionary Land Socialisation Bill
(the Bill of the “33” in the First Duma) was supported by a
minority of progressive peasant deputies. The great majority
were found on the side of the Land Bill of the 104, drafted by the
Popular Socialists, whose programme the Socialist-Revolutionaries
themselves describe as individualistic.


For instance, in the Socialist-Revolutionary Collection of
Articles (published by Nasha Mysl, St. Petersburg, 1907,
No. 1) we find an article by P. Vikhlyaev entitled “The Popular
Socialist Party and the Agrarian Question”. The writer criticises the
Popular Socialist Peshekhonov, and quotes the latter’s statement that
“the Bill of the 104 reflected our [the P.S.1 standpoint on the way
in which the land may be taken” (p. 81 of the Collection).
The Social ist-Revolutionaries declare bluntly that the Bill of the 104
“leads to the negation of the root principle of communal land
tenure”—“in the same way” (sic!) as
Stolypin’s agrarian legislation, the law of November 9, 1906,
does. (Ibid., p. 86; we shall show presently how the
Socialist-Revolutionaries were prevented by their own prejudices from
appraising the real economic difference between the two ways, i. e., the
Stolypin way and the Trudovik way.) The Socialist-Revolutionaries regard
Peshekhonov’s programmatic views as “the manifestation of selfish
individualism” (p. 89), “the pollution of the wide ideological
stream with the mud of individualism” (p. 91), and “the
encouragement of individualistic and selfish tendencies among the masses of
the people” (ibid., p. 93).  
 

All this is true. But the Socialist-Revolutionaries are wrong in believing that
“strong” words can obscure the fact that the crux of the matter is
not the opportunism of Peshekhonov and Co., but the individualism of the
small farmer. The point is not that the Peshekhonovs are polluting the
ideological stream of the Socialist-Revolutionaries, but that the majority
of the progressive peasant deputies have revealed the real economic content
of Narodism, the real aspirations of the small farmers. What the Land Bills of
the 104 in the First and Second

Dumas[4]

revealed was the bankruptcy of the Socialist-Revolutionaries in face of.the
representatives of the broad, really all-Russian, peasant masses.  

While declaring in favour of nationalisation of the land, the Trudoviks very
clearly reveal in their Bill the “selfish and individualistic”
aspirations of the small farmers. They propose to leave the allotments and the
small private hold ings in the possession of their present owners (Clause 3 of
the Land Bill of the 104), provided legislative measures are taken to ensure
that they “gradually become the property of the whole
nation”. Translated into the language of real economic relations, it means
just this: we take as our starting-point the interests of the real
owners, of the real, not the nominal, tillers of the soil, but we
want their economic activity to develop quite, freely on

    nationalised[5]
    

land. Clause 9 of the Bill, which states that “priority is to be
given to the local population before outsiders, and to the agricultural
population before the non-agricultural”, shows once more that the
interests of the small proprietors come first with the Trudoviks. An
“equal right to the land” is a mere phrase; state loans and
grants “to persons without sufficient means to acquire the necessary
agricultural equipment” (Clause 15 of the Land Bill of the 104) are
pious wishes; these who will really and inevitably gain will be the ones
who can become strong proprietors now, who can be transformed from
enslaved tillers of the soil into free and well-to-do farmers. Of course,
it is in the interests of the proletariat to support such measures as will
most of all help agriculture in Russia to pass from the hands of feudal
landlords and enslaved tillers of the soil, who are crushed by ignorance,
poverty, and routine, into the hands of free farmers. And the Bill of the
“104” is nothing but a platform of the struggle to turn the
well-to-do section of the enslaved peasantry into free farmers.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
G. Zubchenko, T. Volkov, M. Gerasimov, all peasants; S. Lozhkin, a
physician, and Afanasyev, a priest.  —Lenin

[2]
Antonov, a worker from Perm Gubernia, Yershov, a worker from Kazan
Gubernia, and V. Churyukov, a worker from Moscow Gubernia.  —Lenin

[3]
See pp. 261-62 of this volume.—Ed.  

[4]
From the Stenographic Records of the Second Duma it appears that the
Socialist-Revolutionary Mushenko introduced a Land Bill signed by 105
deputies. Unfortunately, I have not been able to obtain a copy of that
Bill. Among the Duma materials I had at my disposal there was only the
Trudovik Bill of the 104 that was introduced in the Second Duma too. The
existence. of the Socialist-Revolutionary Bill of the 105 in addition to
the two Trudovik Bills of the 104 (introduced in the First and Second
Dumas) merely indicates, at best, that certain peasants wavered between the
Popular Socialists and the Socialist-Revolutionaries, but it does not
disprove what I have said above.  —Lenin

[5]
Incidentally, A. Finn-Yenotayevsky, in disputing the earnestness and
consciousness of the nationalisation aspirations of the Peas ant Union and
of the peasantry in general, quoted the statement of V. Groman that the
delegates to the peasant’s congresses “do not anticipate having to
make any payment for the land”, and that they have no idea that
differential rent must revert to society as a whole. (A. Finn, The
Agrarian Question and Social-Democracy, p. 69.). Clauses 7 and 14 of
the Bill of the 104 prove that this view is erroneous. In

   

those clauses provision is made by the Trudoviks both for payment for the
land (a land tax rising in accordance with the size of the allotment) and
for the reversion of differential rent to the state (“limiting the
right to appropriate the increase in the value” of the land, “insofar as
it is not due to their, the owners’, labour and
capital—[N. B.! the Trudoviks are not opposed to capital!]—but
to social conditions”). It is true that in regard to urban and other
lands, Clause 7 provides that: “until such property passes to the whole
nation” the rights of occupiers, etc., shall be limited. But that is
probably a slip of the pen, for otherwise it would mean that the Trudoviks
take the rent from the proprietors and return it to the occupiers, the
tenants of nationalised land!  —Lenin
 

 
  

3. The Chief Argument of the Municipalisers Tested by Events

|

5. Medieval Landownership and the Bourgeois Revolution

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Medieval
    Landownership









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 5. Medieval Landownership and the Bourgeois Revolution







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

5. Medieval Landownership and the Bourgeois Revolution

The question now arises whether there are material grounds in the economic
conditions of the agrarian, bourgeois-democratic revolution in Russia
compelling the small proprietors to demand the nationalisation of the land, or
whether this demand as well is merely a phrase, merely the pious wish of the
ignorant muzhik, the vain dream of the patriarchal tiller of the soil.

 

To answer this question we must first try to envisage more concretely
the conditions of a bourgeois-democratic revolution in agriculture, and
then compare those conditions with the two paths of capitalist
agrarian evolution that are possible in Russia, as we have outlined above.


The conditions of the bourgeois revolution in agriculture from the
standpoint of agrarian relations have been very strikingly dealt with by
Marx in the last volume of Theories of Surplus Value (Theorien
über den Mehrwert, II. Band, 2. Teil, Stuttgart, 1905).  

After examining the views of Rodbertus, exposing the great limitations
of the theory of this Pomeranian landlord, and enumerating in detail every
single manifestation of his stupidity (II, 1. Teil, S. 256-58, erster
Blödsinn— sechster Blödsinn des Herrn

    Rodbertus[1]

),

Marx turns to Ricardo’s theory of rent (II, 2. Teil, § 3b,
“The Historical Conditions of Ricardo’s ,

Theory”).[5] 

Speaking of Ricardo and Anderson, Marx says: “Both start out from the
view, regarded as very strange on the Continent:

(1) that no landed property exists as an obstacle to any investment of
capital in the land;

(2) that there the tillers pass from better to worse soils. For Ricardo
this premise is absolute—leaving out of account interruptions in
development through the reaction of science and industry; for Anderson it
is relative, since the worse soil is again transformed into better;

(3) that capital, the mass of capital requisite for application to
agriculture, is always available.  

“Now, as far as points 1 and 2 are concerned, it must appear very
peculiar to those on the Continent that in the country where, according to
their notions, feudal landed property has been most strongly preserved,
economists start out from the idea that landed property does not
exist. Anderson does so as well as Ricardo. The explanation is as follows:


“first, the peculiarity of the English law of

enclosures’ 

[i.e., the law relating to the enclosure of the common lands] which has
absolutely no analogy with the continental division of common land.  
 

“secondly, nowhere in the world has capitalist production,
since Henry VII, dealt so ruthlessly with the traditional relations of
agriculture and so adequately moulded its conditions and made them subject
to itself. England is in this respect the most revolutionary country in the
world. All historically inherited relations—not only the position of
the villages, but the very villages themselves, not only the habitations of
the agricultural population, but this population itself, not only the
ancient economic centres, but the very economy itself—have been
ruthlessly swept away where they were in contradiction to the conditions of
capitalist production in agriculture, or did not correspond to those
conditions. The German, for example, finds economic relations determined by
the traditional common land relations [Feldmarken], the position
of economic centres, and particular conglomerations of the population. The
Englishman finds that the historical conditions of agriculture have been
progressively created by capital since the fifteenth century. The technical
expression customary in the United Kingdom, the ‘clearing of estates’, does
not occur in any continental country. But what does this ‘clearing of
estates’ mean? It means that, without regard for the local
population—which is driven away, for existing villages—which
are levelled to the ground, for farm build ings—which are torn down,
for the kind of agriculture— which is transformed at a stroke, being
converted for example from tillage to pasture, all conditions of
production, instead of being accepted as they are handed down by
tradition, are historically fashioned in the form necessary under
the circumstances for the most profitable investment of capital. To that
extent, therefore, no landed property exists; it allows
capital—the farmer—to manage freely, since it is only concerned
about the money income. A Pomeranian landowner, his mind full of his
ancestral [angestammten] common lands, economic centres, and the
agricultural collegium, etc., is quite likely, therefore, to hold up his
hands in horror at Ricardo’s ‘unhistorical’ views on the development
of agricultural relations. That only shows that he naively confuses
Pomeranian and English conditions. But it cannot be said that Ricardo, who
here starts out from English conditions, is just as narrow in his view as
the

    

Pomeranian landowner who thinks within the limits of Pomeranian
conditions. The English conditions are the only ones in which modern landed
property, i.e., landed property modified by capitalist production,
has developed adequately (in ideal perfection). Here the English theory is
the classical one for the modern, i.e., capitalist mode of production. The
Pomeranian theory, on the other hand, judges the developed relations
according to a historically lower (inadequate) form, which has not taken
full shape” (S. 5-7).  

That is a remarkably profound argument by Marx. Have our
“municipalisers” ever pondered over it?  

In Volume III of Capital (2. Teil, S. 156) Marx had al ready pointed
out that the form of landed property with which the incipient capitalist mode of
production is con fronted does not suit capitalism. Capitalism
creates for itself the required forms of agrarian relationships out of
the old forms, out of feudal landed property, peasants’ commune property, clan
property,

etc.[6] In that chapter, Marx compares the different methods
by which capital creates the required forms of landed property. In Germany
the reshaping of the medieval forms of landed property proceeded in a
reformative way, so to speak. It adapted itself to routine, to tradition,
to the feudal estates that were slowly converted into Junker estates, to
the routine of indolent

       peasants[2]

who were undergoing the difficult transition from corvée
to the condition of the Knecht and Grossbauer. In England this reshaping
proceeded in a revolutionary, violent way; but the violence was practised for
the benefit of the landlords, it was practised on the masses of the peasants,
who were taxed to exhaustion, driven from the villages, evicted, and who
died out, or emigrated. In America this reshaping went on in a violent way as
regards the slave farms in the Southern States. There violence was applied
against the slaveowning landlords. Their estates were broken up, and the large
feudal estates were

    

transformed into small bourgeois

farms.[3]

As regards the mass of “unappropriated” American lands, this
role of creating the new agrarian relationships to suit the new mode of
production (i.e., capitalism) was played by the “American General
Redistribution”, by the Anti-Rent movement
(Anti-Rent-Bewegung) of the forties, the

Homestead Act,[7] etc. When, in 1846, Hermann Kriege, a German
Communist, advocated the equal redistribution of the land in America, Marx
ridiculed the Socialist-Revolutionary prejudices and the petty-bourgeois
theory of this quasi-socialism, but he appreciated the historical
importance of the American movement against landed

   property,[4]

as a movement which in a progressive way expressed the interests of the
development of the productive forces and the interests of capitalism in
America.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Vol. II, Part I, pp. 256-58, first nonsense—sixth nonsense of Herr
Rodbertus.—Ed.  

[2]
See Theorien über den Mehrwert, II. Band, 1. Teil,
S. 280; the condition for the capitalist mode of production in agriculture
is “the substitution of a businessman [Geschäftsmann] for
the indolent

peasant”.[8] —Lenin

[3]
See Kautsky’s Agrarian Question (p. 432, et seq. of the
German text) concerning the growth of the small farms in the American South
as a result of the abolition of slavery.  —Lenin

[4]
Vperyod, 4905, No. 45 (Geneva, April 7/20), article
“Marx on the American ‘General Redistribution’". (See present
edition, Vol. 8, pp. 323-29.— Ed.) (Second volume
of Mehring’s Collected Works of Marx and Engels.)  “We
fully recognise,” wrote Marx in 1846, “the historical
justification of the movement of the American National Reformers. We know
that this movement strives for a result which, true, would give a temporary
impetus to the industrialism of modern bourgeois society, but which, as a
product of the proletarian movement, and as an attack on landed property in
general, especially under the prevailing American conditions, must
inevitably lead, by its own consequences, to communism. Kriege, who with
the German Communists in New York joined the Anti-Rent-Bewegung (movement),
clothes this simple fact in bombastic phrases, without entering into the
content of the

movement.”[9] —Lenin
 



[5]
Rodbertus’s views are analysed by Karl Marx in Theorien
über den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, Berlin, Dietz Verlag, 1959,
SS. 82-85; Ricardo’s theory is analysed in the same book,
SS. 229-33.

 



[6]
See Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 603.

 



[8]
Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, Berlin,
Dietz Verlag, 1959, 5. 100.





[7]
The Homestead Act—a law passed in the United States in
1862 granting settlers a plot of land up to 160 acres free of charge or at
a nominal price. This land became the private property of its holder after
five years.

 



[9]
Karl Marx, Friedrich Engels, Werke, Bd. 4, S. 8, Berlin, Dietz
Verlag, 1959.

 

 
  

4. The Agrarian Programme of the Peasantry

|

6. Why Had the Small Proprietors in Russia to Declare in Favour of Nationalisation?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Why Had the Small
    Proprietors
    in Russia to Declare in Favour of
    Nationalisation









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 6. Why Had the Small Proprietors in Russia to Declare in Favour of Nationalisation?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

6. Why Had the Small Proprietors in Russia to Declare in Favour of
    Nationalisation?

Look from this angle at the agrarian evolution of Russia since the second half
of the nineteenth century.


What was our “great” Peasant Reform, the “cutting
off” of the peasants lands, the removal of the peasants to the
“poor lands”, the enforcement of the new land regulations

    

by military force, shootings, arid floggings? It was the first act of mass
violence against the peasantry in the interests of nascent capitalism in
agriculture. It was the “clearing of estates” for capitalism by the
landlords.


What is Stolypin’s agrarian legislation under Article 87, that
encouragement of the kulaks to plunder the village communes, that
breaking-up of the old agrarian relation ships for the benefit of a handful
of well-to-do proprietors at the price of the rapid ruin of the masses? It
was the second big step in mass violence against the peasantry in the
interests of capitalism. It was the second “clearing of
estates” for capitalism by the landlords.  

And what does the Trudovik nationalisation of the land stand for in the Russian
revolution?


It stands for “clearing of estates” for capitalism
by the peasantry.


The main source of all the well-meant foolishness of our municipalisers
is precisely their failure to understand the economic basis of the
bourgeois agrarian revolution in Russia in its two possible types, i.e.,
the landlord-bourgeois revolution, and the peasant-bourgeois
revolution. Without a “clearing” of the medieval agrarian
relationships and regulations, partly feudal and partly Asiatic, there
can be no bourgeois-revolution in agriculture, because capital
must—through economic necessity—create for itself new
agrarian relationships, adapted to the new conditions of free commercial
agriculture. That “clearing” of the medieval lumber in the
sphere of agrarian relations in general, and of the old system of
landownership first and foremost, must chiefly affect the landlords’
estates and peasant allotments, since both kinds of landed property are
now, in their present form, adapted to the labour-service system, to the
corvée heritage, to bondage, and not to a free capitalistically
developing economy. Stolypin’s “clearing” undoubtedly
follows the line of the progressive capitalist development of Russia; but
it is adapted solely to the interests of the landlords: let the rich
peasants pay the “Peasant” (read: Landlord) Bank an exorbitant
price for the land; in return we shall give them freedom to plunder the
village communes, to forcibly expropriate the masses, to round off their
plots, to evict the poor peasants, to undermine

    

the very foundations of the life of entire villages, and, at any price, in
spite of everything, setting at naught the life and husbandry of any number
of “old established” allotment peasants, to set up new

otrub[5] holdings, as the basis for new capitalist
agriculture. There is unquestionable economic sense in that line; it
faithfully expresses the real course of development as it
should be under the rule of landlords who are being transformed
into Junkers.  

What is the other line, the peasant line? Either it is economically
impossible—in which case all talk about the peasants confiscating the
landlords’ estates, about the peasant agrarian revolution, etc., is either
humbug or an empty dream. Or it is economically possible—provided one
element of bourgeois society is victorious over the other element of bourgeois
society—in which case we must form a clear idea of, and clearly show to
the people, the concrete conditions for that development, the conditions under
which the peasants can reshape the old agrarian relations on a new, capitalist
basis.


Here there naturally arises the thought that this peasant line is precisely the
division of the landlords estates among the peasants for their private
property. Very well. But if this division is to correspond to the really new,
capitalist conditions of agriculture, it must he carried out in a new way and
not in the old way. The division must be based riot on the old allotment land
distributed among the peasants a hundred years ago at the will of the landlords’
bailiffs or of the officials of Asiatic despotism, but on the needs of free,
commercial agriculture. To meet the requirements of capitalism, the division
must be a division among free farmers, not among “indolent”
peasants, the great majority of whom run their economies by routine and
tradition in conformity with patriarchal, not with capitalist conditions. A
division according to the old standards, i.e., in conformity with the old forms
of landownership based on peasant allotments, will not be the clearing
of the old land ownership, but its perpetuation; not clearing the way
for capitalism, but rather encumbering it with a mass of unadapted and
unadaptable “indolents” who cannot become free farmers. To be
progressive, the division must be based on a new sorting process among
the peasant cultivators,

    

which will sift the farmers from the useless lumber. And this new sorting out
is nationalisation of the land, i.e., the total abolition of private
landownership, complete freedom to till the land, the unhampered transformation
of the old peasantry into free farmers.


Picture to yourselves the present system of peasant f arming and the character
of the old peasant landownership based on allotments. “Although united by
the village commune into tiny administrative, fiscal, and land-holding
associations, the peasants are split up by a mass of diverse divisions, into
grades, into categories according to size of allotment, amount of payments,
etc. Let us take, for example, the Zemstvo statistical returns for Saratov
Gubernia; there the peasants are divided into the following grades:

gift-land peasants, owners, full owners, state peasants, state peasants with
communal holdings, state peasants with quarter holdings, state peasants that
formerly belonged to landlords, crown-land peasants, state-land tenants and
landless peasants, owners who were formerly landlords’ peasants, peasants whose
farmsteads have been redeemed, owners who are former crown-land peasants,
colonist free-holders, settlers, gift-land peasants who formerly belonged to
landlords, owners who are former state peasants, manumitted,those who do not
pay quit-rent, free tillers, temporarily-bound, former factory-bound peasants,
etc.; further there are registered peasants, migrant,

etc.[6] All these grades differ in the history of their agrarian
relations, in size of allotments, amount of payments, etc., etc. And within
the grades there are innumerable differences of a similar kind: sometimes
even the peasants of one and the same village are divided into two quite
distinct categories: ‘Mr. X’s former peasants’ and ‘Mrs. Y’s former
peasants’. All this diversity was natural and necessary in the Middle

Ages.”[1]

If the new division of the landlords’ estates were carried out in
conformity with this feudal system of landownership—whether by
levelling to a uniform rate, i.e., equal division, or by fixing some kind
of ratio between

    

the new and the old, or in some other way—not only would it not
guarantee that the new plots would meet the requirements of capitalist
agriculture, but, on the contrary, it would perpetuate the obvious
lack of conformity. Such a division would impede social
evolution, would tie the new to the old instead of liberating the new
from the old. Real liberation can only be achieved by
nationalising the land, thus creating the conditions for the rise
of free farmers, for the development of free farming without
connection with the old, without any relation to medieval landownership in
the form of peasant allotments.  
Capitalist evolution on the medieval peasant allotments proceeded in
post-Reform Russia in such a way that the progressive economic elements
freed themselves from the determining influence of the
allotments. On the one hand, proletarians emerged, who rented out their
allotments, abandoned them, or let the land go to waste. On the other hand,
peasant owners emerged, who purchased or rented land, built up a
new economy out of various fragments of the old, medieval
system of landownership. The land that is now cultivated by a more or less
well-to-do Russian peasant, i. e., by one who, given a favourable outcome
of the revolution, is really capable of becoming a free farmer, consists
partly of his own allotment, partly of an allotment he has rented from a
neighbour who is a village-commune member, partly, perhaps, of land rented
on long-term lease from the state, land leased annually from the landlord,
land purchased from the bank, and so forth. Capitalism requires the
abolition of all these distinctions of category; it requires that
all economy on the land be organised exclusively in accordance with the new
conditions and demands of the market, the demands of
agriculture. Nationalisation of the land fulfils this requirement by the
revolutionary peasant method; at one stroke it completely divests the
people of all the rotten rags of all forms of medieval
landownership. There must be neither landlord

nor allotment ownership,

there must be only the new, free landowner ship—such is the
slogan of the radical peasant. And that slogan expresses in the most
faithful, in the most consistent and categorical manner the interests
of capitalism (which the radical peasant in his simplicity tries to
ward off by

    

making the sign of the cross), and expresses the need for the utmost
development of the land’s productive forces under commodity production.


One may judge from this how clever Pyotr Maslov is in thinking that the
only difference between his agrarian programme and the peasant
programme of the Trudoviks is the perpetuation of the old, medieval,
allotment ownership! The peasant allotment land is a ghetto in which the
peasantry is suffocating and from which it is straining to escape to

 free[2]

land. Yet in spite of the peasants’ demands for free, i. e., nationalised,
land, Pyotr Maslov seeks to perpetuate this ghetto, to perpetuate the old
system; he would subject the best lands, confiscated from the land lords
and converted to public use, to the conditions of the old system of
landownership and the old methods of farming. In deeds, the
Trudovik peasant is a most determined bourgeois revolutionary, but i u
words he is a petty-bourgeois utopian who imagines that a “General
Redistribution” is the starting-point of harmony and

     fraternity,[3]

and not of capitalist farming. Pyotr Maslov is, in deeds, a
reactionary who, fearing the Vendée of a future
counter-revolution, seeks to consolidate the present
anti-revolutionary elements of the old forms of landownership and to
perpetuate the peasant ghetto, while in words lie thoughtlessly
repeats mechanically learnt phrases about bourgeois progress. What the
real conditions are for real free-bourgeois progress and not for the
Stolypin-bourgeois progress of Russian agriculture, Maslov and
Co. absolutely fail to understand.  

The difference between the vulgar Marxism of Pyotr Maslov and the methods of
research that Marx really used

    

can be seen most clearly in the latter’s attitude towards the
petty-bourgeois utopias of the Narodniks (including the
Socialist-Revolutionaries). In 1846, Marx ruthlessly exposed the
petty-bourgeois character of the American Socialist-Revolutionary Hermann
Kriege, who proposed a veritable General Redistribution for America. and
called it “communism”. Marx’s dialectical and
revolutionary criticism swept away the husks of petty-bourgeois doctrine
and picked out the sound kernel of the “attacks on landed
property” and of the “Anti-Rent movement”. Our vulgar
Marxists, however, in criticising “equalised redistribution”,
“socialisation of the land”, and “equal right to the
land”, confine themselves to repudiating the doctrine, and
thus reveal their own obtuse doctrinairism, which prevents them from
seeing the vital life of the peasant revolution beneath the lifeless
doctrine of Narodnik theory. Maslov and the Mensheviks have carried this
obtuse doctrinairism—ex pressed in our “municipalisation”
programme,, which perpetuates the most backward arid medieval form of land
ownership—to such lengths that in the Second Duma the following truly
disgraceful things could be uttered in the name of the Social-Democratic
Party: ...“While on the question of the method of land alienation we
[Social-Democrats] stand much nearer to these [Narodnik] groups than to the
People’s Freedom group, on the question of the forms of land tenure
we stand farther away from them” (47th sitting, May 26, 1907, p. 1230
of Stenographic Record).  

Indeed, in the peasant agrarian revolution the Mensheviks stand farther
away from revolutionary peasant nationalisation, and closer to
liberal-landlord preservation of allotment (and not only allotment)
ownership. The preservation of allotment ownership is the preservation of
downtroddenness, backwardness, and bondage. It is natural for a liberal
landlord, who dreams of redemption payments, to stand up for allotment

      ownership[4]

... with the preservation

    

of a goodly share of landlord ownership! But the Social-Democrat, led
astray by the “municipalisers”, does not understand that the
sound of words vanishes but the deed remains. The sound of the words about
equality, socialisation, etc., will. vanish, because there cannot
be equalisation under commodity production. But the deed will
remain, i. e., the greatest break with the feudal past that can possibly be
achieved under capitalism, the break with medieval allotment ownership and
with all routine and tradition. When people say “nothing will come of
equalised redistribution”, the Marxist ought to understand that this
“nothing” relates exclusively to the socialist aims,
exclusively to the fact that this is not going to abolish capitalism. But
from attempts to bring about such a redistribution, even from the very idea
of such a redistribution, very much will come that will be of
advantage to the bourgeois-democratic revolution.  

For that revolution may take place either with the predominance of the
landlords over the peasants—and that requires the preservation of the
old form of ownership and the Stolypin reform of it exclusively by the
power of the ruble; or it will take place as a result of the victory of the
peasantry over the landlords—and that, in view of the objective
conditions of capitalist economy, is impossible without the abolition of
all forms of medieval landownership, both landlord and peasant. The choice
is between the Stolypin agrarian reform and peasant revolutionary
nationalisation. Only these solutions are economically
real. Anything intermediate, from Menshevik municipalisation to Cadet
redemption payments, is petty-bourgeois narrow-mindedness, a stupid
distortion of theory, a poor invention.  
    

     

Notes
 

[1]
The Development of Capitalism, Chapters V, IX, “Some Remarks
on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of Our Countryside”. (See present edition,
Vol. 3, pp. 381-82.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[2]
The “Socialist-Revolutionary” Mr. Mushenko, the most consistent
exponent of the views of his party in the Second Duma, bluntly declared:
“We raise the banner of the liberation of the land” (47th
sitting, May 26, 1907, p.  1174), One must be blind to fail to perceive not
only the essential capitalist nature of this supposedly
“socialist” banner (Pyotr Maslov sees this too), hut also the progressive
economic nature of such an agrarian revolution compared with the
Stolypin-Cadet revolution (this Pyotr Maslov does not see).  —Lenin

[3]
Cf. the naive expression of this bourgeois-revolutionary point of view
in the speech of the “Popular Socialist” Volk-Karachevsky about
“equality, fraternity, and liberty”. (Second Duma, 16th sitting, March
26, 1907, pp. 1077-80.)  —Lenin

[4]
Incidentally, the Mensheviks (including Comrade Tsereteli, whose speech
I have quoted) are deeply mistaken in believing that the Cadets are at all
consistent in their defence of free peasant owner ship. They are
not. Mr. Kutler, on behalf of the Cadet Party, spoke

   

in the Second Duma in favour of ownership (as distinct from the Cadet Bill
on state land reserve introduced in the First Duma), but at the same time
he added: “The Party proposes only [!] to limit
their [the peasants’] right to alienate, and right
to mortgage, i. e., to prevent the selling and buying of land on a
large scale in future” (12th sitting, March 19, 1907, p. 740 of
Stenographic Record). That is the archreactionary programme of a
bureaucrat disguised as a liberal.  —Lenin
 
a



[5]
Otrub (farmstead)—land allotted to peasants,
who, under a law is sued by the tsarist Minister Stolypin in 1906, were
allowed to with draw from the village communes. The purpose of this law was
to create a mainstay for the autocracy in the countryside in the shape of a
kulak class.

 



[6]
The peasants in Russia, as a class of feudal society, were divided into
three major categories:

1) privately owned (landlords’) peasants,

   

2) state peasants, and

3) crown-land peasants (belonging to the tsar’s family). Each of
these categories, in turn, was divided into grades and special groups,
which differed from one another in origin, forms of land ownership and land
tenure, legal and agrarian status, etc. The Peasant Reform of 1861, carried
out from above by the tsarist government in the interests of the, feudal
landlords, kept this diversity of grades intact right up to 191 7.  

Gilt-land peasants—former serfs, chiefly of the southern
and south-eastern black-earth gubernias, who, at the time of the abolition
of serfdom, received from their landlords gift allotments without having to
pay compensation. Under the “Regulations” of the Peasant Reform
of 1861, the landlord had the right, “by voluntary agreement”
with the peasant, to make him a “gift” of a quarter of the
“top” or “statutory” allotment due to the peasant
(including the cottage plot) on the understanding that all the rest of
peasant’s land became the property of the landlord. Gift allotment,
which strikingly illustrated the predatory nature of the 1861 Reform, was
known among the people as “quarter”, “orphan”,
“cat’s”, or “Gagarin” allotment (the latter from
the name of Prince P. P. Gagarin, who put forward a draft of the
corresponding clauses to the local regulations governing land endowment of
the peasants in the Great Russian and Ukrainian gubernias).  

There were numerous gift-land peasants in such land-poor blackearth
gubernias as Voronezh, Kharkov, Poltava, and Tambov, where the market price
of land seized by the landlords was very high. Many peasants received gift
allotments in the south-eastern and southern black-earth gubernias of
Orenburg, Ufa, Saratov, Ekaterinoslav, and Samara, where rentals were much
lower than the quit-rents due to the landlord, under the “Regulations
of February 19”. By the beginning of the twentieth century, as a result of
the growth of the population and the reallotments which this involved, the
gift-landers lost practically all their allotments and formed the bulk of
the land-poor peasants, 

Temporarily-bound peasants—former landlords’ peasants
who, after the abolition of serfdom in 1861, were obliged to perform
various services for the landlords (corvée service or quit-rent
payment) in return for the use of allotments. This “temporarily-bound
status” continued until the peasants, by agreement with the
landlords, had purchased their allotments by redemption payments. The
landlords were obliged to accept redemption payments which became
obligatory only after the Ukase of 1881, by which the “obligatory
relation” between the peasants and the landlords had to cease as from
January 1, 1883.  

Owners—former landlords’ peasants who had redeemed their
allotments under the “Regulations of February 19, 1861” and
thus ceased to be temporarily bound.  

Full owners—former landlords’ peasants who had redeemed
their allotments before the specified date and had the right to own

   

the land as private property. The full owners were comparatively few and
constituted the most well-to-do element in the countryside.  

State peasants—a category of peasants who tilled state
lands and who, in addition to the poll-tax, paid feudal quit-rent to the
state or the leaseholder of state property. They also performed numerous
services (road repairs, billeting of soldiers, stage-horse posting, etc.);
Under Peter I this category included odnodvortsi,
chernososhniye peasants, half-croppers, Siberian ploughmen of the
Northern maritime country, and peoples of the Volga and Ural regions
(Tatars, Chuvashes, Mordovians, Udmurts, and Komi). Later other categories
were added—“economy” peasants (serfs who passed to the state
from the secularised church estates), state peasants of the western
territories and Transcaucasia, Ukrainian Cossacks, and others. The forms of
land tenure and land ownership among the state peas ants were extremely
varied, and this condition continued even after the Peasant Reform.  

State peasants with communal holdings had no right to own land
as private property; they used arable and other lands belonging to the
village commune.  

State peasants with quarter holdings—descendants of
former servicemen in the lower ranks (children of boyars, Cossacks, the
streltsi, dragoons, soldiers, etc.) who guarded the southern and
south-eastern borderlands of the State of Muscovy. The Tsar of Muscovy
reward ed their services with an endowment of a quarter lot (half
a dessiatin) and they settled in single households (hence their name
odnodvortsi). Communal landownership arose among them in addition
to their quarter holdings.  

These odnodvortsi, being freemen, for a long time held an
intermediate position between the nobles and peasants, and had the right to
acquire serfs. Under Peter I they were turned into state peasants, and
their land became the property of the state. Actually, however, the state
peasants with quarter holdings disposed of their lands as their own private
property; in this they differed from the state peasants with communal in s,
who had no right to buy, sell, or bequeath their land.  

State peasants who formerly belonged to landlords—a
category of state peasants, acquired by the state from private owners or
donated to the state, etc. Although regarded as state peasants they enjoyed
fewer rights; they were given, equal rights in 1859 on the eve of the 1861
Reform, but certain distinctions remained.  

Crown-land peasants—a category of peasants who tilled
the crown lands. Besides the poll-tax, they paid feudal quit-rent,
performed various services and were subjected to exactions in kind, all of
which went for the maintenance of members of the tsarist household. When
the crown lands took shape in 1797 the status of the peasants living on
these estates was defined as something between state and landlords’
peasants. The abolition of serfdom was first applied to the crown-land
peasants in 1858, but did not take full effect until 1863.

   

These peasants received allotments as their private property subject to
redemption payments over a period of 49 years. They were provided with land
slightly better than the landlords’ peasants, but worse than the state
peasants.  

Free tillers—the category of peasants freed from serfdom
under the law of February 20,1803. This law permitted the landlords to
decide the terms on which they gave their peasants freedom with land.  

Registered peasants—a category of state peasants
attached to state-owned and private manufactories for performing auxiliary
jobs (wood chopping, coal handling, ore breaking, haulage, etc). This
practice of attachment assumed wide dimensions in the Urals, Olonets
gubernia, and other places in the early eighteenth century. Beginning with
the early nineteenth century the registered peasants were gradually freed
from factory jobs. They won complete freedom as a result of the Peasant
Reform of 1861.

 

 
  

5. Medieval Landownership and the Bourgeois Revolution

|

7. The Peasants and the Narodniks on the Nationalisation of Allotment Land

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Nationalisation
    of Allotment Land









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 7. The Peasants and the Narodniks on the Nationalisation of Allotment Land







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

7. The Peasants and the Narodniks on the Nationalisation of Allotment
       Land

That the abolition of allotment ownership is a condition
for the creation of free peasant farming in conformity with the new
capitalist conditions is quite clearly realised by the peasants
themselves. Mr. Groman, in his detailed and accurate description of the
discussion at the peasant

     congresses,[1]

cites the following remarkable opinion expressed by a peasant:





   “During the discussion on redemption payment, one delegate,
   without meeting with any real opposition, said: ‘It has been said that
   alienation without compensation would hit many peasants who had purchased
   land with their hard=earned money. There are few such peasants, and they
   have little land, and they will get land in any case when it is
   distributed’.

   That explains the readiness to relinquish property rights both in allotment
   and purchased land.”  



A little further on (p. 20) Mr. Groman repeats this as the general opinion of
the peasants.


“They will get land in any case when it is distributed”!
Is it not perfectly clear what economic necessity dictated this
argument? The new distribution of all the land, both landlord and allotment
land, cannot reduce the holdings of nine-tenths (or rather, ninety-nine
hundredths) of the peasantry; there is nothing to fear from it. But the
redistribution is necessary because it will enable the real, genuine
farmers to arrange their land tenure in accordance with the new conditions,
in accordance with the requirements of capitalism (the “dictates of
the market” to individual producers), without submitting to the
medieval relations which determined the size, location, and distribution of
allotment land.  

Mr. Peshekhonov, a practical and sober-minded “Popular
Socialist” (read: Social-Cadet) who, as we have seen, has managed to
adapt himself to the demands of the masses of small proprietors all over
Russia, expresses this point at view even more definitely.  
 


   “The allotment lands,” he writes, “the part of the
   territory most important from the standpoint of production, are permanently
   assigned to a certain social-estate, and what is worse, to small groups of
   that estate, to. separate households and villages. The result is that the
   peasantry, taken as a whole, cannot freely settle even within the area of
   the allotment land.... The population is not properly
   distributed to suit the requirements of the market [note
   this!].... The ban on the state lands must he lifted, allotment land
   must be freed from the fetters of property, the fences around
   the private estates must be removed. The land must be returned to
   the Russian people, who will then settle upon it in a manner that will suit
   their economic requirements.” (A. V. Peshekhonov, The Agrarian
   Problem in Connection with the Peasant Movement, St. Petersburg, 1906,
   pp. 83, 86, 88-89. Our italics.)  


Is it not clear that the voice of this “Popular Socialist”
is the voice of the free farmer who wants to stand up on his own feet? Is
it not clear that it is really necessary for the farmer that the
“allotment land” should be “freed from the fetters of
property” in order that the population may distribute itself in a new
way, in order that holdings may be redistributed in a manner to “suit
the requirements of the market”, i. e., the requirements of
capitalist agriculture? Mr. Peshekhonov, we repeat, is so
sober-minded that he rejects any kind of socialisation, rejects any kind of
adaptation to communal law—it is not for nothing that the
Socialist-Revolutionaries curse him for an individualist!—he
rejects any prohibition on hired labour on the peasant farm.  

In view of this kind of striving of the peasantry for
nationalisation, the reactionary nature of support for peasant allotment
ownership becomes quite obvious. A. Finn, who in his pamphlet cites some of
Mr. Peshekhonov’s arguments which we have quoted, criticises him as a
Narodnik and tries to prove to him that the development of capitalism out
of peasant farming, and within that system of farming, is inevitable
(p. 14, et seq. in the pamphlet mentioned). That criticism is
unsatisfactory because A. Finn has allowed the general question of the
development of capitalism make him overlook the concrete question of the
conditions for a freer development of capitalist agriculture on
allotment land! A. Finn contents himself with. merely posing the
question of capitalism in general, thus scoring an easy victory
over Narodism, which was vanquished long ago.

    

But we are dealing with a more

       concrete[2]

question, viz., the landlord versus the peasant way of
“removing the fences” (Mr. Peshekhonov’s expression), of
“clearing” the land for capitalism.  

In winding up the debate on the agrarian question in the Second Duma,
Mr. Mushenko, the official spokesman of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party,
revealed just as definitely as Mr. Peshekhonov the capitalist
nature of the land nationalisation that the petty-bourgeois socialists
choose to call “socialisation”, the establishment of
“equal right to the land”, and so on.  

“The population will be properly distributed,” Mr. Mushenko said,
“only when the land is unfenced, only when the fences imposed by the
principle of private ownership of land are removed” (47th sitting, May 26,
1907, p. 1172 of Stenographic Record). Exactly! The “proper”
distribution of the population is the very thing the market, capitalism,
requires. But. the “proper” distribution of “proper”
farmers is hindered by both landlord

and allotment

ownership.  

One more observation on the statements made by delegates of the Peasant
Union merits our attention. Mr. Groman writes in the above-mentioned
pamphlet: 


   “The notorious question of the ‘village commune’—that corner
   stone of the tenet;s of the old and new Narodism—was not raised at
   all and was tacitly rejected: the land must be placed at the disposal of
   individuals and associations, state the resolutions passed at both the
   First and Second Congresses” (p. 12).  

 

Thus, the peasants have clearly and emphatically declared against the old
village commune in favour of free associations and individual land tenure. That
this was the real voice of the peasantry as a whole there can be no doubt, since
there is not a hint at the village commune even in the Land Bill of the
Trudovik Group (of the 104). Yet the village commune is an association for the
ownership of allotment land!


Stolypin is forcibly abolishing the village commune for the benefit of
a handful of rich persons. The peasantry wants to abolish it and replace it
by free associations and tenure by “individuals” on
the nationalised allotment land. But Maslov and Co., in the name
of bourgeois progress, are challenging the fundamental requirement of this
very progress and defending medieval landownership. God save us from that
sort of “Marxism”!  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Material on the Peasant Question. (A report of the
Delegates’ Congress of the All-Russian Peasant Union, November 6-10,
1905, with an introduction by V. Groman. Navy Mir Publishers,
St. Petersburg, 1905, p. 12.)  —Lenin

[2]

“What will this Peshekhonov labour economy lead to in the long run?”
A. Finn asks, and answers quite rightly: “to capitalism” (p. 19 of his
pamphlet). From that unquestionable truth, which It was certainly necessary
to explain to a Narodnik, he should have taken a further step; he
should have explained the specific forms of the manifestation of the
demands of capitalism under the conditions of a peasant agrarian
revolution. Instead, A. Finn took a step backward: “The question
arises,” he writes, “why should we go back to the past; why should we go
by some roundabout way of our own only, in the long run, to find ourselves
back again on the road we are already travelling? That is useless labour,
Mr. Peshekhonov!”  (ibid.)  No; that is not useless labour, and it does
not bring us to capitalism “in the long run”; it is the straightest,
freest, and quickest road to capitalism. A. Finn did not ponder over
the comparative features of the Stolypin capitalist evolution of
agriculture in Russia and a peasant-revolutionary capitalist evolution of
agriculture in Russia. —Lenin
 

 
  

6. Why Had the Small Proprietors in Russia to Declare in Favour of Nationalisation?

|

8. The Mistake Made by M. Shanin and Other Advocates of Division

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Advocates
    of Division









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 8. The Mistake Made by M. Shanin and Other Advocates of Division







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

8. The Mistake Made by M. Shanin and Other Advocates of Division

M. Shanin, approaching the question in his

       pamphlet[1]

from a somewhat different angle, involuntarily provided another argument
for the nationalisation which he detests so much. By citing the example of
Ireland, by his analysis of the conditions of bourgeois reform in
the domain of agriculture, M. Shanin has proved only one thing, viz., that
the principles of private ownership of the land are incompatible with
public or state ownership of the land (but that incompatibility has to be
proved also by a general theoretical analysis, of which Shanin did not even
think). If he has proved anything else it is that private ownership must be
recognised wherever the state carries out any reforms in the sphere of
agriculture developing on capitalist lines. But all these arguments of
Shanin’s are wide of the mark: of course, under the conditions of
bourgeois reform only private ownership of land is conceivable; of
course, the preservation of private ownership of the bulk of the land in
the United Kingdom left no other way open for part

    

of it than private ownership. But what has that to do with the
“peasant agrarian revolution” in Russia? M. Shanin has pointed
out the correct path, if you like, but it is the correct path of a Stolypin
agrarian reform, and not of a peasant agrarian

     revolution.[2]

The difference between the two ways is entirely lost upon M. Shanin, and
yet unless this difference is clearly realised, it is ridiculous, to talk
about a Social-Democratic agrarian programme in the Russian revolution. And
when M. Shanin, prompted, of course, by the very best motives, defends
confiscation against redemption payments, he loses all sense of historical
perspective. He forgets that in bourgeois society confiscation, i.e.,
expropriation without compensation, is as utterly incompatible with
reform as land nationalisation. To speak of confiscation while
admitting the possibility of a reformist and not a revolutionary solution
of the agrarian question is like petitioning Stolypin to abolish
landlordism.  

Another aspect of Shanin’s pamphlet is its heavy emphasis on the
agricultural character of our agrarian crisis, on the absolute
necessity of adopting higher forms of economy, of improving agricultural
technique, which is so incredibly backward in Russia, and so forth. Shanin
elaborates these correct theses in such an incredibly one-bided fashion,
and he so completely ignores the abolition of the feudal latifundia and the
changing of agrarian relationships as a condition for that technical
revolution, that an utterly

    

false perspective is drawn. For Stolypin’s agrarian reform too leads
to technical,progress in agriculture, and does so in a correct way from the
standpoint of the landlords’ interests. The forcible break-up of the
village communes by the laws of November 9, 1906, etc., the setting up of
khutors and the subsidising of otrubs, are not a mirage,
as frivolous, prattling democratic journalists sometimes declare them to
be; they are tile realities of economic progress based on the preservation
of the power and interests of the landlords. It is an incredibly slow and
incredibly painful road for the broad masses of the peasantry and for the
proletariat, but it is the only possible road for capitalist Russia
if the peasant agrarian revolution is not victorious.  

Look at the question which Shanin raises from the stand point of
such a revolution. Modern agricultural technique demands that
all the conditions of the ancient, conservative, barbarous,
ignorant, and pauper methods of economy on peasant allotments be
transformed. The three-field system, the primitive implements, the
patriarchal impecuniosity of the tiller, the routine methods of
stock-breeding amid crass naïve ignorance of the conditions amid
requirements of the market must all be thrown overboard. Well, then, is
such a revolutionising of agriculture possible if the old system of
landownership is preserved? The division of the land among the present
allotment owners would mean preserving

 half[3]

of the medieval system of landownership. Division of the land might be
progressive if it consolidated modern farming, modern
agricultural methods, and scrapped the old. But division cannot give an
impetus to modern agricultural methods if it is based on the old system of
allotment ownership.

Comrade Borisov,[5] an advocate of division, said in Stockholm:

“Our agrarian programme is a programme for the period of developing
revolution, the period of the break-up of the old order and the organisation of
a new social-political

    

order. That is its fundamental idea. Social-Democracy must not bind itself
by decisions which pledge it to support any particular form of economy. In
this struggle of the new social forces against the foundations of the old
order, it is necessary to cut the tangled knot with a decisive
stroke” (p. 125 of the Minutes). All that is quite true and
splendidly stated. And it all speaks in favour of nationalisation, because
the latter alone really “breaks up” the old medieval system of
landownership, really cuts the tangled knot, and allows full freedom for
the new farms to develop on the nationalised land.  

The question arises by what criterion are we to deter mine whether the new
system of agriculture has already developed sufficiently to have the division of
the land adapt ed to it, and not to have a division that will
perpetuate the old obstacles to the new farming? There can be but one criterion,
that of practice. No statistics in the world can assess whether the elements of
a peasant bourgeoisie in a given country have “hardened”
sufficiently to enable the system of landownership to be adapted to the system
of farming. This can be assessed only by the mass of the farmers
themselves. The impossibility of assessing this at the present moment has been
proved by the fact that the mass of the peasants have come forward in
our revolution with a programme of land nationalisation. The small farmer, at
all times and throughout the world, becomes so attached to his farm (if it
really is his farm and not a piece of the landlord’s estate let
out on labour-service, as is frequently the case in Russia) that his
“fanatical” defence of private ownership of the land is inevitable
at a certain historical period and for a certain space of time. If in the
present epoch the mass of the Russian peasants are not displaying the
fanaticism of private property owners (a fanaticism which is fostered by all the
ruling classes, by all the liberal-bourgeois politicians), but are putting
forward a widespread and firmly held demand for the nationalisation of the land,
it would be childishness or stupid pedantry to attribute it to the influence of
the publicists of

Russkoye Bogatstvo[6] or Mr. Chernov’s pamphlets. It is
due to the fact that the real conditions of life of the small cultivator,
of the small farmer in the village, confront him with the economic problem,

    

not of consolidating the new agriculture, which has already taken shape, by
means of dividing the land as private property, hut of clearing the
ground for the creation of a new agriculture (out of the existing elements) upon
“free”, i. e., nationalised, land. The fanaticism of the private
property owner can and should assert itself, in due time, as a demand of the
newly-hatched free farmer for the assured possession of his
farm. Nationalisation of the land had to become the demand of the peasant masses
in the Russian revolution as the slogan of farmers who want to break
the shell of medievalism. Therefore, for Social-Democrats to preach
division of the land to the mass of the peasants, who are inclined towards
nationalisation, and who are only just beginning to enter the conditions for the
final “sorting out” that should produce free farmers capable of
creating capitalist agriculture, is glaring historical tactlessness, and reveals
inability to take stock of the concrete historical situation.


Our Social-Democratic “divisionists”—Comrades Finn, Borisov, and
Shanin—are free from the theoretical dualism of the
“municipalisers”, including the latters’ vulgar criticism of
Marx’s theory of rent (with this we shall deal later on), but they make a
mistake of a different kind, a mistake of historical perspective. While
taking a generally correct stand in theory (and in this they differ from the
“municipalisers”), they repeat the mistake of our cut-off lands
programme of 1903. That mistake was due to the fact that while we correctly
defined the trend of development, we did not correctly define the
moment of that development. We assumed that the elements of capitalist
agriculture had already taken full shape in Russia, both in landlord farming
(minus the cut-off lands and their conditions of bondage—hence the demand
that the cut-off lands be re turned to the peasants) and in peasant farming,
which seemed to have given rise to a strong peasant bourgeoisie and therefore to
be incapable of bringing about a “peasant agrarian revolution”. The
erroneous programme was not the result of “fear” of the peasant
agrarian revolution, but of an over-estimation of the degree
of capitalist development in Russian agriculture. The survivals of serfdom
appeared to us then to be a minor detail, whereas capitalist agriculture

    

on the peasant allotments and on the landlords’ estates seemed to be quite
mature and well-established.  

The revolution has exposed that mistake; it has confirmed the trend of
development as we had defined it. The Marxist analysis of the classes in Russian
society has been so brilliantly confirmed by the whole course of events in
general, and by the first two Dumas in particular, that non-Marxist socialism
has been shattered completely. But the survivals of serfdom in the countryside
have proved to be much stronger than we thought: they have given rise to a
nation-wide peasant movement and they have made that movement the
touchstone of the bourgeois revolution as a whole. Hegemony in the bourgeois
liberation movement, which revolutionary Social-Democracy always assigned to the
proletariat, had to be defined more precisely as leader ship which rallied the
peasantry behind it. But leading to what? To the bourgeois revolution
in its most consistent and decisive form. We rectified the mistake by
substituting for the partial aim of combating the survivals of the old
agrarian system, the aim of combating the old agrarian system as a
whole. Instead of purging landlord economy, we set the aim of
abolishing it.


But this correction, made under the impact of the imposing course of
events, did not make many of us think out to its logical conclusion our new
evaluation of the degree of capitalist development in Russian
agriculture. If the demand for the confiscation of all the landlord estates
proved to be historically correct—and that undoubtedly was The
case—it meant that the wide development of capitalism calls for new
agrarian relationships, that the beginnings of capitalism in landlord
economy can and must be sacrificed to the wide and free development of
capitalism on the basis of renovated small farming. To accept the demand
for the confiscation of the landlord estates means admitting the
possibility and the necessity of the renovation of small farming under
capitalism.  

Is that admissible? Is it not a gamble to support small farming under
capitalism? Is not the renovation of small farming a vain dream?
Is it not a demagogic “trap for the peasants”, a
Bauernfang?  That, undoubtedly, was what many comrades
thought. But they were wrong. The renovation

    

of small farming is possible even under capitalism if the historical
aim is to fight the pre-capitalist order. That is the way small farming was
renovated in America, where the slave plantations were broken up in a
revolutionary manner and the conditions were created for the most rapid and free
development of capitalism. In the Russian revolution the struggle for the land
is nothing else than a struggle for the renovated path of capitalist
development. The consistent slogan of such a renovation
is—nationalisation of the land. To exclude allotment land from
nationalisation is economically reactionary (we shall deal separately with the
politically reactionary aspect of that exclusion). The
“divisionists” are skipping the historical task of the
present revolution; they assume that the objectives of the peasants’ mass
struggle have already been achieved, whereas that struggle has only just
begun. Instead of stimulating the process of renovation, instead of explaining
to the peasantry the conditions for consistent renovation, they are already
designing a dressing-gown for the appeased, renovated

       farmer.[4]


“Everything in good season.” Social-Democracy cannot
undertake never to support division of the land. In a different historical
situation, at a different stage of agrarian evolution, this division may
prove unavoidable. But division of the land is an entirely wrong
expression of the aims of the bourgeois-democratic revolution in
Russia in 1907.  
    

     

Notes
 

[1]
M. Shanin, Municipalisation or Division for Private Property,
Vilna, 1907.  —Lenin

[2]
Shanin’s reference to the example of Ireland, showing that
private ownership preponderates over renting (and not over the
nationalisation of the whole land), is not new either. In exactly the
same way, the “liberal” Professor A. I. Chuprov cites Ireland to
prove that peasant ownership of land is preferable. (The
Agrarian Question, Vol. 11, p. 11.) The real nature of this
“liberal” and even “Constitutional Democrat” is revealed on
page 33 of his article. Here Mr. Chuprov, with incredible brazenness, the
brazenness of a liberal that is possible only in Russia, proposes that on
all the land-surveying commissions the peasants be subordinated to
a majority of landlords! Five members representing the peasants
and five representing the landlords, with a chairman “appointed by the
Zemstvo Assembly”, i. e., by an assembly of landlords. An
allusion to Ireland was also made in the First Duma by the Right-wing
deputy, Prince Drutsky-Lyubetsky, as proof of the necessity for
private ownership of land and as an argument against the Cadet
Bill. (Sitting of May 24, 1906, p 626 of Stenographic Record.)  —Lenin

[3]
I have pointed out above that out of 280,000,000 dessiatins of tile
land available for distribution in European Russia, one half—-
138,800,000 dessiatins—consists of allotment land. (See p. 221 of this
volume.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[4]
The advocates of division frequently cite the words of Marx:

“The free ownership of the self-managing peasant is evidently the most
normal form of landed property for small-scale operation.... Ownership of the
land is as necessary for full development of this mode of production as
ownership of tools is for free development of handicraft production”
(Des Kapital,

III, 2, 341).[7] From this it merely follows that the complete triumph
of free peasant agriculture may call for private ownership. But present-day
small-scale farming is not free. State landownership is “an instrument in
the hands of the land lord rather than of the peasant, an instrument for
extracting labour rent rather than an instrument of free labour of the
peasant”. The destruction of all forms of feudal landownership and free
settlement in all parts of the country are needed for the promotion of free
small— scale farming.  —Lenin
 



[5]
Borisov—S. A. Suvorov.

 



[6]
Russkoye Bogatstvo (Russian Wealth)—a monthly
magazine, published in St. Petersburg from 1876 to the middle of 1918. In
the early nineties it became the organ of the liberal Narodniks. From 1906
it was virtually the organ of the semi-Cadet Popular Socialist
Party.

 



[7]
Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 787.



 
  

7. The Peasants and the Narodniks on the Nationalisation of Allotment Land

|

1. What is Nationalisation of the Land?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## What Is
    Nationalisation of the Land?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 1. What is Nationalisation of the Land?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

Chapter III
The Theoretical Basis of Nationalisation and of
    Municipalisation

A grave fault of almost the whole Social-Democratic press
on the question of the agrarian programme in general, and a shortcoming of
the debate at the Stockholm Congress in particular, is that practical
considerations prevail over theoretical, and political considerations over

      economic.[1]

Most of us, of course, have an excuse, namely, the conditions of intensive
Party work under which we discussed the agrarian problem in the revolution:
first, after January 9, 1905, a few months before the outbreak (the spring
“Third Congress of the R.S.D.L.P.” of Bolsheviks in London in
1905 and the Conference of the Minority held at the same time in Geneva),
and then on the day after the December

uprising,[5] and in Stockholm on the eve of the First Duma. But at all
events this shortcoming must, be corrected now, and an examination of the
theoretical aspect of the question of nationalisation and municipalisation
is particularly necessary.  
    

1. What is Nationalisation of the Land?

Above we quoted the current formulation of the now
generally recognised proposition, “All the Narodnik groups are
advocating nationalisation of the land.” As a matter of fact, this
current formulation is very inexact and there is very little in it that is
“generally recognised”, if by this we mean a really identical
conception of this “nationalisation” among the representatives
of the various political trends. The mass of the peasantry demand the land
spontaneously, for they are oppressed by the feudal latifundia. and do not
associate the transfer of the land to the people with any at all definite
economic ideas. Among the peasantry there is only a very urgent demand,
born, so to speak, from suffering:.and hardened by long years of
oppression—a demand for the revival, strengthening, consolidation,
and expansion of small farming; a demand that the latter be made
predominant, and nothing more. All that the peasant visualises is the
passing of the landlord latifundia into his own hands; in this struggle the
peasant clothes his hazy idea of the unity of all peasants, as a mass, in
the phrase: ownership of the land by the people. The peasant is guided by
the instinct of the property owner, who is hindered by the endless
fragmentation of the present forms of medieval landownership and by the
impossibility of organising the cultivation of the soil in a manner that
fully corresponds to “property owning” requirements if all this
motley medieval system of landownership continues. The economic necessity
of abolishing landlordism,

of abolishing also the “fetters” of allotment
landownership—such

are the negative concepts which exhaust the peasant idea
of nationalisation. What forms of landownership may eventually be necessary
for renovated small farming, which will have digested, so to speak, the
landlord latifundia, the peasant does not think about.  

The negative aspects of the concept (or hazy idea) of nationalisation
undoubtedly also predominate in Narodnik ideology, which expresses the demands
and the hopes of the peasantry. The removal of the old obstacles, the clearing
out of the landlord, the “unfencing” of the land, the removal of the
fetters of allotment ownership, the

    

strengthening of small farming, the substitution of “equality,
fraternity, and liberty” for “inequality” (i. e., the
land lord latifundia) —that expresses nine-tenths of Narodnik
ideology. Equal right to land, equalised laud tenure,
socialisation—all these are merely different forms of expression of
the same ideas; and all are mainly negative concepts, for the Narodnik
cannot conceive the new order as a definite system of social-economic
relationships. The Narodnik regards the present agrarian revolution as a
transition from serfdom, inequality, and oppression in general, to equality
and liberty, and nothing more. That is the typical narrow-mindedness of the
bourgeois revolutionary who fails to see the capitalist features of the new
society he is creating.  

In contrast to the naïve outlook of Narodism, Marxism investigates
the new system that is arising. Even with the fullest freedom of peasant
farming and with the fullest equality of small proprietors occupying the
peoples, or no man’s, or “God’s” land—we have before us a
system of commodity production. Small producers are tied and subjected to
the market. Out of the exchange of products arises the power of money; the
conversion of agricultural produce into money is followed by the conversion
of labour-power into money. Commodity production becomes capitalist
production. And this theory is not a dogma, but a simple description, a
generalisation of what is taking place in Russian peasant farming too. The
freer that farming is from land congestion, landlord oppression, the
pressure of medieval relations and system of landownership, bondage, and
tyranny, tile more strongly do capitalist relationships develop within that
peasant farming. That is a fact to which the whole of the post-Reform
history of Russia undoubtedly testifies.  

Consequently, the concept of nationalisation of the land, in terms of
economic reality, is a category of commodity and capitalist
society. What is real in this concept is not what the peasants think, or what
the Narodniks say, but what arises from the economic relations of present
society. Nationalisation of the land under capitalist relations is neither more
nor less than the transfer of rent to the state. What is rent in capitalist
society? It is not income from the

    

land in general. It is that part of surplus value which re— mains
after average profit on capital is deducted. Hence, rent presupposes
wage-labour in agriculture, the transformation of the cultivator into a
capitalist farmer, into an entrepreneur. Nationalisation (in its pure form)
assumes that the state receives rent from the agricultural entrepreneur who
pays wages to wage-workers and receives average profit on his
capital—average for all enterprises, agricultural and
non-agricultural, in the given country or group of countries.  

Thus, the theoretical concept of nationalisation is inseparably bound
up with the theory of rent, i. e., capitalist rent, as the special form of
income of a special class (the landowning class) in capitalist society.


Marx’s theory distinguishes two forms of rent: differential rent
and absolute rent. The first springs from the limited nature of land, its
occupation by capitalist economies, quite irrespective of whether private
ownership of land exists, or what the form of landownership is. Between the
individual farms there are inevitable differences arising out of
differences in soil fertility, location in regard to markets, and the
productivity of additional investments of capital in the land. Briefly,
those differences may be summed up (without, however, forgetting that they
spring from different causes) as the differences between better and worse
soils. To proceed. The price of production of the agricultural product is
determined by the conditions of production not on the average soil, but on
the worst soil, because the, produce from the best soil alone is
insufficient to meet the demand. The difference between the individual
price of production and the highest price of production is differential
rent. (We remind the reader that by price of production Marx means the
capital expended on the production of the product, plus average profit on
capital.)  

Differential rent inevitably arises in capitalist agriculture even if
the private ownership of land is completely abolished. Under the private
ownership of land, this rent is appropriated by the landowner, for
competition between capitals compels the tenant farmer to be satisfied with
the average profit on capital. When the private ownership of land is
abolished, that rent will go to the state.

    

That rent cannot be abolished as long as the capitalist
mode of production exists.  

Absolute rent arises from the private ownership of land. That rent contains an
element of monopoly, an element of monopoly

price.[2]

Private ownership of land hinders free competition, hinders the levelling
of profit, the formation of average profit in agricultural and
non-agricultural enterprises. And as agriculture is on a lower technical
level than industry, as the composition of capital is marked by a larger
proportion of variable capital than of constant capital, the individual
value of the agricultural product is above the average. Hence, by
hindering the free levelling of profits in agricultural enterprises on a
par with non-agricultural enterprises, the private ownership of land makes
it possible to sell the agricultural product not at the highest price of
production, but at the still higher individual value of the product (for
the price of production is determined by the average profit on capital,
while absolute rent prevents the formation of this “average” by
monopolistically fixing the individual value at a level higher than the
average).  

Thus, differential rent is inevitably an inherent feature of every form of
capitalist agriculture. Absolute rent is not; it arises only under the private
ownership of land, only under the

    historically[3]

created backwardness of agriculture, a backwardness that becomes fixed by
monopoly.  

Kautsky compares these two forms of rent, particularly in their bearing
on the nationalisation of the land, in the following propositions: 
 


   “As differential rent, ground rent arises from competition. As
   absolute rent, it arises from monopoly.... In practice, ground rent does
   not present itself to us divided in parts; it is impossible to say which
   part is differential rent and which part is absolute rent. More over, it is
   usually mixed with the interest on capital expended by the landowner. Where
   the landowner is also the farmer, ground rent appears as a part of
   agricultural profit.  

   “Nevertheless, the distinction between the two forms of rent is
   extremely important.  

   “Differential rent arises from the capitalist character of
   production and not from the private ownership of land.  

   “That rent would continue to exist even under nationalisation of the
   land, as demanded [in Germany] by the advocates of land reform, who would
   nevertheless preserve the capitalist mode of agriculture. In that case,
   however, rent would no longer accrue to private persons, but to the state.
   

   “Absolute rent arises out of the private ownership of land,
   out. of the antagonism of interests between the landowner and the rest. of
   society. The nationalisation of the land would make possible the
   abolition of that rent and the reduction of the price of agricultural
   produce-by an amount equal to that rent. [Our italics.]  

   “To proceed: the second distinction between differential rent and
   absolute rent is that the former is not a constituent part affecting the
   price of agricultural produce, whereas the latter is. The former arises
   from the price of production; the latter arises from the excess of market
   price over price of production. The former arises from the surplus,, from
   the super-profit, that is created by the more productive labour on better
   soil, or on a better located plot. The latter does not arise from the
   additional income of certain forms of agricultural labour; it is possible
   only as a deduction from the available quantity of values for the
   benefit of the landowner, a deduction from the mass of surplus
   value—therefore, it implies either a reduction of profits or a
   deduction from wages. If the price of foodstuffs rises, and wages rise
   also, the profit on capital diminishes. If the price of foodstuffs rises
   without an increase in wages, then the workers suffer the loss. Finally,
   the following may happen— and this may be regarded as the general
   rule—the loss caused by absolute rent. is borne jointly by the
   workers and the

    capitalists.”[4]



Thus, the question of the nationalisation of the land in capitalist society
falls into two essentially distinct parts:

the question of differential rent, and that of absolute
rent. Nationalisation changes the owner of the former, and undermines the
very existence of the latter. Hence, on the

    

one hand, nationalisation is a partial reform within the limits of
capitalism (a change of owners of a part of surplus value), and, on the
other hand, it abolishes the monopoly which hinders the development of
capitalism as a whole.  

Unless a distinction is made between these two sides, i. e., the nationalisation
of differential rent and of absolute rent, it is impossible to understand the
economic significance of the question of nationalisation in Russia. This brings
us, however, to P. Maslov’s repudiation of the theory of absolute rent.

 

Notes
 

[1]
In my pamphlet Revision of the Agrarian Programme of the
Workers’ Party, which I defended at Stockholm, there are very
definite (although brief, as the pamphlet itself is) references to the
theoretical premises of a Marxist agrarian programme. I pointed
out in that pamphlet that “the bare repudiation of nationalisation” would
be a “theoretical distortion of Marxism” (p. 16 of the old edition, p. 41
of this edition). (See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 181.— Ed.)
See also my Report on the Stockholm Congress, pp. 27-28 of the old edition
(p. 63 of this edition). (See present edition, Vol. 10,
p. 346.—Ed.)  “From the strictly scientific point of view, from
the point of view of the conditions of development of capitalism in
general, we. must undoubtedly say—if we do not want to differ from Volume
III of Capital—that the nationalisation of the land is possible
in bourgeois society, that it promotes economic development, facilitates
competition and the influx of capital into agriculture, reduces the price
of grain, etc.” See also the same report, p. 52 (see present edition,
Vol. 10, p. 378. —Ed.): “In spite of their promises, they [the
Right wing of Social-Democracy] do not carry the bourgeois-democratic
revolution in agriculture to its ‘logical’ conclusion, for the only
‘logical’ (and economic) conclusion under capitalism is the
nationalisation of the land, which abolishes absolute rent.”  —Lenin

[2]
In Part 2 of Volume II of Theories of Surplus Value, Marx
reveals the “essence of different theories of rent”: the theory of the
monopoly price of agricultural produce and the theory of differential
rent. He shows what is true in both those theories, insofar as
absolute rent contains an element of monopoly. See p. 125 concerning Adam
Smith’s theory: “it is quite true” that rent is monopoly price,
insofar as the private ownership of land prevents the levelling of
profit. by fixing profit at a level higher than the

average.[6] —Lenin

[3]
See Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. II, Part I (German
original), p. 259: “In agriculture, manual labour still predominates, while
the capitalist mode of production develops industry more quickly than
agriculture. However, that is a historical distinction which may
disappear.” (See also p. 275, and Vol. II, Part 2,

p. 15.)[7] —Lenin

[4]
K. Kautsky, The Agrarian Question, German original, pp.
   79-80.  —Lenin
 



[5]
Lenin is referring to the discussion of the agrarian question at the
First Conference of the R.S.D.L.P. held in Tammerfors December 12-17
(25-30), 1905. The report on this question was made by Lenin. In
furtherance of the decision of the Third Congress of the Party, the
Conference found it necessary to include in the programme an item calling
for support of the peasants’ revolutionary measures, including confiscation
of all state, church, monastery, crown, and privately owned lands. The
Conference drew special attention to the need for an independent
organisation of the rural proletariat and for showing the latter that its
interests could not be reconciled with those of the rural
bourgeoisie.

 



[6]
Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, Berlin,
Dietz Verlag, 1959, S. 336.

 



[7]
Ibid., SS. 84,96,236.

 

 
  

8. The Mistake Made by M. Shanin and Other Advocates of Division

|

2. Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx’s Rough Notes

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Pyotr Maslov
    Corrects Karl Marx's Rough Notes









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 2. Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx's Rough Notes







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

2. Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx’s Rough
       Notes[7]

I already had occasion In 1901, in Zarya
(published abroad), to refer to Maslov’s wrong conception of the
theory of rent in dealing with his articles in the magazine

    Zhizn[1]
[8]


The debates prior to and in Stockholm, as I have already said, were
concentrated to an excessive degree on the political aspect of the
question. But after Stockholm, M. Olenov, in an article entitled “The
Theoretical Principles of the Municipalisation of the Land”
(Obrazovaniye, 1907, No. 1), examined Maslov’s book on the
agrarian question in Russia and particularly emphasised the incorrectness
of Maslov’s economic theory, which repudiates absolute rent
altogether.  

Maslov replied to Olenov in an article in Obrazovaniye, Nos. 2
and 3. He reproached his opponent for being “impudent”,
“bumptious”, “flippant”, etc. As a matter of fact,
in the sphere of Marxist theory, it is Pyotr Maslov who is
impudent and stupidly bumptious, for it is difficult to imagine a greater
display of ignorance than the smug “criticism” of Marx by
Maslov, who persists in his old mistakes.  


   “The contradiction between the theory of absolute rent and the
   whole theory of distribution expounded in Volume III,” writes
   Mr. Maslov, “is so glaring that one can only account for it by the
   fact that Volume III is a posthumous publication containing also the
   rough notes of the author.” (The Agrarian Question, 3rd
   ed., p. 108, footnote.)  

 

Only a person who understands nothing about Marx’s theory of rent
could write a thing like that. But the patronising condescension with which
the incomparable Pyotr Maslov treats the author of those rough notes is
truly superb! This “Marxist” is too superior to think it
necessary to familiarise himself with Marx before trying to teach
other people, to study at least the Theories of Surplus Value,
published in 1905, in which the theory of rent is made so plain that even
the Maslovs should be able to grasp it!  

Here is Maslov’s argument against Marx:



   “Absolute rent is said to arise from the low composition of
   agricultural capital.... As the composition of capital affects neither the
   price of the product, nor the rate of profit., nor the distribution of
   surplus value among the entrepreneurs in general, it cannot create
   any rent. If the composition of agricultural capital is lower than that of
   industrial capital, differential rent results from the surplus value
   obtained in agriculture; but that makes no difference as far as the
   formation of rent is concerned. Consequently, if the ‘composition’
   of capital changed, i.t would not affect rent in the least. The amount of
   rent is not in the least determined by the character of its origin, but
   solely by the above mentioned difference in the productivity of labour
   under different conditions” (op. cit., pp. 108.09. Maslov’s
   italics).  


It would be interesting to know whether the bourgeois critics of
Marx” ever went to such lengths of frivolity in their
refutations. Our incomparable Maslov is completely muddled; and lie is
muddled even when he expounds Marx (incidentally, that is also a
habit of Mr. Bulgakov and all other bourgeois assailants of Marxism, who,
however, differ from Maslov in that they are more honest, since they do not
call themselves Marxists). It is not true to say that according to Marx
absolute rent results from the low composition of agricultural
capital. Absolute rent arises from the private ownership of land. This
private ownership creates a special monopoly having nothing to do with the
capitalist. mode of production, which can exist on communal as well as on
nationalised

land.[2]

The non-capitalist monopoly created by the private ownership of land
prevents the levelling of profits in those branches of production

    

which are sheltered by this monopoly. In order that “the composition
of capital shall not affect the rate of, profit” (there should be
added: the composition of an individual capital, or of the capital of an
individual branch of industry; here too Maslov expounds Marx in a muddled
way), in order that the average rate of profit may be formed, the
profits of all the separate enterprises and of all the separate spheres of
industry must be levelled. The levelling takes place through free
competition, through the free investment of capital in all branches of
production without distinction. Can that freedom exist where there is
non-capitalist monopoly? No, it cannot. The monopoly created by the private
ownership of land hinders the free investment of capital, hinders
free competition, hinders the levelling of the disproportionately high
agricultural profit (arising from the low composition of agricultural
capital). Maslov’s objection reveals an utter lack of understanding,
which is. particularly obvious when, two pages further on, we come across a
reference to... brickmaking (p. 111); here, too, the technical
level is low, the organic composition of capital is below the average, as
in the case of agriculture, and yet there is no rent!  

There cannot be any rent in brickmaking, esteemed
“theoretician”, because absolute rent arises not from the low
composition of agricultural capital, but from the monopoly created by the
private ownership of land, which prevents competition from levelling the
profits of “low composition” capital. To repudiate absolute rent
means repudiating the economic significance of the private ownership of
land.  

Maslov’s second argument against Marx is this: 


   “Rent from the ‘last’ investment of capital. Rodbertus’s
   rent and Marx’s absolute rent, will disappear because the tenant can
   always make the ‘last’ investment the ‘last but one’ if it produces
   anything besides the ordinary profit” (p. 112).  


Pyotr Maslov muddles things, “impudently” muddles them.


In the first place, to put Rodbertus on a par with Marx on the question of rent
is to display crass ignorance. Rodbertus’s theory is based on the
assumption that the erroneous calculations of the Pomeranian landlord
(“not to

    

count” the raw product in agriculture!) are obligatory also for the
capitalist farmer. There is not a grain of historism in
Rodbertus’s theory, not a grain of historical reality, for he takes
agriculture in general, regardless of time and place, agriculture in any
country and in any epoch. Marx takes a special historical period in which
capitalism has promoted technical development in industry more quickly than
in agriculture; Marx takes capitalist agriculture restricted by
non-capitalist private ownership of land.  

Secondly, the reference to the tenant who “can always” make the
last investment of capital the last but one shows that our incomparable Pyotr
Maslov has failed to under stand, not only Marx’s absolute rent, but
his differential rent as well! That is incredible, but it is a fact. During
the term of his lease the tenant “can always” appropriate, and
always does appropriate,

all

rent if he “makes the last investment the last but
one”, if—to put it more simply and (as we shall see in a
moment) more correctly—he invests fresh capital in the land. During
the term of the lease, private ownership of land ceases to exist for the
tenant:

by paying rent, he has “ransomed himself” from that monopoly
and it can no longer hinder

 him.[3]

That is why, when a fresh investment of capital in his land yields the
tenant additional profit and additional rent, it is the tenant, not the
landowner, who appropriates that rent. The landowner will begin to
appropriate that additional rent only after the tenant’s lease has
expired, when a new lease is drawn up. What mechanism will then transfer
the additional rent from the pocket of the tenant farmer to that of the
landowner? The mechanism of free competition, since the fact that the
tenant receives not only average profit but also super-profit (=rent) will
attract capital to this unusually profitable enterprise. Hence it is clear,
on the one hand, why, all other things being equal, a long lease is to the
advantage of the tenant and a short lease to the advantage of the
landlord. Hence it is clear, on the other hand, why, for example, after the
repeal of the Corn Laws, the English

    

landlords introduced a clause in their leases compelling the farmers to
spend not less than £12 (about 110 rubles) per acre on their farms,
instead of £8, as formerly. The landlords thus took into account the
progress in socially necessary agricultural technique which took place as a
result of the repeal of the Corn Laws.  

The question now arises: what form of additional rent does the tenant
appropriate during the term of his lease? Is it only absolute rent, or is it
also differential rent? It is both. For had Pyotr Maslov taken the trouble to
under stand Marx before “criticising the rough notes” so amusingly,
he would have known that differential rent is obtained riot only from different
plots of land, but also from different outlays of capital on the same

      plot.[4]


Thirdly (we apologise to the reader for wearying him with this long list of
blunders which Maslov commits in every sentence; but what else can we do if we
have to deal with such a “prolific” Konfusionsrat—a
“muddled counsellor”, as the Germans say?)—thirdly,
Maslov’s argument about the last and last but one investment is based on
the notorious “law of diminishing returns”. Like the bourgeois
economists, Maslov recognises that law (and, to make it look important, even
calls this stupid invention a fact). Like the bourgeois economists, Maslov
connects that law with the theory of rent, declaring with the audacity of one
who is utterly ignorant of theory, that “if it were not for the fact that
the productivity of the last outlays of capital diminishes, there would be no
such thing as ground rent” (p. 114).


For a criticism of this vulgar bourgeois “law of diminishing
returns” we refer the reader to what I said in 1901 in opposition to
Mr.

      Bulgakov.[5]

On that question there is no essential difference between
Bulgakov and Maslov.  
 

To supplement what I said in opposition to Bulgakov I will quote just one more
passage from the “rough notes” in Volume III, which reveals the
Maslov-Bulgakov criticism in all its splendour.


“Rather than tracing to their origin the real natural causes
leading to an exhaustion of the soil, which, incidentally, were unknown to
all economists writing on differential rent, owing to the level of
agricultural chemistry in their day, the shallow conception was seized upon
that any amount of capital cannot be invested in a limited area of land; as
the Westminster Review, for instance, argued against Richard Jones
that all of England cannot be fed through the cultivation of

Soho Square”....[9] 

This objection is the only argument that Maslov and all other advocates of the
“law of diminishing returns” use. If that law did not operate, if
succeeding outlays of capital could be as productive as preceding ones, there
would then be no need, they argue, to extend the area of cultivation; it would
be possible to obtain any quantity of agricultural produce from the smallest of
plots by the investment of fresh capital in the land, i. e., it would then be
possible for “all of England to be fed through the cultivation of Soho
Square”, or to “put the agriculture of the whole globe on one

     dessiatin”,[6]

etc. Consequently, Marx analyses the main argument in favour of
the “law” of diminishing returns. He goes on to say: 

... “If this be considered a special disadvantage of agriculture,
precisely the opposite is true. It is possible to in vest capital here
successively with fruitful results, because the soil itself serves as an
instrument of production, which is not the case with a factory, or holds
only to a limited extent, since it serves only as a foundation, as a place
and a space providing a basis of operations. It is true that, compared with
scattered handicrafts, large-scale industry may concentrate much production
in a small area. Nevertheless, a definite amount of space is always
required at any given

    

level of productivity, and the construction of tail buildings also has its
practical limitations. Beyond this any expansion of production also demands
an extension of land area. The fixed capital invested in machinery, etc.,
does not improve through use, but, on the contrary, wears out. New
inventions may indeed permit some improvement in this respect, but with any
given development in productive power, machines will always deteriorate. If
productivity is rapidly developed all of the old machinery must be re
placed by the more advantageous; in other words, it is lost. The soil,
however, if properly treated, improves all the time. The advantage of, the
soil, permitting successive investments of capital to bring gains without
loss of previous investments, implies the possibility of differences in
yield from, these successive investments of capital.” (Das
Kapital, III. Band, 2. Teil,

S. 314.)[10]


Maslov preferred to repeat the threadbare fable of bourgeois economics about
the law of diminishing returns rather than ponder over Marx’s
criticism. And yet Maslov has the audacity, while distorting Marx, to claim
here, on these very questions, that he is expounding Marxism!


The degree to which Maslov mutilates the theory of rent from his purely
bourgeois point of view of the “natural law” of diminishing returns
can be seen from the following tirade, which he gives in italics: “If
successive outlays of capital on the same plot of land, leading to intensive
farming, were equally productive, the competition of new lands would
immediately disappear; for the cost of transport affects the price of grain in
addition to the cost of production” (page 107).


Thus, overseas competition can be explained only by means of the law of
diminishing returns! Exactly what the bourgeois economists say! But if Maslov
was unable to read or incapable of understanding Volume III, then at least he
should have familiarised himself with Kautsky’s The Agrarian
Question, or with Parvus’s pamphlet on the agricultural crisis. Perhaps the
popular explanations given by those Marxists would have enabled Maslov to under
stand that capitalism raises rent and increases the industrial
population. And the price of laud (= capitalised rent) keeps that rent
at its inflated level. This applies also to differential

    

rent, so that we see a second time that Maslov failed to understand
anything Marx wrote even about the simplest form of rent.  

Bourgeois economics accounts for the “competition of new
lands” by the “law of diminishing returns”; for the
bourgeois, consciously or unconsciously, ignores the social-historical
aspect of the matter. Socialist economics (i. e., Marxism) accounts for
overseas competition by the fact that land for which no rent is paid
undercuts the excessively high grain prices established by capitalism in
the old European countries, which raised ground rent to an incredible
degree. The bourgeois economist fails to understand (or conceals from
himself and others) that the level of rent fixed by the private ownership
of land is an obstacle to progress in agriculture, and he
therefore throws the blame upon the “natural” obstacle, the
“fact” of diminishing returns.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See The Agrarian Question, Part 1, St. Petersburg, 1908,
article “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’", footnote
to pp. 178-79. (See present edition, Vol. 5, p. 127.—Ed.)  —Lenin

[2]
See Theories of Surplus Value, Vol. 11, Part 1, p. 208, where
Marx shows that the landowner is an absolutely superfluous figure in
capitalist production; that the purpose of the latter is “fully answered”
if the land belongs to the

state.[11] —Lenin

[3]
Had Maslov read the “rough notes” in Volume III at all attentively he
could not but have noticed how frequently Marx deals with this.  —Lenin

[4]
Marx calls the differential rent obtained from the difference in
various plots Differential Rent I; and that obtained from the difference in
the productivity of additional outlays of capital on the same plot he calls
Differential Rent II. In the “rough notes” in Volume Ill, that
distinction is brought out in scrupulous detail (Part VI, Chapters 39-43),
and one must he a “critic of Marx” after the manner of the Bulgakovs
“not to notice”

it.[12] —Lenin

[5]
See present edition, Vol. 5, pp. 107-19.—Ed.  

[6]
See “The Agrarian Question and the ‘Critics of Marx’" on the law
of diminishing returns. Maslov utters the same nonsense: “The entrepreneur
will successively spend all [I] his capital, for example, on one dessiatin,
if the new outlays will produce the same profit” (p. 107), etc.  —Lenin
 



[7]
This section was published in the newspaper Proletary, No. 33,
July 23 (August 5), 1908.

 



[8]
Zhizn (Life)—a monthly magazine, published in
St. Petersburg from 1897 to 1901; in 1902, it was published abroad. From
1899 onwards the magazine was the organ of the “legal
Marxists”.

 



[11]
Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, Berlin,
Dietz Verlag, 1959, S. 36.

 



[12]
Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959,
pp. 634-720.

 



[9]
Ibid., p. 761.

 



[10]
Ibid., pp. 761-62,

 

 
  

1. What is Nationalisation of the Land?

|

3. Is it Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute the Narodniks?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Is it
    Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute
  the Narodniks?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 3. Is it Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute the Narodniks?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

3. Is it Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute the Narodniks?

Pyotr Maslov thinks it is
necessary. “Elaborating” his silly “theory”, he
tells us for our edification in Obrazovaniye: 


   “If it were not for the ‘fact’ that the productivity of
   successive expenditures of labour on the same plot of land diminishes, the
   idyll which the Socialist-Revolutionaries and Social-Narodniks depict
   could, perhaps, be realised: every peasant would use the patch of land he
   was entitled to and apply as much labour to it as he liked, and the land
   would ‘reward’ him for every ‘application’ with a corresponding quantity of
   products” (No. 2, 1907, p. 123).  


Thus, if Marx had not been refuted by Pyotr Maslov, the Narodniks would,
perhaps, be right! Such are the pearls of wisdom that drop from the lips of our
“theoretician”. And we, in our simple Marxist way, had thought that
the idyll of perpetuating small production is refuted not by the
bourgeois-stupid “law of diminishing returns”, but by the fact of
commodity production, the domination of the market, the advantages of
large-scale capitalist farming over small farming, etc. Maslov has changed all
this! Maslov has discovered that had it not been for the bourgeois law refuted
by Marx, the Narodniks would have been right!

 

But that is not all. The revisionists, too, would have been right. Here is
another argument advanced by our home-grown economist: 

“If I am not mistaken, I I Pyotr Maslov] happened to be the first
[that’s the sort of fellow I am! I to lay special emphasis on the
difference between the significance of the cultivation of the soil and of
technical progress for the development of farming, and, in particular, for
the struggle between large-scale and small production. Whereas the
intensification of agriculture and the further expenditure of labour and
capital are to an equal extent less productive both in large-scale and in
small farming, technical progress, which increases the productivity of
labour in agriculture as it does in industry, creates enormous and
exceptional advantages for large-scale production. These advantages are
determined almost entirely by technical conditions.” ... You are
muddling things up, my dear man: the advantages of large-scale production
in commercial respects are of great importance.  

“On the other hand, cultivation of the soil can usually be applied equally
in large-scale and in small farming”.... Cultivation of the soil
“can” be applied.


Evidently, our sagacious Maslov knows of a type of f arming which can be
conducted without the cultivation of the soil... “For example, the
substitution of multiple-crop rotation for the three-field system, an increase
in the quantity of fertilisers, deeper ploughing, etc., can be equally applied
in large-scale and small farming, and equally affect the productivity of
labour. But the introduction of reaping-machines, for example, increases the
productivity of labour only on the larger farms, because the small strips of
grain field can be more conveniently reaped or mown by hand.”...


Yes, undoubtedly Maslov was the “first” to succeed in introducing
such endless confusion into the question! Just imagine: a steam plough (deeper
ploughing) is “cultivation of the soil”, a reaping-machine is a
“technical implement”. Thus, according to the doctrine of our
incomparable Maslov, a steam plough is not a technical implement; a
reaping-machine is not the further expenditure of labour and
capital. Artificial fertilisers, the steam plough, grass cultivation

    

are “intensification”. The reaping-machine and in general most
agricultural machines” represent “technical progress”.
Maslov “happened” to invent this nonsense because he had to find
some way of wriggling out of the “law of diminishing returns”, which
technical progress has refuted. Bulgakov wriggled out of it by saying:
technical progress is temporary, stagnation is constant. Maslov wriggles out of
it by inventing a most amusing division of technical progress in agriculture
into “intensification” and “technical implements”.


What is intensification? It is the further expenditure of labour and capital. A
reaping-machine, according to the discovery of our great Maslov, is not
expenditure of capital. A seed-drill is not expenditure of capital!
“The substitution of multiple-crop rotation for the three-field
system” is equally applicable in large-scale and in small
farming. That is not true. The introduction of multiple-crop rotation also
calls for additional outlays of capital and it is much more applicable
in large-scale farming. Incidentally, in this connection see the data on
German agriculture quoted above (“The Agrarian Question and the
‘Critics of

     Marx’"[1]

).

Russian statistics, too, testify to the same thing. The slightest
reflection would reveal to you that it could not be otherwise; that
multiple-crop rotation cannot be applied equally in small and
large-scale farming. Nor can increased quantities of fertilisers be
“equally applicable”, because big farms (1) have more cattle,
which is of the greatest importance in this respect; (2) feed their cattle
better and are not so “sparing” of straw, etc.; (3) have better
facilities for storing fertilisers; (4) use larger quantities of artificial
fertilisers. Maslov, in a really “impudent” way, distorts
well-known data on modern agriculture. Finally, deep ploughing
cannot be equally applicable in small and large-scale
farming either. It is sufficient to point to two facts: first, the use of
steam ploughs is in creasing on the large farms (see above-quoted data on
Germany; now, probably, electric ploughs

too).[2]

Perhaps even Maslov will realise that these cannot be “equally”
applicable in large-scale and small farming. In the latter

    

it is the employment of cows as draught animals that is
developing. Just think, great Maslov, can this signify that deep
ploughing is equally applicable? Secondly, even where large and small farms
use the same types of draught animals, the latter are feebler on
the small farms, and therefore there cannot be equal conditions in regard
to deep ploughing.  

In short, there is hardly a sentence in all Maslov’s vain attempts at
“theoretical” thinking which does not reveal an inexhaustible amount
of the most incredible confusion and the most astonishing ignorance. But Maslov,
unperturbed, concludes:



   “Whoever has clarified for himself the difference between these
   two aspects of the development of agriculture [improvement in cultivation
   and technical improvement] will easily upset all the arguments of
   revisionism, and of Narodism. in Russia.” (Obrazovaniye,
   1907, No. 2, p. 125.)  


Well, well. Maslov is a non-Narodnik and a non-revisionist only
because he succeeded in rising above Marx s rough notes to the point of
“clarifying” for himself the decrepit prejudices of decrepit
bourgeois political economy. It is the old song set to a new tune! Marx
versus Marx—exclaimed Bernstein and Struve. It is
impossible to demolish revisionism without demolishing Marx—announces
Maslov.


In conclusion, a characteristic detail. If Marx, who created the theory of
absolute rent, is wrong, if rent cannot exist without the “law of
diminishing returns”, if the Narodniks and revisionists might be right
did that law not exist, then, it would seem, Maslov’s
“corrections” to Marxism should serve as the corner-stone
of his, Maslov’s, “theory”. And so they do. But Maslov prefers
to conceal them. Recently the German translation of his book, The
Agrarian Question in Russia, appeared. I was curious to see in
what form Maslov had presented his. incredible theoretical banalities to
the European Social-Democrats. I found that he had not presented them at
all. In facing Europeans, Maslov kept the “whole”
of his theory hidden in his pocket. He omitted from his book all that
he had written in repudiation of absolute rent, the law of diminishing returns,
etc. I could not help recalling in this connection

    

the story about a stranger who was present for the first time at a
discussion between ancient philosophers but remained silent all the
time. One of the philosophers said to the stranger: “If you are wise,
you are behaving foolishly; if you are a fool, you are behaving wisely.”

 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 5, p. 181.—Ed.  

[2]
Ibid., p. 131.—Ed.  
 

 
  

2. Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx’s Rough Notes

|

4. Is the Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected with the Programme of Municipalisation?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Is the
    Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected
    with the Programme of Municipalisation?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 4. Is the Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected with the Programme of Municipalisation?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

4. Is the Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected with the Programme
       of Municipalisation?

Puffed up though Maslov may be with the importance of his
remarkable discoveries in the sphere of political economic theory, he,
evidently, has some doubts whether any such connection exists. At any rate,
in the article quoted above (Obrazovaniye, No. 2, p. 120) he
denies that there is any connection between municipalisation and the
“fact” of diminishing returns. That is rather odd: the
“law of diminishing returns” is connected with the repudiation
of absolute. rent, is connected also with the fight against Narodism, but
it is not connected with Maslov’s agrarian programme! The fallacy of
this opinion that there is no connection between general agrarian theory
and Maslov’s Russian agrarian programme can, however, be easily
proved by direct means.  

The repudiation of absolute rent is the repudiation of the economic
significance of private land ownership under capitalism. Whoever claims
that only differential rent exists, inevitably arrives at the conclusion
that it makes not the slightest difference to the conditions of capitalist
farming and of capitalist development whether the land belongs to the state
or to private persons. In both cases, from the standpoint of the theory
which repudiates absolute rent, only differential rent exists. Clearly,
such a theory must lead to the repudiation of the significance of
nationalisation as a measure which accelerates the development of
capitalism, clears the path for it, etc. For such a view of nationalisation
follows from the recognition of two forms of rent: the capitalist form,
i. e., the form which cannot be eliminated under capitalism even on
nationalised land (differential rent), and the

non-capitalist

form connected with monopoly, a form which capitalism does not need and
which hinders the full development of capitalism (absolute rent).  
 

That is why, proceeding from his “theory”, Maslov
inevitably arrived at the conclusion that “it makes no difference
whether it [ground rent] is called absolute or differential
rent” (Obrazovaniye, No. 3, p. 103); that the only
question is whether that rent is to be made over to the local or to the
central authorities. But such a view is the result of theoretical
ignorance. Quite apart from the question of whom the rent is paid to, and
the political purposes for which it will be used, there is the far more
fundamental question of the changes in the general conditions of
capitalist farming and of capitalist development that are brought about by
the abolition of private ownership of land.  

Maslov has not even raised this purely economic question; it has not
entered his mind, and it could not do so since he repudiates absolute
rent. Hence the distorted one-sided, “politician’s”
approach, as I might call it, which reduces the question of confiscating
the landlords’ estates exclusively to that of who will receive the
rent. Hence the distort ed dualism in the programme based on the
anticipation of “the victorious development of the revolution”
(the expression used in the resolution on tactics which was added to
Maslov’s programme at the Stockholm Congress). The
victorious development of the bourgeois revolution presupposes,
first of all, fundamental economic changes that will really sweep
away all the survivals of feudalism, and medieval monopolies. In
municipalisation, however, we see a real agrarian bimetallism: a
combination of the oldest, most antiquated and obsolete, medieval allotment
owner ship with the absence of private landownership, i. e., with the most
advanced, theoretically ideal system of agrarian relations in capitalist
society. This agrarian bimetallism is a theoretical absurdity, an
impossibility from the purely economic point of view. Here, the combination
of private with public ownership of land is a purely mechanical combination
“invented” by a man who sees no difference between the very
system of capitalist farming under private landownership and without
private landownership. The only question such a “theoretician”
is concerned with is:

how is the rent, “no matter what you call it, absolute or
differential”, to be shuffled around?  
 

Indeed; in a capitalist country it is impossible to leave half the land
(138,000,000 dessiatins out of 280,000,000) in private hands. There are two
alternatives. Either private landownership is really needed at a given stage of
economic development, really corresponds to the fundamental interests of the
capitalist farmer class—in which case it is inevitable everywhere as the
basis of bourgeois society which has taken shape according to a given
type.


Or private landownership is not essential for the given stage of capitalist
development, does not follow inevitably from the interests of the farmer class,
and even contradicts those interests—in which case the preservation of
that obsolete form of ownership is impossible.


The preservation of monopoly in one half of the land area under
cultivation, the creation of privileges for one category of small farmers, the
perpetuation in a free capitalist society of the “pale of
settlement”, which divides land owners from tenants of public land,
is an absurdity inseparably bound up with the absurdity of Maslov’s
economic theory.


Therefore, we must now proceed to examine the economic significance of
nationalisation, which has been pushed into the background by Maslov and his

     supporters.[1]

 

Notes
 

[1]
At Stockholm one of these was Plekhanov. By the irony of his tory, this
supposedly stern guardian of orthodoxy failed to notice, or did not
want to notice, Maslov’s distortion of Marx’s economic
theory. —Lenin
 

 
  

3. Is it Necessary to Refute Marx in Order to Refute the Narodniks?

|

5. Criticism of Private Landownership from the Standpoint of the Development of Capitalism

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Criticism of
    Private Landownership









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 5. Criticism of Private Landownership from the Standpoint of the Development of Capitalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

5. Criticism of Private Landownership from the Standpoint of the
       Development of Capitalism

The erroneous repudiation of absolute rent, of the form in which private landed
property is realised in capitalist incomes, led to an important defect in
Social-Democratic literature and in the whole of the Social-Democratic position
on the agrarian question in the Russian revolution. Instead of taking the
criticism of private landownership into their own hands, instead of basing this
criticism on an economic analysis, an analysis of definite economic evolution,
our Social-Democrats, following Maslov, surrendered this criticism to the
Narodniks. The result was an extreme theoretical vulgarisation of Marxism and
the distortion

    

of its propagandist tasks in the revolution. The criticism of private
landownership in speeches in the Duma, in propaganda and agitational
literature, etc., was made only from the Narodnik, i.e., from the
petty-bourgeois, quasi-socialist, point of view. The Marxists were unable
to pick out the real core of this petty-bourgeois ideology, having failed
to understand that their task was to introduce the historical element into
the examination of the question, and to replace the point of view of the
petty bourgeois (the abstract idea of equalisation, justice, etc.) by the
point of view of the proletariat on the real roots of the struggle against
private ownership of land in developing capitalist society. The Narodnik
thinks that repudiation of private landownership is repudiation of
capitalism. That is wrong. The repudiation of private landownership
expresses the demands for the purest capitalist development. And we have to
revive in the minds of Marxists the, “forgotten words” of Marx,
who criticised private landownership from the point of view of the
conditions of capitalist economy.  

Marx directed such criticism not only against big land ownership, but
also against small landownership. The free ownership of land by the small
peasant is a necessary concomitant of small production in agriculture under
certain historical conditions. A. Finn was quite right in emphasising this
in opposition to Maslov. But the recognition of this historical necessity,
which has been proved by experience, does not relieve the Marxist
of the duty of making an all-round appraisal of small landownership. Real
freedom of such landownership is inconceivable without the free purchase
and sale of land. Private ownership of land implies the necessity of
spending capital on purchasing land. On this point Marx, in Volume III of
Capital, wrote:

“One of the specific evils of small-scale agriculture, where it is combined
with free landownership, arises from the cultivator’s investing capital
in the purchase of land” (III, 2, 342). “The expenditure of
capital in the price of the land withdraws this capital from cultivation”

(ibid., 341).[1]


“The expenditure of money-capital for the purchase of land, then, is not an
investment of agricultural capital. It is a decrease pro tanto in the
capital which small peas ants can employ in their own sphere of production. It

    

reduces pro tanto the size of their means of production and thereby
narrows the economic basis of reproduction. it subjects the small peasant to the
money-lender, since credit proper occurs but rarely in this sphere in
general. It is a hindrance to agriculture, even where such purchase
takes place in the case of large landed estates. It contradicts in fact the
capitalist mode of production, which is on the whole indifferent to whether the
landowner is in debt, no matter whether he has inherited or purchased his

estate” (344-45).[2]


Thus, both mortgage and usury are, so to speak, forms of
capital’s evasion of the difficulties which private land
ownership creates for the free penetration of capital into agriculture. In
commodity production society it is impossible to conduct economy without
capital. The peasant, and his ideologist the Narodnik, cannot help
realising this. Hence, the question boils down to whether capital can be
freely invested in agriculture directly, or through the medium of the
usurer and the credit institutions. The peasant and the Narodnik, who,
partly, are not aware of the complete domination of capital in modern
society, and, partly, pull the cap of illusions and dreams over their eyes
in order to shut out the unpleasant reality, turn their thoughts towards
outside financial aid. Clause 15 of the Land Bill of the 104 reads as
follows: “Persons receiving land from the national fund and lacking
sufficient means to acquire the necessary agricultural equipment must be
given state assistance in the form of loans and grants.” Without a
doubt, such financial assistance would be necessary if Russian agriculture
were reorganised by a victorious peasant revolution. Kautsky, in his book
The Agrarian Question in Russia, quite rightly emphasises
this. But what we are discussing now is the social-economic significance of
all these “loans and grants”, which the Narodnik overlooks. The
state can only be an intermediary in transferring the money from the
capitalists; but the state itself can obtain this money only from the
capitalists. Consequently, even under the best possible organisation of
state assistance, the domination of capital is not removed in the least,
and the old question remains: what are the possible forms of investment of
capital in agriculture?  
 

And that question inevitably leads to the Marxist criticism of the
private ownership of land. That form of ownership is a
hindrance to the free investment of capital in
the land. Either complete freedom for this investment— in which case:
abolition of private landownership, i.e., the nationalisation of the land;
or the preservation of private landownership—in which case:
penetration of capital by roundabout ways, namely, the mortgaging
of land by landlords and peasants, the enslavement of the peasant by the
usurer, the renting of land to tenants who own capital.  

Marx says: “Here, in small-scale agriculture, the price of land, a form
and result of private landownership, appears as a barrier to production
itself. In large-scale agriculture, and large estates operating on a capitalist
basis, ownership likewise acts as a barrier, because it limits the tenant farmer
in his productive investment of capital, which in the final analysis benefits
not him, but the landlord.” (Das Kapital, III. Band,
2. Teil,

S. 346-47.)[3]


Consequently, the abolition of private landownership is the maximum
that can be done in bourgeois society for the removal of all obstacles to
the free investment of capital in agriculture and to the free flow of
capital from one branch of production to another. The free, wide, and rapid
development of capitalism, complete freedom for the class struggle, the
disappearance of all superfluous intermediaries who make. agriculture
something like the “sweated” industries—that is what
nationalisation of the land implies under the capitalist system of
production.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Ibid., p. 787.

 



[2]
Ibid., p. 790.

 



[3]
Ibid., p. 792.

 

 
  

4. Is the Repudiation of Absolute Rent Connected with the Programme of Municipalisation?

|

6. The Nationalisation of the Land and Money Rent

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## “Money”
    Rent









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 6. The Nationalisation of the Land and Money Rent







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

6. The Nationalisation of the Land and Money Rent

An interesting economic argument against nationalisation
was advanced by A. Finn, an advocate of division of the land. Both
nationalisation and municipalisation, he says, mean transferring rent to a
public body. The ques tion is: what kind of rent? Not capitalist rent, for
“usually the peasants do not obtain rent in the capitalist sense from
their land” (The Agrarian Question and Social-Democracy,
p. 77, cf. p. 63), but pre-capitalist money rent.

 

By money rent Marx means the payment by the peasant to the landlord of
the whole of the surplus product in the form of money. The original form of
the peasant’s economic dependence upon the landlord under the
pre-capitalist modes of production was labour rent (Arbeitsrente),
i. e., corv6e; then came rent in the form of produce, or rent in kind, and
finally came money rent. That rent, says A. Finn, “is the most
widespread form in our country even today” (p. 63).  

Undoubtedly, tenant farming based on servitude and bondage is extremely
widespread in Russia, and, according to Marx’s theory, the payment
which the peasant makes under such a system of tenancy is largely money
rent. What power makes it possible to extort that rent from the
peas antry? The power of the bourgeoisie and of developing capitalism? Not
at all. It is the power of the feudal latifundia. Since the latter will be
broken up—and that is the starting-point and fundamental condition of
the peasant agrarian revolution—there is no reason to speak of
“money rent” in the pre-capitalist sense. hence, the only
signifi cance of Finn’s argument is that he emphasises once more the
absurdity of separating the peasant allotment land from the rest
of the land in the event of an agrarian revolution; since allotment lands
are often surrounded by landlords’ lands, and since the present
conditions of demarcation of the peasant lands from the landlords’ lands
give rise to bondage, the preservation of this demarcation is
reactionary.

Unlike eUher division of the land or nationalisation,
municapallsation preserves this demarcation.  

Of course, the existence of small landed property, or, more correctly, of small
farming, introduces certain changes in the general propositions of the theory of
capitalist. rent, but it does not destroy that theory. For example, Marx points
out that absolute rent as such does not usually exist under small farming,
which is carried on mainly to meet the needs of the farmer himself (Vol. III,
2. Teil,

S. 339, 344).[2] But the more commodity production develops, the more
all the propositions of economic theory become applicable to
peasant farming also, since it has come under the conditions of the
capitalist world. It must not be forgotten

    

that no land nationalisation, no equalised land tenure, will abolish the
now fully established fact that the well-to-do peasants in Russia are
already farming on capitalist lines. In my Development of
Capitalism I showed that, according to the statistics of the eighties
and nineties of the last century, about one-fifth of the peasant house
holds account for up to half of peasant agricultural production
and a much larger share of rented land; that the farms of these
peasants are now commodity-producing farms rather than natural-economy
farms, and that, finally, these peasants cannot exist without a
vast army of farm-hands and

    day-labourers.[1]

Among these peasants the elements of capitalist rent are
taken for granted. These peasants express their interests through
the mouths of the Peshekhonovs, who “soberly” reject the
prohibition of hired labour as well as “socialisation of the
land”, who soberly champion the point of view of the peasant economic
individualism which is asserting itself. If, in the utopias of the
Narodniks, we carefully separate the real economic factor from the false
ideology, we shall see at once that it is precisely the bourgeois peasantry
which stands to gain most from the break-up of the feudal latifundia,
irrespective of whether that is carried out by division, nationalisation,
or municipalisation. “Loans and grants” from the state, too,
are bound to benefit the bourgeois peasantry in the first place. The
“peasant agrarian revolution” is nothing but the subordination
of the whole system of land ownership to the conditions of progress and
prosperity of precisely these capitalist farms.  

Money rent is the moribund yesterday, which cannot but die
out. Capitalist rent is the nascent tomorrow, which cannot but develop
under the Stolypin expropriation of the poor peasants (“under Article
87”), as well as under the peasant expropriation of the richest
landlords.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 3, pp. 136-39.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Ibid., pp. 785, 789-90.

 

 
  

5. Criticism of Private Landownership from the Standpoint of the Development of Capitalism

|

7. Under What Conditions Can Nationalisation Be Brought About?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Under What
    Conditions Can Nationalisation Be
    Brought About?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 7. Under What Conditions Can Nationalisation Be Brought About?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

7. Under What Conditions Can Nationalisation Be Brought About?

The view is often met with among Marxists that
nationalisation is feasible only at a high stage of development of
capitalism, when it will have fully prepared the conditions

    

for “divorcing the landowners from agriculture” (by means of
renting and mortgages). It is assumed that large-scale capitalist farming
must have already established itself before nationalisation of the
land, which cuts out rent without affecting the economic organism, can be
brought

about.[1]


Is this view correct? Theoretically it cannot be substantiated; it
cannot be supported by direct references to Marx; the facts of experience
speak against it rather than for it.  

Theoretically, nationalisation is the “ideally” pure
development of capitalism in agriculture. The question whether such a
combination of conditions and such a relation of forces as would permit of
nationalisation in capitalist society often occur in history is another
matter. But nationalisation is not only an effect of, but also a condition
for, the rapid development of capitalism. To think that nationalisation is
possible only at a very high stage of development of capitalism in
agriculture means, if anything, the repudiation of nationalisation as a
measure of bourgeois progress; for everywhere the high development
of agricultural capitalism has already placed on the order of the day (arid
will in time inevitably place on the order of the day in other countries)
the “socialisation of agricultural production”, i. e., the
socialist revolution. No measure of bourgeois progress, as a bourgeois
measure, is conceivable when the class struggle between the proletariat and
the bourgeoisie is very acute. Such a measure is more likely in a
“young” bourgeois society, which has not yet developed its
strength, has not yet developed its contradictions to the full, and has not
yet created a proletariat strong enough to strive directly towards the
socialist revolution. And Marx allowed the possibility of, and some times
directly advocated, the nationalisation of the land, not only in the epoch
of the bourgeois revolution in Germany

    

in 1848, but also in 1846 for America, which, as he most accurately pointed
out at that time, was only just starting its
“industrial” development. The experience of various capitalist
countries gives us no example of the nationalisation of the land in
anything like its pure form. We see something similar to it in New Zealand,
a young capitalist democracy, where there is no evidence of highly
developed agricultural capitalism. Something similar to it existed in
America when the government passed the Homestead Act and distributed plots
of land to small farmers at a nominal rent.  

No. To associate nationalisation with the epoch of highly developed capitalism
means repudiating it as a measure of-bourgeois progress; and such a repudiation
directly contradicts economic theory. It seems to me that in the following
argument in Theories of Surplus Value, Marx outlines conditions for the
achievement of nationalisation other than those usually presumed.


After pointing out that the landowner is an absolutely superfluous
figure in capitalist production, that the purpose of the latter is
“fully answered” if the land belongs to the state, Marx goes on
to say: 

“That is why in theory the radical bourgeois arrives at the
repudiation of private landed property.... In practice, however, he lacks
courage, since the attack on one form of property, private property in
relation to the conditions of labour, would be very dangerous for the other
form. Moreover, the bourgeois has territorialised himself.”
(Theorien über den Mehrwert, II. Band, 1. Teil,

S. 208.)[2]


Marx does not mention here, as an obstacle to the achievement of
nationalisation, the undeveloped state of capitalism in agriculture. He
mentions two other obstacles, which speak much more strongly in
favour of the idea of achieving nationalisation in the epoch of
bourgeois revolution.  

First obstacle: the radical bourgeois lacks the courage to
attack private landed property owing to the danger of a socialist attack on
all private property, i.e., the danger of a socialist revolution.  

Second obstacle: “The bourgeois has territorialised him
self”. Evidently, what Marx has in mind is that the bourgeois

    

mode of production has already entrenched itself in private landed
property, i. e., that this private property has become far more bourgeois
than feudal. When the bourgeoisie, as a class, has already become
bound up with landed property on a broad, predominating scale, has
already “territorialised itself”, “settled on the
laud”, fully subordinated landed property to itself, then a genuine
social movement of the bourgeoisie in favour of nationalisation is
impossible. It is impossible for the simple reason that no class
ever goes against itself.  

Broadly speaking, these two obstacles are removable only in
the epoch of rising and not of declining capitalism, in the epoch of the
bourgeois revolution, and not on the eve of the socialist
revolution. The view that nationalisation is feasible only at a high stage
of development of capitalism cannot be called Marxist. It contradicts both
the general premises of Marx’s theory and his words as quoted
above. It oversimplifies the question of the historically concrete
conditions under which nationalisation is brought about by such-and-such
forces and classes, and reduces it to a schematic and bare abstraction.


The “radical bourgeois” cannot be
courageous in the epoch of strongly developed capitalism. In such
an epoch this bourgeoisie, in the mass, is inevitably
counter-revolutionary. In such an epoch the almost complete
“territorialisation” of the bourgeoisie is already
inevitable. In the epoch of bourgeois revolution, however, the
objective conditions compel the “radical bourgeois” to
be courageous; for, in solving the historical problem of the given period,
the bourgeoisie, as a class, cannot yet fear the proletarian
revolution. In the epoch of bourgeois revolution the bourgeoisie has
not yet territorialised itself: landownership is still too much
steeped in feudalism in such an epoch. The phenomenon of the mass
of the bourgeois farmers fighting against the principal forms of
landownership and therefore arriving at the practical achievement of the
complete bourgeois “liberation of the land”, i. e.,
nationalisation, becomes possible.  

In all these respects the Russian bourgeois revolution finds itself in
particularly favourable conditions. Arguing from the purely economic point
of view, we must certainly

    

admit the existence of a maximum of survivals of feudalism in the Russian
system of landownership, in both land lord estates and peasant
allotments.Under such circumstances, the contradiction between relatively
developed capitalism in industry and the appalling backwardness of the
countryside becomes glaring and, owing to objective causes, makes the
bourgeois revolution extremely far-reaching and creates conditions for the
most rapid agricultural progress. The nationalisation of the land is
precisely a condition for the most rapid capitalist progress in our
agriculture. We have a “radical bourgeois” in Russia who has
not vet “territorialised” himself, who cannot, at present, fear
a proletarian “attack”. That radical bourgeois is the Russian
peasant.  

From this point of view the difference between the attitude of the mass of the
Russian liberal bourgeoisie and that of the mass of Russian peasants towards the
nationalisation of the land becomes quite intelligible. The liberal landlord,
lawyer, big manufacturer and merchant have all sufficiently
“territorialised” themselves. They cannot but fear a proletarian
attack. They cannot but prefer the Stolypin-Cadet road. Think what a golden
river is now flowing towards the landlords, government officials, lawyers, and
merchants in the form of the millions which the “Peasant” Bank is
handing out to the terrified landlords! Under the Cadet system of
“redemption payments” this golden river would have a slightly
different direction, would, perhaps, be slightly less abundant, but it would
still consist of hundreds of millions, and would flow into the same hands.


Out of the revolutionary overthrow of all the old, forms of
landownership neither the government official nor the lawyer can derive a single
kopek. And the merchants, in the mass, are not far-sighted enough to prefer the
future expansion of the home, peasant, market to the immediate possibility of
snatching something from the gentry. Only the peasant, who is being driven into
his grave by the old Russia, is capable of striving for the complete renovation
of the system of landownership.

    

     

Notes
 

[1]
Here is one of the most exact expressions of this view uttered by
Comrade Borisov, an advocate of the division of the land:
“...Eventually, it [the demand for the nationalisation of the land]
will be put forward by history; it will be put forward when petty-bourgeois
farming has degenerated, when capitalism has gained strong positions In
agriculture, and when Russia will no longer be a peasant country” (Minutes
of the Stockholm Congress, p. 127).  —Lenin
 



[2]
Karl Marx, Theorien über den Mehrwert, 2. Teil, Berlin,
Dietz Verlag, 1959, S. 36.

 

 
  

6. The Nationalisation of the Land and Money Rent

|

8. Does Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Does
    Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 8. Does Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

8. Does Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?

If nationalisation is regarded as a measure most likely to be achieved in the
epoch of bourgeois revolution, such a view must inevitably lead to the admission
that nationalisation may turn out to be a mere transition to division. The real
economic need which compels the mass of the peasantry to strive for
nationalisation is the need for the thorough renovation of all the old agrarian
relationships, for “clearing” all the land, for readapting it to the
new system of farming. That being the case, it is clear that the farmers who
have adapted themselves, who have renovated the whole system of
landownership, may demand that the new agrarian system be
consolidated, i.e., that the holdings they have rented from the state
be converted into their property.


Yes, that is indisputable. We arrive at nationalisation not from
abstract arguments, but from a concrete calculation of the concrete
interests of a concrete epoch. And, of course, it would be ridiculous to
regard the mass of small farmers as “idealists”; it would be
ridiculous to think that they will stop at division if their interests
demand it. Consequently, we must inquire:

(1) whether their interests can demand division;

(2) under What circumstances; and

(3) how this will affect the proletarian agrarian programme.  

We have already answered the first question in the affirmative. To the second
question no definite reply can yet be given. After the period of revolutionary
nationalisation the demand for division may be evoked by the desire to
consolidate to the greatest possible degree the new agrarian relations, which
meet the requirements of capitalism. It may be evoked by the desire of the
given owners of land to increase their incomes at the expense of the
rest of society. Finally, it may be evoked by the desire to
“quieten” (or, plainly speaking, to put down) the proletariat and
the semi-proletarian strata, for whom nationalisation of the land will be an
element that will “whet the appetite” for the socialisation of the
whole of social production. All these three possibilities reduce themselves to a
single economic basis, since the consolidation of the new system of capitalist

    

landownership of the new farmers automatically creates anti-proletarian
sentiments and a striving on the part of these farmers to create new
privileges for themselves in the shape of right of
ownership. Hence, the question reduces itself precisely to this economic
consolidation. The constant factor counteracting this will be the
development of capitalism, which increases the superiority of large-scale
agriculture and demands constant facility for the
“consolidation” of small farms into large ones. A temporary
factor counteracting it will be the land available for colonisation in
Russia: consolidating the new economy means raising the technical level of
agriculture. And we have already shown that every step forward in
agricultural technique “opens up” for Russia more and more new
areas of land available for colonisation.  

Our examination of the second question leads to the following deduction: the
circumstances under which the new farmers’ demands for the division of the land
will overcome all counteracting influences cannot be predicted with
accuracy. Allowance, however, must be made for the fact that capitalist
development after the bourgeois revolution will inevitably give rise to
such circumstances.


As regards the last question, that concerning the attitude of the
workers’ party towards the possible demand of the new farmers for the
division of the land, a very definite reply can be given. The proletariat
can and must support the militant bourgeoisie when the latter wages a
really revolutionary struggle against feudalism. But it is not for the
proletariat to support the bourgeoisie when the latter is becoming
quiescent. If it is certain that a victorious bourgeois revolution in
Russia is Impossible without the nationalisation of the land, then it is
still more certain that a subsequent turn towards the division of the land
is impossible without a certain amount of “restoration”,
without the peasantry (or rather, from the point of view of the presumed
relations: farmers) turning towards counter revolution. The proletariat
will uphold the revolutionary tradition against all such strivings and will
not assist them.  

In any case, it would be a great mistake to think that, in the event of
the new farmer class turning towards division of the land, nationalisation
would be a transient phenomenon

    

of no serious significance. In any case, it would have tremendous material
and moral significance. Material significance, in that nothing is capable
of so thoroughly sweeping away the survivals of medievalism in. Russia, of
so thoroughly renovating the rural districts, which are in a state of
Asiatic semi-decay, of so rapidly promoting agricultural progress, as
nationalisation. Any other solution of the agrarian question in the
revolution would create less favourable starting-points for further
economic development.  

The moral significance of nationalisation in the revolutionary epoch is that
the proletariat helps to.strike a blow at “one form of private
property” which must inevitably have its repercussions all over the
world. The proletariat stands for the most consistent and
most. determined bourgeois revolution and the most favourable conditions for
capitalist development, thereby most effectively counteracting all
half-heartedness, flabbiness, spinelessness and passivity—qualities which
the bourgeoisie cannot help displaying.

 

Notes
 
 

 
  

7. Under What Conditions Can Nationalisation Be Brought About?

|

1. “A Guarantee Against Restoration”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A
    Guarantee Against Restoration









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 1. 'A Guarantee Against Restoration'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

Chapter IV
Political and Tactical Considerations in Questions of
    the Agrarian Programme

As already pointed out, it is considerations of this kind that occupy a
disproportionately large place in our Party discussion on the agrarian
programme. Our task is to examine these considerations as systematically and
briefly as possible and to show the relation between the various political
measures (and points of view) and the economic basis of the agrarian revolution.

1. “A Guarantee Against Restoration”

In my Report on the Stockholm Congress I dealt with this argument, citing the
debate from memory. Now, we have before us the authentic text of the Minutes.


“The key to my position,” exclaimed Plekhanov at the Stockholm
Congress, “is that I draw attention to the possibility

    

of restoration” (p., 115). Let us examine this key a little more
closely. Here is the first reference to it in Plekhanov’s first
speech: 

“Lenin says, we shall make nationalisation

harmless’, 

but to make nationalisation harmless we must find a guarantee against
restoration; and there is not, nor can there be, any such guarantee. Recall
the history of France; recall the history of England; in each of these
countries, the wide sweep of the revolution was followed by
restoration. The same may happen in our country; and our programme must be
such that in the event of its application, the harm that may be caused by
restoration may be reduced to a minimum. Our programme must eliminate the
economic basis of tsarism; but nationalisation of the land effected during
the revolutionary period does not eliminate that basis. There fore, I
consider that the demand for nationalisation is an anti-revolutionary
demand” (p. 44). What the “economic basis of tsarism” is,
Plekhanov tells in the same speech:

“The situation in our country was such that the land, together with its
cultivators, was held in servitude by the state, and on the basis of that
servitude Russian despotism developed. To overthrow despotism, it is necessary
to do away with its economic basis. Therefore, I am opposed to
nationalisation at present.” (p. 44).


First of all, let us examine the logic of this argument about
restoration. First: “there is not, nor can there be, any
guarantee against restoration!” Second: “the harm that may be caused
by restoration must be reduced to a minimum”. That is to say, we must
invent a guarantee against restoration, although there cannot be any such
guarantee! And on the very next page, 45 (in the same speech), Plekhanov
finally invents a guarantee: “In the event of restoration,” he
plainly says, “it [municipalisation] will not surrender the land
[listen!] to the political representatives of the old order.” Thus,
although “there cannot be” any such guarantee, a guarantee against
restoration has been found. A very clever conjuring trick, and the Menshevik
press is filled with rapture over the conjurer’s skill.


When Plekhanov speaks he is brilliant and witty, he crackles, twirls, and
sparkles like a Catherine-wheel. The

    

trouble starts when the speech is taken down verbatim and later subjected
to a logical examination.  

What is restoration? It is the reversion of state power to the political
representatives of the old order. Can there be any guarantee against such a
restoration? No, there cannot. Therefore, we invent such a
guarantee: municipalisation, which “will not surrender the
land”.... But we ask: what obstacles does municipalisation raise to the
“surrender of the land”? The only obstacle is the law passed by
the revolutionary parliament declaring such and such lands (former landlord
estates, etc.) to be the property of the Regional Diets. But what is a
law? The expression of the will of the classes which have emerged victorious
and hold the power of the state.


Can you see now why such a law “will not surrender the land” to
“the representatives of the old order” when the latter will
have recaptured state power?


And after the Stockholm Congress this unmitigated non sense was preached by
Social-Democrats even from the rostrum of the

Duma![1]


As to the substance of this famous question of “guarantees
against restoration”, we must make the following observation. Since
we can have no guarantees against restoration, to raise that question in
connection with the agrarian programme means diverting the
attention of the audience, clogging their minds, and introducing
confusion into the discussion. We are not in a position to call forth at
our own will a socialist revolution in the West, which is the only absolute
guarantee against restoration in Russia. But a relative and conditional
“guarantee”, i.e., one that would raise the greatest possible
obstacles to restoration, lies in carrying out the revolution in
Russia in the most far-reaching, consistent, and determined manner
possible. The more far-reaching the revolution is, the more difficult will
it be to restore the old order and the more gains will remain even if
restoration does take place. The more deeply the old soil is ploughed up by
revolution, the more difficult will it be to restore the old order. In

    

the political sphere, a democratic republic represents a more profound
change than democratic local self-government; the former presupposes (and
calls forth) greater revolutionary energy, intelligence, and organisation
on the part of the large masses of the people; it creates traditions which
it will be far more difficult to eradicate. That is why, for instance,
present-day Social-Democrats attach so much value to the great fruits of
the French Revolution in spite of all the restorations that have taken
place, and in this they differ from the Cadets (and from Cadet-mind ed
Social-Democrats?) who prefer democratic Zemstvos under a monarchy as a
“guarantee against restoration”.  

In the economic sphere, nationalisation in a bourgeois agrarian
revolution is; more far-reaching than anything else, because it breaks up
all the medieval forms of landowner ship. At the present
time the peasant farms his own strip of allotment land, a strip of rented
allotment land, a strip of rented landlord’s land, and so
on. Nationalisation makes it possible to tear down all the fences
of landownership to the utmost degree, and to “clear” all the
land for the new system of economy suitable to the requirements of
capitalism. Of course, even such a clearing affords no guarantee against a
return to the old order; to promise the people such a “guarantee
against restoration” would be a swindle. But such a clearing of the
old system of landownership will enable the new system of
economy to become so firmly rooted that a return to the old forms of
landownership would be extremely difficult, because no power on
earth can arrest the development of capitalism. Under
municipalisation, how ever, a return to the old form of landownership is
easier, because municipalisation perpetuates the
“pale of settlement”, the boundary that separates medieval
landownership from the new, municipalised form. After nationalisation,
restoration will have to break up millions of new, capitalist farms in
order to restore the old system of landownership. After municipalisation,
restoration will not have to break up any farms or to set up any new land
boundaries; all it will have to do will be literally to sign a paper
transferring the lands owned by the municipality X to the noble
landlords Y, Z, etc., or to hand over to the landlords the rent from the
“municipalised” lands.  
 

We must now pass from Plekhanov’s logical error on the question of
restoration, from the confusion of political concepts, to the economic essence
of restoration. The Minutes of the Stockholm Congress fully confirm the statement made in my Report that Plekhanov impermissibly confuses the restoration
which took place in France on the basis of capitalism with the restoration of
“our old, semi-Asiatic order”. (Minutes of the

Stockhholm  Congress, p. 116.) Therefore, there
is no need for me to add anything to what I have already said on this
question in the Report. I shall only deal with the “elimination of
the economic basis of despotism”. The following is the most important
passage in Plekhanov’s speech pertaining to this: 

“It is true that the restoration fin France I. did not restore the
survivals of feudalism; but the equivalent of these survivals in our own
country is our old system of feudal attachment of both land and cultivator
to the state, our old peculiar nationalisation of the land. It will he all
the more easy for our restoration to return to that [sic!]
nationalisation because you yourselves demand the nationalisation of the
land, because you leave that legacy of our old semi-Asiatic order
intact” (p. 116).  

So, after the restoration, the return to that, i. e., semi
Asiatic, nationalisation “will be easier” because Lenin (and
the peasantry) are now demanding nationalisation. What is this? A
historico-materialistic analysis, or a purely rationalistic

     “wordplay”?[2]

Is it the word “nationalisation” or certain
economic changes that facilitate the restoration of the
semi-Asiatic conditions? Had Plekhanov thought this matter over he would
have realised that municipalisation and division eliminate one
basis of the Asiatic order, i.e., medieval landlord ownership, hut leave
another, i.e., medieval allotment ownership. Consequently, in
essence, in the economic essence of the revolution (and
not in virtue of the term by which one might designate it), it is
nationalisation that far more radically eliminates the
economic basis of Asiatic despotism. Plekhanov’s
“conjuring trick” lies in that he described medieval
landownership with its dependence, its imposts, and its servitude
as “peculiar nationalisation”

    

and skipped the two forms of that system of
landownership: allotments and landlordism. As a result of this juggling
with words the real historical question as to what forms of medieval
landownership are abolished by one or another agrarian measure is
distorted. Plekhanov’s fireworks display was very crude after
all.  

Plekhanov’s almost incredible muddle on the question of restoration is to
be explained by two circumstances. First, in speaking about the “peasant
agrarian revolution”, Plekhanov completely failed to grasp its peculiar
character as capitalist evolution. He confuses Narodism, the theory of
the possibility of non-capitalist evolution, with the Marxist view that
two types of capitalist agrarian evolution are
possible. Plekhanov constantly betrays a vague “fear of the peasant
revolution” (as I told him in Stockholm; see pp. 106-07 of the

       Minutes[3]

),

a fear that it may turn out to be economically reactionary and lead, not to the
American farmer system, but to medieval servitude. Actually, that is
economically impossible. Proof—the Peasant Re form and the subsequent
course of evolution. In the Peas ant Reform the shell of feudalism (both
landlord feudalism and “state feudalism”, which Plekhanov, followed
by Martynov, referred to at Stockholm) was very strong. But economic evolution
proved stronger, and it filled this feudal shell with a
capitalist content. Despite the obstacles presented by medieval
landownership, both peasant and landlord economy developed, although incredibly
slowly, along the bourgeois path. If there had been any real grounds
for Plekhanov’s fears of a return to Asiatic despotism, the system of
landownership among the state peasants (up to the eighties) and among the former
state peasants (after the eighties) should have turned out to be the purest type
of “state feudalism”. Actually, it proved to be freer than the
landlord system, because feudal exploitation had already become impossible in
the latter half of the nineteenth century. There was less bondage and a more
rapid, development of a peasant bourgeoisie among the state peasants with
“large

   landholdings”.[4]

Either a slow and painful

    

bourgeois evolution of the Prussian, Junker type, or a rapid, free evolution of
the American type is possible in Russia now. Anything else is an illusion.


The second reason for the “restoration muddle” in the heads
of some of our comrades was the uncertain situation in the spring of
1906. The peasantry, as a mass, had not yet definitely shown itself. It was
still possible to assume that the peasant movement and the Peasant Union
were not the final expressions of the real aspirations of the overwhelming
majority of the peasantry. The autocratic bureaucracy and Witte had not yet
finally given up hope that “the muzhik will help us out” (a
classic phrase used by Witte’s organ Russkoye Gosudarstvo in
the spring of 1906), i. e., that the peasants would go to the Right. Hence
the strong representation allowed to the peasantry under the Law of
December 11, 1905. Even at that time many Social-Democrats still thought
the autocracy capable of playing some trick with the peasants’ idea:
“Better all the land be the tsar’s than the
gentry’s”. But the two Dumas, the Law of June 3, 1907, and
Stolypin’s agrarian legislation were enough to open everybody’s
eyes. To save what it could, the autocracy had to introduce the policy of
forcibly breaking up the village communes in favour of private ownership of
land, i. e., to base the counter-revolution, not on the peasants’ vague
talk about nationalisation (the land belongs to the “commune”,
and so on), but on the only possible economic basis upon
which the power of the landlords could be retained, i.e.,
capitalist evolution on the Prussian model.  

The situation has now become quite clear, and it is high time to put away
forever the vague fear of “Asiatic” restoration roused by the
peasant movement against the private ownership of

land.[5]

    

     

Notes
 

[1]
Tsereteli’s speech on May 26, 1907. Stenographic Record of the
Second Duma, p. 1234.  —Lenin

[2]
Comrade Schmidt in Stockholm. Minutes, p. 122.  —Lenin

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 283.—Ed.  

[4]
Of course, our former state peasants can be described as possessing
“large landholdings” only in comparison with the former landlords’

   

peasants. According to the returns for 1905, the former held an average of
12.5 dessiatins of allotted land per household, whereas the latter held
only 6.7 dessiatins.  —Lenin

[5]
I say nothing here about the fact that the bogey of restoration is a
political weapon of the bourgeoisie against the proletariat, since
everything essential on this subject has been said already in my
Report. (See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 339.—Ed.)  —Lenin
 

 
  

8. Does Nationalisation Mean Transition to Division?

|

2. Local Self-Government as a “Bulwark Against Reaction”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Local
    Self-Government









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 2. Local Self-Government as a 'Bulwark Against Reaction'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

2. Local Self-Government as a “Bulwark Against Reaction”

... “In the shape of local self-government bodies which will possess the
land,” said Plekhanov at Stockholm, “it [municipalisation] will create a
bulwark against reaction. And a very powerful bulwark it will be. Take our
Cossacks for example” (p. 45). Well, we shall “take our
Cossacks” and see what the reference to them is worth. But first of all,
let us examine the general grounds for this opinion that local self-government
is capable of being a bulwark against reaction. That view has been propounded by
our municipalisers on innumerable occasions, and it will be sufficient to quote
a passage from John’s speech to supplement Plekhanov’s
formula. “What is the difference between nationalisation and
municipalisation of the land if we admit that both are feasible and equally
bound up with the democratisation of the political system? The difference is
that municipalisation is better able to consolidate the gains of the revolution,
the democratic system, and will serve as the basis for its further development,
whereas nationalisation will merely consolidate the power of the state”
(p. 112).


The Mensheviks actually deny the possibility of guarantees against restoration,
and in the very same breath produce “guarantees” and
“bulwarks” like conjurers. doing a trick in front of an
audience. Just think a little, gentle men! How can local self-government be a
bulwark against reaction, or consolidate the gains of the revolution? There can
be only one bulwark against reaction and one means of consolidating the gains
of the revolution, namely, the class-consciousness and organisation of the
masses of the proletariat and the peasantry. And in a capitalist state which is
centralised, not by the arbitrary will of the bureaucracy, but by the
inexorable demands of economic development, that organisation must find
expression in a single force welded together throughout the state. Without a
centralised peasant movement, without a centralised nation wide political
struggle of the peasantry led by a centralised proletariat, there can be
no serious “revolutionary gains” worthy of
“consolidation”; there can be no “bulwark against
reaction”.

 

Local self-government that is at all really democratic is impossible
unless landlord rule is completely overthrown and landlordism is
abolished. While admitting this in words, the Mensheviks, with amazing
light-mindedness, refuse to consider what it implies in deeds. In deeds, it
cannot be attained unless the revolutionary classes conquer political power
throughout the state; and one would have thought that two years of revolution
would have taught even the most obdurate “man in the muffler” that
these classes in Russia can only be the proletariat and the peasantry. To be
victorious, the “peasant agrarian revolution” of which you gentlemen
speak must, as such, as a peasant revolution, become the central authority
throughout the state.


The democratic self-governing bodies can be only particles of such a
central authority of the democratic peasantry. Only by combating the
local and regional disunity of the peasantry, only by advocating, preparing, and
organising a nation-wide, all-Russian, centralised movement, can real service
be rendered to the cause of “peasant agrarian revolution”, and not
to the encouragement of parochial backwardness and local provincial
stupefaction of the peasantry. It is precisely this stupefaction that you,
Mr. Plekhanov and Mr. John, are serving when you advocate the preposterous and
arch-reactionary idea that local self government can become a “bulwark
against reaction”, or that it can “consolidate the gains of the
revolution”. For the experience of the two years of the Russian revolution
has plainly demonstrated that it was precisely this local and regional disunity
of the peasant movement (the soldiers’ movement is part of the peasant movement)
that was most of all responsible for the defeat.


To present a programme of a “peasant agrarian revolution and associate it
only with the democratisation of local self-government and not of the
central government, to hold the former up as a genuine “bulwark” and
“consolidation”, is in reality nothing but a Cadet deal with

    reaction.[1]

The

    

Cadets lay stress on local “democratic” self-government because
they do not want, or dare, to touch upon more important
questions. The Mensheviks did not realise what a big word they uttered
when they admitted that the “peas ant agrarian revolution” is
the task of the day, and in their political commentary to this agrarian
programme they displayed the acme of provincial narrow-mindedness.  

Here is a sample of John’s reasoning, if you please:



   “Comrade Lenin is afraid that the reaction will wrest the
   confiscated lands from the local self-government bodies; if that can be
   said of the lands which may pass into the hands of the state, it cannot
   possibly be said of municipalised lands. Even the autocratic Russian
   Government could not take away tile land from the local government bodies
   of Armenia, as that called forth strong resistance on the part of the
   population” (p. 113).  


Superb, is it not? The whole history of the autocracy is one of
wholesale grabbing of local, regional, and national lands; and our
wiseacres try to reassure the people who are becoming stupefied in their
provincial isolation by arguing that “even the autocracy” did
not take away the land from the Armenian churches, although it had
begun to do so, and was in fact prevented from doing so only by
the all-Russian revolution.... In the centre autocracy, and in the
provinces “Armenian lands” which “it dares not take
away”.... How has so much philistine stupidity penetrated our
Social-Democratic movement?  

And here are Plekhanov’s Cossacks: 


   “Take our Cossacks. They behave like downright reactionaries; yet
   if the [autocratic] government dared to lay hands on their land, they would
   rise against it to a man. Consequently, the merit of municipalisation lies
   precisely in that it will prove of use even in the event of restoration
   (p. 45).  

 

“Consequently”, indeed! If the autocracy rose against the
defenders of the autocracy, then the defenders of the autocracy would rise
against the autocracy. What profundity! Cossack landownership, however, is
of use not only in the event of restoration, but also as a means of
upholding what must be overthrown before it can be restored. Speaking in
opposition to Plekhanov, Schmidt called attention to this interesting
aspect of municipalisation. He said: 


   “Let me remind you that the autocracy had granted certain
   privileges to the Cossacks a month ago. Consequently, it is not afraid
   of municipalisation, for the Cossacks’ lands even now are managed
   in a manner which greatly resembles municipalisation..,. It
   [municipalisation] is going to play a counter-revolutionary role”
   (pp. 123-24).  


Plekhanov became so excited over that speech that he interrupted the
speaker (on quite an unimportant point. to ask him whether he was speaking
about the Orenburg Cossacks) and tried to upset the standing orders by
demanding the floor out of his turn to make a statement. Subsequently he
submitted the following written statement: 


   “Comrade Schmidt misquoted my reference to the Cossacks. I made no
   reference to:the Orenburg Cossacks at all. I said: look at the Cossacks;
   they are behaving like arch-reactionaries; nevertheless, if the government
   tried to lay hands on their land, they would rise against it to a man. And
   so would, more or less, all the regional bodies to whom the confiscated
   landlords’ land would be transferred by the revolution, if any such attempt
   were made. And such behaviour on their part would be one of the guarantees
   against reaction in the event of restoration” (p. 127).  


It is a brilliant plan, of course, to overthrow the autocracy without
touching the autocracy: to take certain regions away from it and leave it
to regain them if it can! It is almost as brilliant as the idea of
expropriating capitalism through the savings-banks. But that is not the
point just now. The point is that regional municipalisation, which
“should” play a wonderful role after the victorious revolution,
is now playing a counter-revolutionary role. And that is the point
that Plekhanov evaded!  
 

At the present time the Cossack lands represent real
municipalisation. Large regions belong to separate Cossack troops—the
Orenburg, Don, and others. The Cossacks possess an average of 52
dessiatins per household, the peasants an average of 11 dessiatins. In
addition, the Orenburg Cossacks own 1,300,000 dessiatins of “army
lands”; the Don Cossacks, 1,900,000 dessiatins, etc. This
“municipalisation” is the breeding-ground of purely feudal
relations. This actually existing municipalisation involves the caste and
regional isolation of the peasants, who are split up by differences in the
size of holdings, amount of taxes paid, and terms of medieval land tenure
as a reward for service, and so forth. “Municipalisation” does
not assist the general democratic movement, it serves to disintegrate it,
to split up into regions and thus weaken what can be victorious only as a
centralised force; it serves to alienate one region from another.  

And in the Second Duma we find the Right Cossack Karaulov
speaking in support of Stolypin (asserting that Stolypin in his
declaration also agreed to the compulsory shifting of land boundaries),
denouncing nationalisation no less strongly than Plekhanov,
and openly declaring in favour of municipalisation by regions
(18th session, March 29, 1907, Stenographic Record, p.1366).  

The Right-wing Cossack Karaulov grasped the crux of the matter a
thousand times more correctly than Maslov and Plekhanov. The division into
regions is a guarantee against revolution. If the Russian
peasantry (with the aid of a centralised, not “regional”,
proletarian movement) fails to break the bounds of its regional isolation
and organise an all-Russian movement, the revolution will always
be beaten by the representatives of the various privileged regions which
the centralised authority of the old regime will use in the struggle as,
necessity requires.  

Municipalisation is a reactionary slogan, which idealises the
medieval isolation of the regions, and dulls the peasantry’s
consciousness of the heed for a centralised agrarian revolution.  
    

     

Notes
 

[1]
I have dealt more fully with this in the Report. (See present edition,
Vol. 10, pp. 337-38.—Ed.)  Here I shall add an extract from a
speech by the Menshevik Novosedsky, which I did not hear (see the Report)
at the Congress, but which corroborates this most strikingly.

   

Opposing the amendment to substitute. the words “democratic republic” for
“democratic state”, Novosedsky said: ... “In the event, of truly
democratic local self-government being established, the programme now
adopted may be carried into effect even with a degree of
democratisation of the central government which cannot be described as the
highest degree of Its democratisation. Even under democratisation
of a comparative degree, so to speak, municipalisation will not be harmful,
but useful.” (p. 138. Our italics.) That is as clear as clear can
he. A peasant agrarian revolution without the overthrow of the
autocracy—such is the highly reactionary idea The Mensheviks advocate.
—Lenin
 

 
  

1. “A Guarantee Against Restoration”

|

3. The Central Authority and the Consolidation of the Bourgeois State

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Central
    Authority









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 3. The Central Authority and the Consolidation of the Bourgeois State







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

3. The Central Authority and the Consolidation of the Bourgeois State

It is the central state authority that the municipalisers
dislike above all else. Before we proceed to examine their arguments, we
must first ascertain what nationalisation means from the political and
legal standpoint (its economic content we have ascertained above).  

Nationalisation is the transfer of all the land to the
ownership of the state. State ownership means that the state is
entitled to draw the rent from the land and to lay down-general
rules governing the possession and use of the land for the whole
country. Under nationalisation such general rules certainly include
prohibition of any sort of intermediary, i.e., the prohibition of
sub-letting, or the transfer of land to anyone except the direct tiller,
and so on. Furthermore, if the state in question is really democratic (not
in the Menshevik sense à la Novosedsky), its ownership of
the land does not at all preclude, but, on the contrary, requires
that the land be placed at the

disposal

of the local and regional self-governing bodies within the limits of the
laws of the country. As I have already pointed out in my pamphlet
Revision,

      etc.,[1]

our minimum programme directly demands this when it calls for the
self-determination of nationalities, for wide regional self-government, and
so on. Hence the detailed regulations, corresponding to local differences,
the practical allotment, or distribution of land among individuals,
associations, etc.—all this inevitably passes into the hands
of the local organs of the state, i. e., to the local
self-governing bodies.  

Any misunderstandings on this score, if they could, arise, would be due
either to a failure to understand the difference between the concepts of
ownership, possession, disposal, and use, or to demagogical flirting with
provincialism and

     federalism.[2]

The basis of the difference between

    

municipalisation and nationalisation is not in the apportionment of rights
as between the central and provincial authorities, and still less in the
“bureaucracy” of the central authority—only utter
ignoramuses can think and talk like that—the essential difference is
that under municipalisation, private ownership is retained for one category
of land, whereas under nationalisation it is completely abolished. The
essential difference lies in the “agrarian bimetallism”, which
is implied in the first programme, and eliminated in the second.  

If, however, you approach the present programme from the standpoint of
possible arbitrary action by the central authority, etc. (a standpoint
which the vulgar advocates of municipalisation often fall back upon), you will
see that the present programme is confused and vague in the extreme. It suffices
to point out that the present programme transfers “to the possession of
the democratic state” both the “lands, required for
colonisation”, and “forest and water areas of national
importance”. Obviously, these terms are very indefinite and provide an
abundant source for conflicts. Take, for instance, Mr. Kaufman’s latest
contribution in Volume 11 of The Agrarian Question, published by the
Cadets (“On Norms of Supplementary Allotments”), in which a
computation is made of the land reserves available in 44 gubernias for the
purpose of additional allotments for the peasants at the highest norms of
1861. The “non-allotment distributable land” is first estimated with
out forest land and then with forest land (over 25 per cent of forest). Who is
to determine which of these forests are of “national importance”? Only the
central state authority, of course. Hence, it is in the hands of this central
state authority that the Menshevik programme places a gigantic

    

area of 57,000,000 dessiatins in 44 gubernias (according to Kaufman). Who is to
determine what the lands available for “colonisation” are? Only the
bourgeois central authority, of course. It alone will determine, for instance,
whether the 1,500,000 dessiatins of “army lands” of the Orenburg
Cossacks, or the 2,000,000 dessiatins of the Don Cossack lands can or cannot
serve as “colonisation lands” for the whole country
(because the Cossacks have 52.7 dessiatins per household). Clearly, the question
is not as it is put by Maslov, Plekhanov, and Co. It is not a question of
protecting the local regional self-governing bodies from the
encroachments of the central government by means of paper resolutions; that
cannot be done either with paper, or even with guns; for the trend of capitalist
development is to wards centralisation, towards the concentration of such a
force in the hands of the central bourgeois government as the
“regions” will never be able to stand up against. The point
is that one and the same class should have political power both
centrally and locally, that democracy should be quite consistently applied in
both cases to an absolutely equal degree, a degree sufficient to
ensure the complete supremacy of, let us say, the majority of the
population, i. e., the peasantry. That alone can serve as a real
guarantee against “excessive” encroachments of the centre,
against infringements of the “lawful” rights of the regions. All
other guarantees invented by the Mensheviks are downright foolishness; they are
foolscaps donned by provincial philistines to protect themselves from the power
of the central authority which has been concentrated by capitalism. That is
exactly the kind of philistine foolishness that Novosedsky is guilty of, as
also the whole of the present programme, which conceives the possibility
of complete democracy in local self-government and a “lower”
degree of democracy at the centre. Incomplete democracy means that power at the
centre is not in the hands of the majority of the population,
not in the hands of those elements which predominate in the local
self-governing bodies; and that means not only the possibility but the
inevitability of conflicts, out of which, by virtue of the laws of
economic development, the non-democratic central authority must emerge
victorious!

 

“Municipalisation” from this angle, regarded as a means of
“securing” something for the regions against the central
authority, is sheer philistine nonsense. If that can be called a
“fight” against the centralised bourgeois authority, it is the
sort of “fight” that the anti-Semites are waging
against capitalism, that is, the same extravagant promises, which attract
the dull and ignorant masses and the same economic and political
impossibility of fulfilling these promises.  

Take the stock argument of the advocates of municipalisation against
nationalisation, namely, nationalisation will strengthen the bourgeois
state (or as John so admirably put it: “will strengthen only
the state power”), and will increase the revenues of the
anti-proletarian, bourgeois government; whereas—this is
exactly what they say—where as municipalisation will yield
revenues for the needs of the population, for the needs of the
proletariat. This kind of argument makes one blush for Social-Democracy,
for it is sheer anti-Semitic stupidity and anti-Semitic
demagogy. We shall not quote the “small fry” who have been
led astray by Plekhanov and Maslov; we shall quote Maslov
“himself”: 


   “Social-Democracy,” he instructs the readers of
   Obrazovaniye, “always makes its calculations in such a way
   that its plans and aims will be vindicated even under the worst
   circumstances.... We must assume that the bourgeois system with all its
   negative features will predominate in all spheres of social
   life. Self-government will have the same bourgeois character as the whole
   state system; the same acute class struggle will go on in it as in the
   municipalities of Western Europe.  

   “What is the difference, then, between local self-government and
   the state authority? Why does Social-Democracy seek to transfer the land
   not to the state, but to the local self-governing bodies?  

   “To define the functions of the state and of local
   self-government, let us compare their budgets.”
   (Obrazovaniye, 1907, No. 3, p. 102.)  


Then follows a comparison: in one of the most democratic republics—the
United States of America—42 per cent of the budget is spent on the army
and navy. The same applies to France, England, etc. The “landlord
Zemstvos” in Russia spend 27.5 per cent of their budgets on public health,
17.4 per cent on education, 11.9 per cent on roads.

 


   “This comparison of the respective budgets of the most democratic
   states with the least. democratic local self-governing bodies shows that
   the former, by their functions, serve the interests of the ruling classes,
   that the state funds are spent on means of oppression, on means of
   suppressing, democracy; on the other hand, we find that the most
   undemocratic, the very worst type of local self-government is compelled,
   however badly, to serve democracy, to satisfy local requirements”
   (p. 103).  

   “Social-Democrats must not be so naive as to accept
   nationalisation of the land on the grounds, for instance, that the revenues
   from nationalised lands would go towards the maintenance of
   republican troops.... It will be a very naive reader who believes
   Olenov when he says that Marx’s theory ‘permits’ the inclusion in the
   programme only of the demand for the nationalisation of the land, i. e.,
   the expenditure of ground rent [irrespective of whether it is called
   absolute or differential rent?] on the army and navy, and that this theory
   does not permit the inclusion of municipalisation of the laud, i.. e., the
   expenditure of rent on the needs of the population” (p. 103).  


Clear enough, one would think. Nationalisation—for the army and navy;
municipalisation—for the needs of the people! A Jew is a capitalist; down
with the Jews means down with the capitalists!


Good Maslov fails to see that the high percentage of expenditure on cultural
needs in the budgets of local self-governing bodies is a high percentage of
secondary items of expenditure. Why is that? Because the jurisdiction and
financial powers of local self-governing bodies are determined by the central
authority and determined in such a manner that it takes vast sums for the army,
etc., and gives only farthings for “culture”. Is such a division
unavoidable in bourgeois society? Yes, it is; for in bourgeois society the
bourgeoisie could not rule if it did not spend vast sums on making its class
rule secure and thus leave only farthings for cultural, purposes. One must boa
Maslov to conceive this brilliant idea: if I declare this new source of vast
sums to be the property of the Zemstvos, I get round the rule of
the bourgeoisie! How easy the task of the proletarians would be if they reasoned
like Maslov:

all we have to do is to demand that the revenues from the railways, post,
telegraph, and the liquor monopoly should not be “nationalised”,
but “municipalised”, and all those revenues will be spent not on
the army and navy, but for cultural purposes. There is no need whatever to

    

overthrow the central authority, or to change it radically; all we have to
do is simply to secure the “municipalisation” of all the big
items of revenue, and the trick is done. Oh, wiseacres!  

In Europe, and in every bourgeois country, municipal revenues are those
revenues—and let the good Maslov remember this!—which the
bourgeois central authority is willing to sacrifice for cultural purposes,
because they are secondary items of revenue, because it is
inconvenient for the central authority to collect them, and because the
principal, cardinal, fundamental needs of the bourgeoisie and of its rule
have already been met by the vast sums of revenue. Therefore, to
advise the people to secure new vast sums, hundreds of millions from the
municipalised lands, and to make sure the money is spent for cultural
purposes by handing it over to the Zemstvos and not to the central
authority, is the advice of a charlatan. The bourgeoisie in a bourgeois
state can give nothing but farthings for real cultural purposes,
for it requires the large sums to secure is rule as a class. Why does the
central authority appropriate nine-tenths of the revenues from taxes on
land, commercial bodies, etc., and allow the Zemstvos to keep only
one-tenth? Why does it make it a law that any additional taxes imposed by
the Zemstvos shall not exceed a certain low percentage? Because the large
sums are needed to ensure the class rule of the bourgeoisie, which by its
very bourgeois nature cannot allow more than farthings to be spent for
cultural

      purposes.[3]

 

The European socialists take this distribution of the large sums and
the farthings for granted; they know quite well that it cannot be otherwise
in bourgeois society. Taking this distribution for granted, they say: we
cannot participate in the central government because it is an instrument of
oppression; but we may participate in municipal governments because there
the farthings are spent for cultural purposes. But what would these
socialists think of a man who advised the workers’ party to agitate in
favour of the European municipalities being given property rights in the
really large revenues, the total rent from local land, the whole revenue
from the local post offices, local rail ways, and so on? They would
certainly think that such a man was either crazy or a “Christian
Socialist” who had found his way into the ranks of Social-Democracy
by mistake.  

Those who, in discussing the tasks of the present (i. e., bourgeois) revolution
in Russia, argue that we must not strengthen the central authority of the
bourgeois state reveal a complete inability to think. The Germans may and
should argue in that way because they have before them only a Junker-bourgeois
Germany; there can be no other Germany until socialism is established. In our
country, on the other hand, the whole content of the revolutionary mass
struggle at the present stage is whether Russia is to be a Junker-bourgeois
state (as Stolypin and the Cadets desire), or a peasant-bourgeois state (as the
peasants arid the workers desire). One cannot take part in such a revolution
without supporting one section of the bourgeoisie, one type of bourgeois
evolution, against the other. Owing to objective economic causes, there is not
and cannot be any other “choice” for us in this revolution than that
between a bourgeois centralised republic of peasant-farmers and a bourgeois
centralised monarchy of Junker-landlords. To

    

avoid that difficult “choice” by fixing the attention of the
masses on the plea: “if only we could make the Zemstvos a little more
democratic”, is the most vulgar philistinism.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 181-83.—Ed.  

[2]
We see that kind of flirting on the part of Maslov.
...“Perhaps,” he writes in an article in Obrazovaniye, 1907,
No. 3, p. 104, “in some places, the peasants would agree to share their
lands; hut the refusal of the peasants in a single large area (e.g.,
Poland) to share their lands would he enough to make the proposal to
nationalise all the land an absurdity.” That is,a sample of vulgar
argumentation in which there is no trace of thought, but a mere
jumble of words. The “refusal” of

   

an area that occupies an exceptional position cannot alter the general
programme, nor make it absurd: some areas may also “refuse” to
municipalise the land. That is not the point. What is important is the fact
that in a united capitalist state, the private ownership of land and
nationalisation on a large scale cannot exist side by side as two separate
systems. One of them will have to get the upper hand, It is up to the
workers’ party to advocate the superior system, the one that
facilitates the rapid development of the productive forces and freedom to
wage the class struggle.  —Lenin

[3]
A study of R. Kaufmann’s highly comprehensive work, Die
Kommunalfinanzen, 2 Bände, Lpz. 1906, II. Abt., 5. Band des
Handund Lehrbuches der Staatswissenschaften, begr. von Frankenstein,
fortges. von Heckel, will show that the division of local and central state
expenditures in England is more in favour of the local government
bodies than it is in Prussia and France. Thus, in England, 3,000 million
marks are expended by the local authorities, and 3,600 million by the
central government; in France, the respective figures are 1,100 million as
against 2,900; in Prussia, 1,100 and 3,500. Let us now take the
cultural expenditure, for instance, the expenditure on education
in the country most favourably situated (from the, standpoint of the
advocates of municipalisation), i. e., England. We find that out of the
total local expenditure of £ 151,600,000 (in 1902-03) £
16,500,000 were spent on education, i. e., slightly over one-tenth. The
central government, under

   

the 1908 Budget (see Almanach de Gotha) spent for educational
purposes £ 16,900,O00 out of a total of £ 198,000,000, i.e.,
less than one tenth. Army and navy expenditure for the same year amounted
to £ 59,200,000; add to this the expenditure of £ 28,500,000 on
the national debt, £ 3,800,000 on law courts and police, £
1,900,000 on foreign affairs and £ 19,800,000 on cost of tax
collection, and you will see that the bourgeoisie spends only
farthings on education, and vast sums on the maintenance
of its rule as a class.  —Lenin
 

 
  

2. Local Self-Government as a “Bulwark Against Reaction”

|

4. The Scope of the Political and of the Agrarian Revolutions

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Scope of the
    Political and of the Agrarian
    Revolutions









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 4. The Scope of the Political and of the Agrarian Revolutions







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

4. The Scope of the Political and of the Agrarian Revolutions

A difficult “choice”, we said, meaning of
course not the subjective choice (which is the more desirable), but the
objective outcome of the struggle of the social forces that are deciding
the historical issue. Those who say that my agrarian programme, which links
the republic with nationalisation, is optimistic, have never thought out
what the “difficulty” involved in a favourable outcome for the
peasantry really is. Here is Plekhanov’s argument on the subject:



   “Lenin evades the difficulty of the question by means of
   optimistic assumptions. That is the usual method of utopian thinking. The
   anarchists, for instance, say:

   ‘there is no need for any coercive organisation’, and when we retort that
   the absence of coercive organisation would enable individual members of the
   community to injure the community if they so desired, the anarchists reply:

   ‘that cannot be’. In my opinion, that means evading the difficulty of the
   question by means of optimistic assumptions. And that is what Lenin
   does. He raises a whole series of optimistic ‘ifs’ around the possible
   consequences of the measure he proposes. To prove this, I shall quote the
   reproach which Lenin levelled at Maslov. On page 23 or his

       pamphlet[1]

   be says:

   ‘Maslov’s draft tacitly assumes a situation in which the demands of
   our political minimum programme have not been carried out in full, the
   sovereignty of the people has not been ensured, the standing army has not
   been abolished, officials are not elected, and so forth. In other words, it
   assumes that our democratic revolution, like most of the democratic
   revolutions in Europe, has not reached its complete fulfilment and that it
   has been curtailed, distorted, “rolled back”, like all the
   others. Maslov’s draft is especially intended for a half-way,
   inconsistent, incomplete, or curtailed democratic revolution, “made
   innocuous” by reaction.’

   Assuming that the reproach Lenin levelled at Maslov is justified, the
   passage quoted still shows that Lenin’s own draft programme will be
   good only in the event of all his ‘ifs’ coming true. But if those ‘ifs’ are
   not realised, the implementation of his

draft[2]

   will prove harmful. But we have no need of such drafts. Our draft programme
   must be armed at all points, i. e., ready to meet unfavourable
   ‘ifs’.” (Minutes of the Stockholm Congress, pp. 44-45.)  

 

I have quoted this argument in full because it clearly indicates
Plekhanov’s mistake. He has completely failed to understand the
optimism which scares him. The “optimism” is not in assuming the
election of officials by the people, etc., but In assuming the victory
of the peasant agrarian revolution. The real “difficulty”
lies in securing the victory of the peasant agrarian revolution in
a country which, at least since 1861, has been developing along
Junker-bourgeois lines; and since you admit the possibility of this
fundamental economic difficulty, it is ridiculous to regard the
difficulties of political democracy as all but anarchism. It is ridiculous
to forget that the scope of the agrarian and of the political changes
cannot fail to correspond, that the economic revolution
presupposes a corresponding political
superstructure. Plekhanov’s cardinal mistake on this question lies in
this very failure to understand the root of the “optimism” of
our common, Menshevik and Bolshevik, agrarian programme.  

Indeed, picture to yourselves concretely what a “peasant
agrarian revolution”, involving confiscation of the
landlords’ estates, means in contemporary Russia. There can be no doubt
that during the past half-century capitalism has paved the way for itself
through landlord farming, which now, on the whole, is
unquestionably superior to peasant farming, not only as regards yields
(which can be partly ascribed to the better quality of the land owned by
the landlords), but also as regards the wide use of improved implements and
crop rotation (fodder grass

    cultivation).[3]

There is no doubt that landlord farming is bound by a thou sand ties not
only to the bureaucracy, but also to the bourgeoisie. Confiscation
undermines a great many of the interests of the big bourgeoisie, while the
peasant revolution, as Kautsky has rightly pointed out, leads also to the
bankruptcy of the state, i.e., it damages the interests not only of the
Russian, hut of the whole international bourgeoisie. It stands to reason
that under such conditions the victory of the peasant revolution, the,
victory of the petty

    

bourgeoisie over both the landlords and the big bourgeoisie, requires an
exceptionally favourable combination of circumstances; it requires what,
from the standpoint of the philistine, or of the philistine historian, are
very unusual “optimistic” assumptions; it requires tremendous peasant
initiative, revolutionary energy, class-consciousness, organisation, and
rich narodnoye tvorchestvo (the creative activity of the
people). All that is beyond dispute, and Plekhanov’s philistine jokes
at the expense of that last phrase are only a cheap way of dodging a

       serious[4]

issue. And since commodity production does not unite or centralise the
peasants, but disintegrates and disunites them, a peasant
revolution in a bourgeois country is possible only under the leadership of
the proletariat—a fact which is more than ever rousing the opposition
of the most powerful bourgeoisie in the world to such a revolution.  

Does that mean that Marxists must abandon the idea of a peasant
agrarian revolution altogether? No. Such a deduction would be worthy only
of those whose philosophy is nothing but a liberal parody of Marxism. What
it does mean is only, first, that Marxism cannot link the destiny of
socialism in Russia with the outcome of the bourgeois democratic
revolution; second, that Marxism must reckon with the two possibilities in
the capitalist evolution of agriculture in Russia and clearly show the
people the conditions and significance of each possibility, arid third,
that Marxism must resolutely combat the view that a radical agrarian
revolution is possible in Russia without a radical political revolution.


(1) The Socialist-Revolutionaries, in common with all the Narodniks who
are at all consistent, fail to understand the bourgeois nature of the
peasant revolution and Link

    

with it the whole of their own quasi-socialism. A favour able outcome of
the peasant revolution, in the opinion of the Narodniks, would mean the
triumph of Narodnik socialism in Russia. Actually, such an outcome would be
the quickest and most decisive bankruptcy of Narodnik (peas ant)
socialism. The fuller and the more decisive the victory of the peasant
revolution, the sooner will the peasantry be converted into free, bourgeois
farmers, who will “give the sack” to Narodnik
“socialism”. On the other hand, an unfavourable outcome would
prolong the agony of Narodnik socialism for some time, making it possible
to some extent to maintain the illusion that criticism of the land
lord-bourgeois variety of capitalism is criticism of capitalism in general.


Social-Democracy, the party of the proletariat, does not in any way
link the destiny of socialism with either of the possible outcomes of the
bourgeois revolution. Either out come implies the development of capitalism
and the oppression of the proletariat, whether under a landlord monarchy
with private ownership of land, or under a farmers’ republic, even with the
nationalisation of the land. Therefore, only an absolutely independent and
purely proletarian party is able to defend the cause of socialism
“whatever the situation of democratic agrarian

      reforms”[5]

may be, as time concluding part of my agrarian programme declares (that
part was incorporated in the resolution on tactics of the Stockholm
Congress).  

(2) But the bourgeois nature of both possible outcomes of the
agrarian revolution by no means implies that Social-Democrats can be
indifferent to the struggle for one or the other outcome. It is undoubtedly
in the interests of the working class to give the most vigorous support to
the peasant revolution. More than that: it must play the leading part in
that revolution. In fighting for a favourable outcome of the revolution we
must spread among the masses a very clear understanding of what keeping to
the land lord path of agrarian evolution means, what incalculable hardships
(arising not from capitalism, but from the inadequate development of
capitalism) it has in store for all

    

the toiling masses. On the other hand, we must also explain the
petty-bourgeois nature of the peasant revolution, and the fallacy of
placing any “socialist” hopes in it.  

Moreover, since we do not link the destiny of socialism with either of the
possible outcomes of the bourgeois revolution, our programme cannot be
identical for both a favourable and “unfavourable case”. When
Plekhanov said that we do not need drafts specially providing for both the one
and the other case (that is, drafts built upon “ifs”), he
said it simply without thinking; for it is precisely from his
standpoint, from the standpoint, of the probability of the worst outcome, or of
the necessity of reckoning with it, that it is particularly necessary to
divide the programme into two parts, as I did. It needs to be said that on the
present path of landlord-bourgeois development the workers’ party stands for
such and such measures, while at the same time it helps the peasantry with all
its might to abolish landlordism entirely and thus create the possibility for
broader and freer conditions of development. I dealt with this aspect of the
matter in detail in my Report (the point about rent, the necessity of including
that point in the programme in the “worst case”; and its omission
in Maslov’s

       draft).[6]

I shall merely add that Plekhanov’s mistake is
more obvious than ever at the present moment, when the actual conditions for
Social-Democratic activity give least grounds for optimistic assumptions. The
Third Duma can in no way induce us to give up the struggle for the peas ant
agrarian revolution; but for a certain space of time we shall have to work on
the basis of agrarian relations which entail the most brutal exploitation by the
landlords. Plekhanov, who was particularly concerned about the worst case, now
finds himself with no programme to meet it.


(3) Since we set ourselves the task of assisting the peas ant
revolution, we must clearly see the difficulty of the task and realise that
the political and agrarian changes must correspond. Otherwise we
shall get a scientifically unsound and, in practice, reactionary
combination of agrarian “optimism” (confiscation plus
municipalisation or

    

division) with political “pessimism” (Novosedsky’s
democratisation “of a comparative degree” at the centre).


The Mensheviks, as if in spite of themselves, accept the peasant
revolution, but do not want to give the people a clear and definite picture
of it. One can detect in what they say the opinion expressed with such
inimitable naïveté by the Menshevik Ptitsyn at Stockholm:
“The revolutionary turmoil will pass away, bourgeois life will resume
us usual course, and unless a workers’ revolution takes place in the West,
the bourgeoisie will inevitably come to power in our country. Comrade Lenin
will not and cannot deny that” (Minutes, p. 91). Thus, a superficial,
abstract conception of the bourgeois revolution has obscured the question
of one of its varieties, namely, the peasant revolution! All of this last
is mere “turmoil”, and the only thing that is real is the
“usual course”. The philistine point of view and failure to
understand what the struggle is about in our bourgeois revolution could
hardly be expressed in clearer terms.  

The peasantry cannot carry out an agrarian revolution without
abolishing the old regime, the standing army and the bureaucracy, because
all these are the most reliable mainstays of landlordism, bound to it by
thousands of ties. That is why the idea of achieving a peasant revolution
by democratising only the local institutions without completely breaking up
the central institutions is scientifically unsound. In practice it is
reactionary because it plays into the hands of petty-bourgeois obtuseness
and petty-bourgeois opportunism, which sees the thing in a very
“simple” way: we want the land; as to politics, God will take
care of that! The peasant agrees that all the land must be taken; but
whether all political power has to be taken as well, whether all political
power can be taken, and how it should be taken, are things he does not
bother about (or did not bother until the dissolution of two Dumas made him
wiser). Hence, the extremely reactionary standpoint of the “peasant
Cadet” Mr. Peshekhonov, who already in his Agrarian Problem
wrote: “Just now it is far more necessary to give a definite answer
on the agrarian question than, for instance, on the question of a
republic” (p. 114).

    

And that standpoint of political imbecility (the legacy of the
arch-reactionary Mr. V. V.) has, as we know, left its mark on the whole
programme and tactics of the “Popular-Socialist” Party. Instead
of combating the short sightedness of the peasant who fails to see the
connection between agrarian radicalism and political radicalism, the
P.S.’s (“Popular Socialists”) adapt themselves to that
short-sightedness. They believe it is “more practical that
way”, but in reality it is the very thing which dooms the agrarian
programme of the peasantry to utter failure. Need less to say, a radical
political revolution is difficult, but so is an agrarian revolution;
the. latter is impossible apart from the former, and it is the duty of
socialists not to conceal this from the peasants, not to throw a veil over
it (by using rather vague, semi-Cadet phrases about the “democratic
state”, as is done in our agrarian programme), but to speak out, to
teach the peasants that unless they go the whole way in politics it is no
use thinking seriously of confiscating the landlords’ land.  

It is not the “ifs” that are important here in the programme. The
important thing is to point out in it that the agrarian and the political
changes must correspond. Instead of using the word “if”,
the same idea can be put differently: “The Party explains that the best
method of taking possession of the land in bourgeois society is by abolishing
private ownership of land, nationalising the land, and transferring it to the
state, and that such a measure can neither be carried out nor bear real fruit
without complete democratisation not only of the local institutions, but of the
whole structure of the state, including the establishment of a republic, the
abolition of the standing army, election of officials by the people, etc.”


By failing to include that explanation in our agrarian programme we have given
the people the false idea that confiscation of the landlords’ estates
is possible without the complete democratisation of the central government. We
have sunk to the level of the opportunist petty bourgeoisie, i.e., the
“Popular Socialists”; for in both Dumas it so happened that their
programme (the Bill of the 104) as well as ours linked agrarian changes with
democratisation only of the local institutions. Such a view is
philistine

    

obtuseness, of which the events of June 3, 1907, and the Third Duma should have
cured many people, the Social Democrats above all.

 

Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 187.—Ed.  

[2]
In that case it would not be my draft! Plekhanov is illogical!
   —Lenin

[3]
See the new and comprehensive data on the superiority of landlord over
peasant farming because of the more extensive cultivation of grass in
Kaufman’s The Agrarian Question, Vol. II.  —Lenin

[4]
Narodnoye tvorchestvo is

narodovolchestvo,[7] Plekhanov said mockingly at
Stockholm. It is the sort

o  criticism with which The Adventures of
Chichikov is criticised, by making fun of the hero’s name:
“Chichikov.... Chi... chi... how

funny!”[8] Only those who think that the in here admission of the
possibility of a peasant revolution against the bourgeoisie and the
landlords is narodovolchestvo can seriously regard as
narodovolchestvo the idea that it is necessary to ronse the
“creative activity of the people”, that it is necessary to find new forms
of struggle arid new ways of organising the peasantry in the Russian
revolution.  —Lenin

[5]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 195.—Ed.  

[6]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 342-43.—Ed.  
 
a



[7]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 341.

 



[8]
The words in inverted commas “Chi ... chi ... etc.," are a
paraphrase of a passage from Chernyshevsky’s Essays on the Gogol
Period in Russian Literature. This passage, ridiculing a controversial
trick used by the journalist Senkovsky (“Baron Brambeus”) reads
as follows:

“A witty comment of Dead Souls might be written in the
following manner: After giving the title of the book, ‘The Adventures of
Chichikov, or Dead Souls’, the commentator might start straight off with:

‘The bad dentures of Chi! chi! kov—don’t think that I have
sneezed, dear reader ... etc., etc.’ Some twenty years ago there may have
been readers who would think that witty.”

 

 
  

3. The Central Authority and the Consolidation of the Bourgeois State

|

5. A Peasant Revolution Without the Conquest of Power by the Peasantry?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Peasant
    Revolution Without the Conquest of
    Power by the Peasantry?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 5. A Peasant Revolution Without the Conquest of Power by the Peasantry?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

5. A Peasant Revolution Without the Conquest of Power by the Peasantry?

The agrarian programme of Russian Social-Democracy is a
proletarian programme in a peasant revolution that is directed against the
survivals of serfdom, against all that is medieval in our agrarian
system. Theoretically, as we have seen, this thesis is accepted by the
Mensheviks as well (Plekhanov’s speech at Stockholm). But the
Mensheviks have failed to think out that proposition and to perceive its
indissoluble connection with the general principles of Social-Democratic
tactics in the Russian bourgeois revolution. And it is in Plekhanov’s
writings that this shallow thinking is most clearly revealed.  

Every peasant revolution directed against medievalism, when the whole of the
social economy is of a capitalist nature, is a bourgeois revolution. But not
every bourgeois revolution is a peasant revolution. If, in a country where
agriculture is organised on fully capitalist lines, the capitalist farmers,
with the aid of the hired labourers, were to carry out an agrarian revolution by
abolishing the private ownership of land, for instance, that would be a
bourgeois revolution, but by no means a peasant revolution. Or if a revolution
took place in a country where the agrarian system had become so integrated with
the capitalist economy in general that that system could not be abolished
without abolishing capitalism, and if, say, that revolution put the industrial
bourgeoisie in power in place of the autocratic bureaucracy—that would be
a bourgeois revolution, but by no means a peasant revolution. In other words,
there can be a bourgeois country without a peasantry, and there can be a
bourgeois revolution in such a country with out a peasantry. A bourgeois
revolution may take place in a country with a considerable peasant population
and yet not be a peasant revolution; that is to say, it is a revolution which
does not revolutionise the agrarian relations that especially affect the
peasantry, and does not bring the peasantry to the fore as a social force that
is at all

    

active in creating the revolution. Consequently, the general Marxist
concept of “bourgeois revolution” contains certain propositions that
are definitely applicable to any peasant revolution that takes place in a
country of rising capitalism, but that general concept says nothing at all
about whether or not a bourgeois revolution in a given country must (in the
sense of objective necessity) become a peasant revolution in order to be
completely victorious.  

The principal source of the error in the tactical line pursued by
Plekhanov and his Menshevik followers during The first period of the
Russian revolution (i.e., during 1905-07) is their complete failure to
understand this correlation between bourgeois revolution in general, and a
peas ant bourgeois revolution. The furious

outcry[1]

usually raised in Menshevik literature over the Bolsheviks’ alleged failure
to grasp the bourgeois character of the present revolution is merely a
screen to cover the Mensheviks’ own shallow thinking. As a matter of fact,
not a single Social-Democrat of either group, either before or during the
revolution, has ever departed from the Marxist views concerning the
bourgeois nature of the revolution; only “simplifiers”, those
who vulgarise disagreements between the groups, could affirm the
contrary. But some Marxists, namely, the Right wing, have all the time made
shift with a general, abstract, stereotyped conception of the bourgeois
revolution, and failed to perceive the special feature of the
present bourgeois revolution, namely, that it is a peasant revolution. It
was quite natural and inevitable for that wing of Social-Democracy to fail
to understand the source of the counter-revolutionary nature of our
bourgeoisie in the Russian revolution, to determine clearly which classes
are capable of achieving complete victory in this revolution, and to fall
into the view that in a bourgeois revolution the proletariat must support
the bourgeoisie, that the bourgeoisie must be the chief actor in the
bourgeois revolution, that the sweep of the revolution would be weakened if
the bourgeoisie deserted it, and so on and so forth.  
 

The Bolsheviks, on the other hand, ever since the beginning of the revolution
in the spring and summer of 1905, when the confusion of Bolshevism with
boycottism, boyevism, etc., that is now so prevalent among the ignorant or
stupid, was still out of the question, clearly pointed to the source of
our tactical differences by singling out the concept of peasant revolution as
one of the varieties of bourgeois revolution, and by defining
the victory of the peasant revolution as “the revolutionary-democratic
dictatorship of the proletariat and the peasantry”. Since then Bolshevism
won its greatest ideological victory in international Social-Democracy
with the publication of Kautsky’s article on the driving forces of the
Russian, revolution (“The Driving Forces and Prospects of the Russian
Revolution”, Russian translation edited and with a preface by N. Lenin,
published by Novaya Epokha Publishers, Moscow; 1907). As is known, at
the beginning of the split between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks in 1903,
Kautsky sided with the latter. In 1907, having watched the course of the Russian
revolution, on the subject of which he wrote repeatedly, he at once saw the
mistake made by Plekhanov, who had sent him his famous questionnaire. In that
questionnaire, Plekhanov inquired only about the bourgeois nature of
the Russian revolution, without specifying the concept of peasant bourgeois
revolution, without going beyond general formulas such as “bourgeois
democracy”, “bourgeois opposition parties”. In answering
Plekhanov Kautsky rectified that mistake by pointing out that the bourgeoisie
was not the driving force of the Russian revolution, that in that sense
the days of bourgeois revolutions had passed, that “a lasting community of
interests during, the whole period of the revolutionary struggle exists only
between the proletariat and the peasantry” (op. cit., pp. 30-31), and
that “it [this lasting community of interests] should be made the basis of
the whole of the revolutionary tactics of Russian Social-Democracy”
(ibid., p. 31). The underlying principles of Bolshevik tactics as
against those of the Mensheviks are here clearly expressed. Plekhanov
is terribly angry about this in his New Letters, etc. But his annoyance
only makes the impotence of his argument more obvious. The crisis through which
we are passing is “a bourgeois crisis for all

    

that”, Plekhanov keeps on repeating and he calls the Bolsheviks
“ignoramuses” (p. 127). That abuse is an expression of his
impotent rage. Plekhanov has failed to grasp the difference between a
peasant bourgeois revolution and a non-peasant bourgeois revolution. By
saying that Kautsky “exaggerates the speed of development of our
peasant” (p. 131), and that “the difference of opinion between
us [between Plekhanov and Kautsky] can only be one of nuances”
(p. 131), etc., Plekhanov resorts to the most miserable and cowardly
shuffling, for anyone at all capable of thinking can see that the very
opposite is the case. It is not. a question of “nuances” or of
the speed of development, or of the “seizure” of power that
Plekhanov shouts about, but of the basic view as to which
classes are capable of being the driving force of the Russian
revolution. Voluntarily or involuntarily, Plekhanov and the Mensheviks are
inevitably falling into a position of opportunist support to the
bourgeoisie, for they fail to grasp the counter-revolutionary nature of the
bourgeoisie in a peasant bourgeois revolution. The Bolsheviks from the
outset defined the general and the basic class conditions for the victory
of this revolution as the democratic dictatorship of the proletariat and
the peasantry. Kautsky arrived at substantially the same view in his
article, “The Driving Forces”, etc., and he repeat ed it in the
second edition of his Social Revolution, in which he
says: “It [the victory of Russian Social-Democracy in the near future]
can only come as the result of a coalition [einer Koalition]
between the proletariat and the peasantry.” (Die soziale
Revolution, von K. Kautsky, Zweite Auflage. Berlin, 1907, 5. 62.)
(Space does not permit us to deal with another addition Kautsky made to the
second edition, in which he sums up the lessons of December 1905, a summing
up which differs radically from Menshevism.)  

Thus we see that Plekhanov completely evaded the question of the underlying
principles of the general Social-Democratic tactics in a bourgeois
revolution that can be victorious only as a peasant revolution. What I said at
Stockholm

     (April 1906)[2]

about Plekhanov having reduced Menshevism to absurdity by repudiating the
conquest of power

    

by the peasantry in a peasant revolution has been completely borne out in
subsequent. literature. And that fundamental error in the tactical line was
bound to affect the Mensheviks’ agrarian programme. As I have repeatedly
pointed out above, municipalisation does not in either the economic or the
political sphere fully express the conditions of a real victory of the
peasant revolution, for the real conquest of power by the proletariat and
the peasantry. In the economic sphere, such a victory is incompatible with
the perpetuation of the old system of allotment landowner ship; in the
political sphere, it is incompatible with mere regional democracy and
incomplete democracy in the central government.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
In Plekhanov’s New Letters on Tactics and Tactlessness
(published by Glagolev, St. Petersburg), that outcry is positively
comical. There is any amount of furious language, abuse of the Bolsheviks
and posturing, but not a grain of thought.  —Lenin

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 283.—Ed.  
 

 
  

4. The Scope of the Political and of the Agrarian Revolutions

|

6. Is Land Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible Method?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Is Land
    Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible
    Method?









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 6. Is Land Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible Method?







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

6. Is Land Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible Method?
Comrade John said at Stockholm (p. 111 of the Minutes) that
the “draft providing for land municipalisation is more acceptable,
because it is more flexible: it takes into account the diversity of
economic conditions, and it can be carried out in the process of the
revolution itself”. I have already pointed out the cardinal defect of
municipalisation in this respect: it rivets allotment ownership to the
property form. Nationalisation is incomparably more flexible in this
respect, because it makes it much easier to organise new farms on the
“unfenced” land. Here it is also necessary to refer briefly to
other, minor arguments that John raised.  

“The division of the land,” says John, “would in some
places revive the old agrarian relations. In some regions the distribution
would be as much as 200 dessiatins per household, so that in the Urals, for
instance, we would create a class of new landlords.” That is a sample
of an argument which denounces its own system I And it was that kind of
argument that decided the issue at the Menshevik Congress! It is
municipalisation, and it alone, that is guilty of the sin referred to here,
for it alone rivets the land to individual regions. It is not the division
of land that is to blame, as John thinks, thus falling into a ridiculous
logical error, but the provincialism of the municipalisers. In any case,
according to the Menshevik programme, the municipalised

    

lands in the Urals would remain the “property” of the people of
the Urals. That would mean the creation of a new, reactionary,
Cossack stratum—reactionary because privileged small farmers having
ten times more land than all the rest of the farmers could not but resist
the peasant revolution, and could not but defend the privileges of private
landownership. It only remains for us to assume that on the basis of that
same programme, the “democratic state” might declare the tens
of millions of dessiatins of Ural forests to be “forests of national
importance”, or “colonisation lands” (does not the Cadet
Kaufman apply that term to the forest land in the Urals, within the 25 per
cent limit, which means 21,000,000 dessiatins in the Vyatka, Ufa, and Perm
gubernias?). and on that ground become their “owner”. Not
flexibility, but confusion, pure and simple, is the distinguishing feature
of municipalisation.  

Now let us see what carrying out municipalisation in the very process of the
revolution means. Here we meet with attacks on my “revolutionary peasant
committees” as a class institution. “We are for non-class
institutions,” the Mensheviks argued at Stockholm, playing at
liberalism. Cheap liberalism! It did not occur to our Mensheviks that in order
to introduce local self-government of a non-class character it is necessary to
defeat the privileged class against which the struggle is being waged and to
wrest the power from it. It is just “in the very process of the
revolution”, as John puts it, i. e., in the course of the struggle to
drive out the landlords, in the course of those “revolutionary act
ions of the peasantry” that are mentioned also in the Mensheviks’
resolution on tactics, that peasant committees can be set up. The introduction
of local self-government of a non-class character is provided for in our
political programme; it is bound to be established as the organisation of
administration after the victory, when the whole of the population will
have been compelled to accept the new order. If the words of our programme about
“sup porting the revolutionary actions of the peasantry, including the
confiscation of the landlords’ lands” is not mere phrase-mongering, then
we must think about organising the masses for those “actions”!
Yet that is entirely overlooked in the Menshevik programme. That programme is
so

    

drawn up as to be easily and wholly converted into a parliamentary Bill,
like the Bills proposed by the bourgeois parties, which either (like the
Cadets) hate all “actions”, or opportunistically shirk the task
of systematically assisting and organising such actions (like the Popular
Socialist). But a programme built on such lines is unworthy of a workers’
party which speaks of a peasant agrarian revolution, a party which pursues
the aim not of reassuring the big bourgeoisie and the bureaucracy (like the
Cadets), not of reassuring the petty bourgeoisie (like the Popular
Socialists), but exclusively of developing the consciousness and initiative
of the broad masses in the course of their struggle against feudal Russia.


Recall, if only in general outline, the innumerable
“revolutionary actions” of the peasantry which took place in
Russia in the spring of 1905, in the autumn of 1905, and in the spring of
1906. Do we pledge our support to such actions or riot? If not, then our
programme would not be telling the truth. If we do, then obviously our
programme fails to give directives about the organisation of
such actions. Such actions can be organised only on the spot where
the struggle is going on; the organisation can be created only by the
masses who are directly taking part in the struggle, i. e., the
organisation must definitely be of the peasant committee type. To wait for
big,. regional self-governing bodies to be set up during such actions would
be ridiculous. The extension of the power and influence of the victorious
local committees to adjacent villages, uyezds, gubernias, towns, areas,
and to the entire country is, of course, desirable and
essential. There can be no objection to the need for such an extension
being indicated in the programme, but that should certainly not be confined
to regions, it should embrace the central government as well. That in the
first place. Secondly, in that case we must not speak about local
self-governing bodies, since that term points to the
dependence of the local governing organisations upon the
structure of the state. “Local self-government”
operates according to the rules laid down by the central authority,. and
within the limits set by the latter. The organisations of the fighting
people of which we are speaking must be quite independent of all the
institutions of the old regime, they

    

must fight for a new state structure, they must serve as the instrument of
the full power of the people (or the sovereignty of the people), and as the
means for securing it.  

In short, from the standpoint of the “very process of the
revolution”, the Menshevik programme is unsatisfactory in all
respects. It reflects the confusion of Menshevik ideas on the question of
the provisional government, etc.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

5. A Peasant Revolution Without the Conquest of Power by the Peasantry?

|

7. Municipalisation of the Land and Municipal Socialism

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Municipalisation of
    the Land and Municipal Socialism









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 7. Municipalisation of the Land and Municipal Socialism







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

7. Municipalisation of the Land and Municipal Socialism

These two terms were made equivalent by the Mensheviks
themselves, who secured the adoption of the agrarian programme at
Stockholm. We need only mention the names of two prominent Mensheviks,
Kostrov and Larin. “Some comrades,” said Kostrov at Stockholm,
“seem to be hearing about municipal ownership for the first time. Let
me remind them that in Western Europe there is a whole political trend
[!precisely!] called ‘municipal socialism’ [England], which advocates the
extension of ownership by urban and rural municipalities, and which is also
supported by our comrades. Many municipalities own real estate, and that
does not contradict our programme. We now have the possibility of acquiring
[!] real estate for the municipalities gratis [!!] and we should take
advantage of it. Of course, the confiscated land should be
municipalised” (p. 88).  

The naive idea about “the possibility of acquiring property
gratis” is magnificently expressed here. But in citing the example of
this municipal socialism “trend” as a special trend mainly
characteristic of England, the speaker did not stop to think why this
is. an extremely opportunist trend. Why did Engels, in his letters
to Sorge describing this extreme intellectual opportunism of the English
Fabians, emphasise the petty-bourgeois nature of their
“muncipalisation”

schemes?[2]


Larin, in unison with Kostrov, says in his comments on the Menshevik
programme: “Perhaps in some areas the people’s local
self-governing bodies will themselves be able to run these large estates,
as the horse tramways or slaughter-houses are run by municipal councils,
and then all [!!] the profits obtained from them will be placed at the
disposal

    

of the whole [!]

     population”[1]

–and

not of the local bourgeoisie, my dear Larin?


The philistine illusions of the philistine heroes of West-European
municipal socialism are already making them selves felt. The fact that the
bourgeoisie is in power is for gotten; so also is the fact that only in
towns with a high percentage of proletarian population is it
possible to obtain for the working people some crumbs of benefit from
municipal government! But all this is by the way. The principal fallacy of
the “municipal socialism” idea of municipalising the land lies
in the following.  

The bourgeois intelligentsia of the West, like the English Fabians,
elevate municipal socialism to a special “trend” precisely
because it dreams of social peace, of class conciliation, and seeks to
divert public attention away from the fundamental questions of the economic
system as a whole, and of the state structure as a whole, to minor
questions of local self-government. In the sphere of questions in
the first category, the class antagonisms stand out most sharply; that is
the sphere which, as we have shown, affects the very foundations of the
class rule of the bourgeoisie. Hence it is in that sphere that the
philistine, reactionary utopia of bringing about socialism piecemeal is
particularly hopeless. Attention is diverted to the sphere of minor local
questions, being directed not to the question of the class rule of the
bourgeoisie, nor to the question of the chief instruments of that rule, but
to the question of distributing the crumbs thrown by the rich
bourgeoisie for the “needs of the
population”. Naturally, since attention is focused on such
questions as the spending of paltry sums (in comparison with the total
surplus value and total state expenditure of the bourgeoisie), which the
bourgeoisie itself is willing to set aside for public health
(Engels pointed out in The Housing Question that the bourgeoisie
itself is afraid of the spread of epidemic diseases in the

towns[3]), or for education (the bourgeoisie must have trained workers
able to adapt themselves to a high technical level!), and so on, it is
possible, in the sphere of such minor questions, to hold

    

forth about “social peace”, about the harmfulness of the class
struggle, and so on. What class struggle can there be if the bourgeoisie
itself is spending money on the “needs of the population”, on
public health, on education? What need is there for a social revolution if
it is possible through the local self-governing bodies, gradually, step by
step, to extend “collective ownership”, and
“socialise” production:

the horse tramways, the slaughter-houses referred to so relevantly by the
worthy Y. Larin?


The philistine opportunism of that “trend” lies in the fact
that people forget the narrow limits of so-called “municipal
socialism” (in reality, municipal capitalism, as the English
Social-Democrats properly point out in their controversies with the
Fabians). They forget that so long as the bourgeoisie rules as a class it
cannot allow any encroachment, even from the “municipal” point
of view, upon the real foundations of its rule; that if the
bourgeoisie allows, tolerates, “municipal socialism”, it is
because the latter does not touch the foundations of its rule,
does not interfere with the Important sources of its wealth, but
extends only to the narrow sphere of local expenditure, which the
bourgeoisie itself allows the “population” to
manage. It does riot need more than a slight acquaintance with
“municipal socialism” in the West to know that any attempt on
the part of socialist municipalities to go a little beyond the
boundaries of their normal, i. e., minor, petty activities, which give no
substantial relief to the workers, any attempt to meddle with
capital, is invariably vetoed in the most emphatic manner by the
central authorities, of the bourgeois state.  

And it is this fundamental mistake, this philistine opportunism of the
West-European Fabians, Possibilists, and Bernsteinians that Is taken over
by our advocates of municipalisation.  

“Municipal socialism” means socialism in matters of
local government. Anything that goes beyond the limits of
local interests, beyond the limits of state
administration, i. e., anything that affects the main sources of
revenue of the ruling classes and the principal means of securing their
rule, anything that affects not the administration of the state, but the
structure of the state, thereby goes beyond

    

the sphere of “municipal socialism”. But our wiseacres evade
this acute national issue, this question of the land, which affects the
vital interests of the ruling classes in the most direct way, by
relegating it to the sphere of “local government
questions”. In the West they municipalise horse trains and
slaughter-houses, so why should we not municipalise the best half of all
the land?—argues the Russian petty intellectual. That would serve
both in the event of restoration and in the event of incomplete
democratisation of the central government!  

And so we get agrarian socialism in a bourgeois revolution, a socialism
of the most petty-bourgeois kind, one that counts on blunting the
class struggle on vital issues by relegating the latter
to the domain of petty questions affecting only local government. In fact,
the question of the disposal of one half of the best land in the country is
neither a local question nor a question of administration. It is a question
that affects the whole state, a question of the structure, not only of the
landlord, but of the bourgeois state. And to try to entice the people with
the idea that “municipal socialism” can be developed in
agriculture be fore the socialist revolution is accomplished is to practise
the most inadmissible kind of demagogy. Marxism permits nationalisation to
be included in the programme of a bourgeois revolution because
nationalisation is a bourgeois measure, because absolute rent hinders the
development of capitalism; private ownership of the land is a hindrance to
capitalism. But to include the municipalisation of the big estates in the
programme of the bourgeois revolution, Marxism must be remodelled into
Fabian intellectualist opportunism.  

It is here that we see the difference between petty-bourgeois and
proletarian methods in the bourgeois revolution. The petty bourgeoisie,
even the most radical—our Party of Socialist-Revolutionaries
included—anticipates that after the bourgeois revolution
there will be no class struggle, but universal prosperity and
peace. Therefore, it “builds its nest” in advance, it
introduces plans for petty-bourgeois reforms in the bourgeois revolution,
talks about various “norms” arid “regulations” with
regard to landownership, about strengthening the labour principle and small
farming,

    

etc. The petty-bourgeois method is the method of building up relations
making for the greatest possible degree of social peace. The proletarian
method is exclusively that of clearing the path of all that is
medieval, clearing it for the class struggle. Therefore, the
proletarian can leave it to the small proprietors to discuss
“norms” of landownership; the proletarian is interested only in
the abolition of the landlord latifundia, the abolition of private
ownership of land, that last barrier to the class struggle in
agriculture. In the bourgeois revolution we are interested not in
petty-bourgeois reformism, not in a future “nest” of tranquil
used small farmers, but in the conditions for the proletarian struggle
against all petty-bourgeois tranquillity on a bourgeois basis.  

It is this anti-proletarian spirit that municipalisation introduces
into the programme of the bourgeois agrarian revolution; for,
despite the deeply fallacious opinion of the Mensheviks, municipalisation
does not extend and sharpen the class, struggle, but,. on the contrary,
blunts it. It blunts it, too, by assuming that local democracy is
possible without the complete democratisation of the centre. It also blunts
it with the idea of “municipal socialism”, because the latter
is conceivable in bourgeois society only away from the
high road of the struggle, only in minor, local, unimportant questions on
which even the bourgeoisie may yield, may reconcile itself to
without losing the possibility of preserving its class rule.  

The working class must give bourgeois society the purest, most consistent and
most thorough-going programme of bourgeois revolution, including the bourgeois
nationalisation of the land. The proletariat scornfully rejects petty-
bourgeois reformism in the bourgeois revolution; we are interested in freedom
for the struggle, not in freedom for philistine bliss.


Naturally, the opportunism of the intelligentsia in the workers’ party
takes a different line. Instead of the broad revolutionary programme of
bourgeois revolution, attention is focused on a petty-bourgeois utopia: to
secure local democracy with incomplete democratisation at the centre, to
secure for petty reformism a little corner of municipal activity away from
great “turmoil”, and to evade the extraordinarily

    

acute conflict over the land by following the recipe of the anti-Semites,
i. e., by relegating an important national issue to the domain of petty,
local questions.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
The Peasant Question and Social-Democracy, p. 66.  —Lenin
 



[2]
K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow,
p. 537.

 



[3]
K. Marx and F.Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, 1955;
p. 578.

 

 
  

6. Is Land Nationalisation a Sufficiently Flexible Method?

|

8. Some Examples of the Muddle Caused by Municipalisation

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Muddle Caused by
    Municipalisation









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 8. Some Examples of the Muddle Caused by Municipalisation







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

8. Some Examples of the Muddle Caused by Municipalisation

What confusion the “municipalisation” programme has created in the
minds of Social-Democrats and to what a helpless position it has reduced our
propagandists and agitators can be seen from the following curious cases.


Y. Larin is undoubtedly a prominent and well-known figure in Menshevik
literature. In Stockholm, as can be seen from the Minutes, he took a most active
part in securing the adoption of the programme. His pamphlet, The Peasant
Question and Social-Democracy, which was included in the series of
pamphlets published by Novy Mir, is almost an official commentary on
the Menshevik programme. And here is what this commentator writes. In the
concluding pages of his pamphlet he sums up the question of agrarian reform. He
foresees three kinds of outcome of these reforms:

(1) additional allotments to the peasants as their private property,
subject to compensation—“the most unfavourable outcome for the
working class, for the lower strata of the peasantry and for the whole
development of the national economy” (p. 103). The second outcome is
the best, and. the third, although unlikely, is “a paper declaration
of compulsory equalised land tenure.” One would have thought that we had
the right to expect that an advocate of the municipalisation programme
would, have made municipalisation the second outcome. But no! Listen to
this: 


   “Perhaps all the confiscated land, or even all the land in
   general, will be declared the property of the state as a
   whole and will be turned over to the local self-governing bodies to be
   distributed gratis [??] for the use of all who are actually
   cultivating it, without, of course, the compulsory introduction throughout
   the whole of Russia of equalised land tenure, and without prohibiting the
   employment of hired labour. Such a solution of the problem, as we have
   seen, best secures the immediate interests, of the proletariat as well as
   the general interests of the socialist movement, and will help to increase
   the productivity of labour, which is the fundamental, vital question for
   Russia. Therefore, the Social-Democrats should advocate and carry out an

    

   agrarian reform [?] precisely of that character. It will be achieved when,
   at the highest point of development of the revolution, the conscious
   elements of social development are strong” (p. 103. Our italics).
   


If Y. Larin or other Mensheviks believe this to be an exposition of the
municipalisation programme, they are labouring under a tragicomical
illusion. The transfer of all the land to state ownership is
nationalisation of the land, and we cannot conceive of the land
being disposed of other wise than through local self-governing bodies
acting within the limits of a general state law. To such a
programme—not of “reform”, of course, but of
revolution—I wholeheartedly subscribe, except for the point about
distributing the land “gratis” even to those farmers who employ
hired labour, To promise such a thing on behalf of bourgeois society is
more fitting for an anti-Semite than for a Social-Democrat. No Marxist can
assume the possibility of such an outcome with in the framework of
capitalist development; nor is there any reason for considering it
desirable to transfer rent to capitalist farmers. Nevertheless, except for
this point, which was probably a slip of the pen, it remains an indubitable
fact that in a popular Menshevik pamphlet the nationalisation of the
land is advocated as the best outcome at the highest point of
development of the revolution.  

On the question of what is to be done with the privately owned lands, Larin has
this to say:



   “As regards the privately owned lands occupied by big, efficient
   capitalist farms, Social-Democrats do not propose the confiscation of such
   lands for the purpose of dividing them among the small. farmers. While the
   average yield of small peasant farming, either on privately owned or rented
   land, does not reach 30 poods per dessiatin, the average yield of
   capitalist agriculture in Russia is over 50 poods” (p. 64).  


In saying this, Larin in effect throws overboard the idea of a
peasant agrarian revolution, for his average figures of crop
yields appertain to all the landlord lands. If we do not believe
in the possibility of achieving a wider and more rapid increase in the
productivity of labour on small farms after they have been freed from the
yoke of serfdom, then all talk about “supporting the revolutionary
actions of the peasantry, including the confiscation of the laud from the
landlords”, is meaningless. Besides, Larin forgets

    

that on the question of “the purpose for which Social-Democrats
propose the confiscation of capitalist estates”, there is the
decision of the Stockholm Congress.  

It was Comrade Strumilin who, at the Stockholm Congress, moved an
amendment to insert after the words: economic development (in the
resolution), the following:

“insisting, therefore, that the confiscated big capitalist farms
should continue to be exploited on capitalist lines in the interests of the
whole of the people, and under conditions that best meet the needs of the
agricultural proletariat” (p. 157). This amendment was rejected
almost unanimously, it received only one vote (ibid.).


Nevertheless, propaganda is being carried on among the masses that
ignores the decision of the Congress! The retention of private ownership of
allotment land makes municipalisation such a confusing thing, that
commentaries on the programme cannot help running counter to the decision
of the Congress.  

K. Kautsky, who has been so frequently and unfairly quoted in favour of
one or the other programme (unfairly because he has categorically declined
to express a definite view on the question and has confined himself to
explaining certain general truths), Kautsky, who, curiously enough, was
oven cited as being in favour of municipalisation, wrote, it turns out, to
M. Shanin in April 1906 as follows: 


   “Evidently, by municipalisation I meant something different from what
   you, and perhaps Maslov, mean. What I meant was the following: the big
   landed estates will be confiscated and large-scale agriculture will be
   continued upon such land, either by the municipalities ii] or by larger
   organisations, or else the land will be rented out to producers
   associations. I do not know whether that is possible in Russia or whether
   it would be acceptable to the peasants. Nor do I say that we should demand
   it, but ii the demand is raised by others, I think we could easily agree to
   it. It would be an interesting

     experiment.”[1]


 

These quotations should suffice to show how those who were, or are,
fully in sympathy with the Stockholm programme, are destroying it
by the way they interpret it. The fault here lies in the hopeless muddle in
the programme; in theory it is bound up with the repudiation of
Marx’s theory of rent, in practice it is an adaptation to the
impossible “middle” event of local democracy under a
non-democratic central government, and in economics it amounts to
introducing petty-bourgeois, quasi-socialist reformism into the programme
of the bourgeois revolution.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
M. Shanin, Municipalisation or Division for Private Property,
   Vilna, 1907, p. 4. M. Shanin rightly expresses doubt whether Kautsky may
   he counted among the supporters of municipalisation and protests
   against the Mensheviks’ self-advertisement (in the Menshevik

   Pravda,[2] 1906) in regard to Kautsky. Kautsky himself, in a
   letter— published by Maslov, bluntly says: “We may leave it to
   the peasants to decide the forms of property to he adopted on the
   land confiscated from the big landowners. I would consider it a mistake to
   impose anything

   

   on them in that respect” (p. 16, The Question of the Agrarian
   Programme, by Maslov and Kautsky. Novy Mir Publishers,
   Moscow, 1906). This quite definite statement by Kautsky certainly
   excludes municipalisation of the land, which the Mensheviks want to
   impose on the peasants.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Pravda (Truth)—a monthly Menshevik magazine
dealing with questions of art, literature, and social activities, published
in Moscow in 1904-06.

 

 
  

7. Municipalisation of the Land and Municipal Socialism

|

1. The Rights and the Octobrists

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Rights and
    the Octobrists









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 1. The Rights and the Octobrists







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

Chapter V
Classes and Parties in the Debate on the Agrarian
    Question in the Second Duma

We think it will be useful to approach the question of the
workers’ party’s agrarian programme in the Russian bourgeois
revolution from another and somewhat different angle. The analysis of the
economic conditions for the revolution and of the political arguments in
favour of this or that programme should be supplemented by a picture of the
struggle between the different classes and parties that will as far as
possible embrace all the interests and place them in direct contrast to one
another. Only such a picture can give us an idea of the thing we are
discussing (the struggle for the land in the Russian revolution) as a
whole, excluding the one-sided and accidental character of individual
opinions, and testing theoretical conclusions by the practical intuition of
the persons concerned. As individuals, any representatives of parties and
classes may err, but when they come out in the public arena, before the
entire population, the individual errors are inevitably rectified by the
corresponding groups or classes that are interested in the
struggle. Classes do not err; on the whole, they decide their interests and
political aims in conformity

    

with the conditions of the struggle and with the conditions of social
evolution.  

Excellent material for drawing such a picture is provided by the
Stenographic Records of the two Dumas. We shall take the Second Duma
because it undoubtedly reflects the struggle of classes in the Russian
revolution more fully and with greater maturity: the Second Duma elections
were not boycotted by any influential party. The political grouping of the
deputies in the Second Duma was much more definite, the various Duma groups
were more united and more closely connected with their respective
parties. The experience of the First Duma had already provided considerable
material which helped all the parties to elaborate a more thought-out
policy. For all these reasons it is preferable to take the Second Duma. We
shall refer to the debate in the First Duma only in order to supplement, or
clarify, statements made in the Second Duma.  

To obtain a full and accurate picture of the struggle between the
different classes and parties during th.e debate in the Second Duma we
shall have to deal separately with each important and specific Duma group
and characterise it with the aid of excerpts from the principal speeches
delivered on the chief points of the agrarian question. As it is impossible
and unnecessary to quote all the minor speakers, we shall mention only
those who contributed something new, or threw noteworthy light on some
aspect of the question.  

The main groups of Duma deputies that stood out clearly in the debates on the
agrarian question were the following:

(1) the Rights and the Octobrists—as we shall see, no essential
difference between them was shown in the Second Duma;

(2) the Cadets;

(3) the Right and Octobrist peasants, standing, as we shall see, to the
Left of the Cadets;

(4) the non-party peasants;

(5) the Narodniks, or Trudovik intellectuals, standing somewhat to the
Right of

(6) the Trudovik peasants; then come

(7) the Socialist-Revolutionaries;

(8) the “nationals”, representing the non-Russian
nationalities, and

(9) the Social-Democrats. We shall mention the government’s position
in connection with the Duma group with which the government is essentially
in agreement.  
    

1. The Rights and the Octobrists

The stand taken by the Rights on the agrarian question was undoubtedly best
expressed by Count Bobrinsky in the speech he delivered on March 29, 1907 (18th
session of the Second Duma). In a dispute with the Left-wing priest Tikhvinsky
about the Holy Scriptures, and their commandments to obey the powers that be,
and recalling. “the cleanest and brightest page in Russian history”

(1289)[1]

–the

emancipation of the serfs (we shall deal with this later on)—the
count approached the agrarian question “with open
visor”. “About 100 or 150 years ago the peasants, nearly
everywhere in Western Europe, were as poverty-stricken, degraded, and
ignorant as our peasants are today. They had the same village communes as
we have in Russia, with division of land per head, that typical survival of
the feudal system” (1293). Today, continued the speaker, the peasants
in Western Europe are well off. The question is, what miracle transformed
“the poverty-stricken, degraded peasant into a prosperous and useful
citizen who has respect for himself and for others”? “There can be
only one answer: that miracle was performed by individual peasant
ownership, the form of ownership that is so detested here, on the Left, but
which we, on the Right, will defend with all the strength of our minds,
with all the strength of our earnest convictions, for we know that in
ownership lie, the strength and future of Russia”
(1294). “Since the middle of last century agronomic chemistry has
made wonderful... discoveries in plant nutrition, and the peasants
abroad— small owners equally [??] with big ones—have succeeded
in utilising these, scientific discoveries, and by employing artificial
fertilisers have achieved a still further increase in crop yield; and
today, when our splendid black earth yields only 30 to 35 poods of grain,
and sometimes not even enough for seed, the peasants abroad, year after
year, get an average yield ranging from 70 to 120 poods, depending on the
country and climatic conditions. Here you have the solution of the agrarian
problem. This is no dream, no

    

fantasy. It is an instructive historical example. And the Russian peasant
will not follow in the footsteps of Pugachov and

Stenka Razin[3] with the cry

‘saryn na kichku![4] [Don’t be too sure of that, Count!]
He will follow the only true road, the road that was taken by all the
civilised nations, the road taken by his neighbours in Western Europe, and,
lastly, the road taken by our Polish brothers, by the West-Russian
peasants, who have already realised how disastrous is the commune and
homestead strip system of ownership, and in some places have already begun
to introduce the khutor system” (1296). Count Bobrinsky goes
on to say; and rightly, that “this road was indicated in 1861, when
the peasants were freed from serf dependence”. He advises the
government not to grudge “tens of millions” for the purpose of
“creating a well-to-do class of peasant-proprietors”. He
declares: “This, gentlemen, in general outline, is our agrarian
programme. It is not. a programme of election and propaganda promises. It
is not a programme for breaking up the existing social and juridical norms
lit is a programme for forcibly getting rid of millions of peasants]; it is
not a programme of dangerous fantasies, it is a quite practicable programme
[that is still open to question] and one that has been well-tried [what is
true is true]. And it is high time to abandon dreams about some sort of
economic exceptionalism of the Russian nation.... But how are we to explain
the fact that quite impracticable Bills, like that of the Trudovik Group
and that of the Party of People’s Freedom, have been introduced in a
serious legislative assembly? No parliament in the world has ever heard of
all the land being taken over by the state, or of the land being taken from
Paul and given to Peter.... The appearance of these Bills is the result of
bewilderment” (a fine explanation!).... “And so, Russian
peasants, you have to choose between two roads: one road is broad and looks
easy—that is the road of usurpation and compulsory alienation, for
which calls have been made here. That road is attractive at first, it runs
downhill, but it ends i.n a precipice [for the landlords? 1, and spells
ruin to the peasantry and the entire state. The other road is narrow and
thorny, and runs uphill, but it leads to the summits of truth, right, and
lasting prosperity” (1299).  
 

As the reader sees, this is the government’s programme. This is
exactly what Stolypin is accomplishing with his famous agrarian legislation
under Article 87. Purishkevich formulated the same programme in his
agrarian theses (20th session, April 2, 1907, pp. 1532-33). The same
programme was advocated, part by part, by the Octobrists, beginning with
Svyatopolk-Mirsky on the first day of the debates on the agrarian question
(March 19), and ending with Kapustin (“the peasants need landownership
and not land tenure, as is proposed”—24th session, April 9, 1907,
p. 1805, speech by Kapustin, applauded by the Right “and part of the
Centre”).  

In the programme of the Black Hundreds and the Octobrists there is not even a
hint about defending pre-capitalist forms of farming, as, for example,
by vaunting patriarchal agriculture, and so forth. Defence of the village
commune, which until quite recently had ardent champions among the higher
bureaucracy and the landlords, has given place to bitter hostility towards
it. The Black Hundreds fully take the stand of capitalist development and
definitely depict a programme that is economically progressive, European; this
needs to be specially emphasised, because a vulgar and simplified view of the
nature of the reactionary policy of the landlords is very widespread among
us. The liberals often depict the Black Hundreds as clowns and fools, but it
must be said that this description is far more applicable to the Cadets. Our
reactionaries, however, are distinguished by their extremely pronounced
class-consciousness. They know perfectly well what they want, where they are
going, and on what forces they can count. They do not betray a shadow of
half-heartedness or irresolution (at all events in the Second Duma; in the
First there was “bewilderment”—among the Bobrinskys!). They are
clearly seen to be connected with a very definite class, which is accustomed to
command, which correctly judges the conditions necessary for preserving
its rule in a capitalist environment, and brazenly defends its
interests even if that entails the rapid extinction, degradation, and eviction
of millions of peasants. The Black-Hundred programme is reactionary not because
it seeks to perpetuate any pre capitalist relations or system (in that respect
all the parties

    

of the period of the Second Duma. already, in essence, take the stand of
recognising capitalism, of taking it for granted), but because it stands
for the Junker type of capitalist development in order to
strengthen the power arid to increase the incomes of the landlords, in
order to place the edifice of autocracy upon a new and stronger
foundation. There is no contradiction between what these gentle men say and
what they do; our reactionaries, too, are “businessmen”, as
Lassalle said of the German reactionaries in contrast to the liberals.


What is the attitude of these people towards the idea of nationalising
the land? Towards, say, the partial nationalisation with compensation demanded
by the Cadets in the First Duma, leaving, like the Mensheviks, private
ownership of small holdings and creating a state land reserve out of the rest of
the land? Did they not perceive in the nationalisation idea the possibility of
strengthening the bureaucracy, of consolidating the central bourgeois government
against the proletariat, of restoring “state feudalism” and the
“Chinese experiment”?


On the contrary, every hint at nationalisation of the land infuriates them, and
they fight it in such a way that one would think they had borrowed their
arguments from Plekhanov. Take the nobleman Vetchinin, a Right land
lord. “I think,” he said at the 39th session on May 16, 1907,
“that the question of compulsory alienation must be decided in the
negative sense from the point of view of the law. The advocates of that opinion
forget that the violation of the rights of private owners is characteristic of
states that are at a low stage of social and political development. It is
sufficient to recall the Muscovy period, when the tsar often took land away from
private owners and later granted it to his favourites and to the
monasteries. What did that attitude of the government lead to? The consequences
were frightful” (619).


Such was the use made of Plekhanov’s “restoration of Muscovy Rus”!
Nor is Vetchinin the only one to harp on this string. In the First Duma, the
landlord N. Lvov, who was elected as a Cadet and then went over to the Right,
and after the dissolution of the First Duma negotiated with Stolypin for a place
in the Ministry—that personage

    

put the question in exactly the same way. “The astonishing thing
about the Bill of the 42,” he said concerning the Bill that the
Cadets. introduced in the First Duma, “is that it bears the impress
of the same old bureaucratic despotism which seeks to put everything on an
equal level” (12th session, May 19, 1906, pp. 479-80). He, quite in
the spirit of Maslov, “stood up for” the non-Russian
nationalities: “How are we to subordinate to it [equalisation] the
whole of Russia, including Little Russia, Lithuania, Poland, and the Baltic
region?” (479.) “In St. Petersburg,” he warned,
“you will have to set up a gigantic Land Office... and maintain a
staff of officials in every corner of the country” (480).  

These outcries about bureaucracy and serfdom in connection with
nationalisation—these outcries of our municipalisers, inappropriately
copied from the German model— are the dominant note in all the
speeches of the Right. The Octobrist Shidlovsky, for example, opposing
compulsory alienation, accuses the Cadets of advocating “attachment
to the land” (12th session of the Second Duma, March 19, 1907,
p. 752). Shulgin howls about property being in violate, about compulsory
alienation being “the grave of culture and civilisation” (16th
session, March 26, 1907, p. 1133). Shulgin refers—he might have been
quoting from Plekhanov’s

Diary,[5] though he does not say so—to twelfth-century
China, to the deplorable result of the Chinese experiment in
nationalisation (p. 1137). Here is Skirmunt in the First Duma: The state
will be the owner! “A blessing, an El Dorado for the
bureaucracy” (10th session, May 16, 1906, p. 410). Here is the
Octobrist Tantsov, exclaiming in the Second Duma: “With far greater
justification, these reproaches [about serfdom] can be flung back to the
Left and to the Centre. What do these Bills hold out for the peasants in
reality if not the prospect of being tied to the land, if not the old
serfdom, only in a different form, in which the place of the landlord will
be taken by usurers and government officials” (39th session, May 16,
1907, p. 653).  

Of course, the hypocrisy of these outcries about bureaucracy is most glaring,
for the excellent idea of setting up local laud committees to be elected by
universal, direct, and equal suffrage by secret ballot was advanced by the very

    

peasants who are demanding nationalisation. But the Black-Hundred landlords
are compelled to seize on every possible argument against
nationalisation. Their class instinct tells them that nationalisation in
twentieth-century Russia is inseparably bound up with a peasant
republic. In other countries, where, owing to objective conditions, there
can not be a peasant agrarian revolution, the situation is, of course,
different—for example, in Germany, where the Kanitzes can sympathise
with plans for nationalisation, where the socialists will not even hear of
nationalisation, where the bourgeois movement for nationalisation is
limited to intellectualist sectarianism. To combat the peasant revolution
the Rights had to come before the peasants in the role of
champions of peasant ownership as against nationalisation. We have
seen one example in the case of Bobrinsky. Here is another—Vetchinin:
“This question [of nationalising the land] must, of course, be
settled in the negative sense, for it finds no sympathy even among the
peasants; they want to have land by right of ownership and not by right of
tenancy” (39th session, p. 621). Only landlords and cabinet ministers
could speak for the peasants in that manner. This fact is
so well known that I regard it as superfluous to quote the speeches of the
Gurkos, Stolypins, and other such heroes, who ardently champion private
ownership.  

The only exception among the flights is the Terek Cossack Karaulov,
whom we have already

      mentioned.[2]

Agreeing partly also with the Cadet Shingaryov, Karaulov said that the
Cossack troops are a “huge agrarian commune” (1363), that
“it is better to abolish private ownership of the land” than to
abolish the village communes, and he advocated the “extensive
municipalisation of the land, to be converted into the property of the
respective regions” (1367). At the same time he complained about the
pinpricks of the bureaucracy. “We are not the masters of our own
property,” he said (1368). With the significance of these Cossack
sympathies for municipalisation we have already dealt above.  
    

     

Notes
 

[1]
Here and elsewhere the figures indicate the pages of Stenographic
Record.  —Lenin

[2]
See p. 336 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[3]
Stepan Razin and Yemelyan Pugachov—leaders of great
peasant revolts in Russia in the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.

 



[4]
Saryn na kichku (literally, “to the prow,
lubbers!”)—a cry said to have been used by Volga freebooters
ordering the people on a board ed vessel to lie down in the bows and stay
there until the looting was over.

 



[5]
Plekhanov’s “Diary”—Dnevnik Sotsial-Demokrata
(Diary of a Social-Democrat)—a non-periodical organ
published at considerable intervals by Plekhanov in Geneva from March 1905
to April 1912.

   

In all, sixteen issues were brought out. Publication was resumed in
Petrograd in 1916, but only one issue appeared: In the first eight issues
(1905-06) Plekhanov expounded extremely Right-wing Menshevik and
opportunist views, advocated a bloc between Social-Democracy and the
liberal bourgeoisie, rejected the idea of an alliance of the proletariat
and the peasantry, and condemned the December uprising. In 1909-12
(Nos. 9-16), he opposed the Menshevik liquidators, who sought to disband
the underground Party organisations. On the basic questions of tactics,
however, he took a Menshevik stand. Plekhanov’s social-chauvinist
views were forcibly expressed in the. issue No. 1 published in 1916.

 

 
  

8. Some Examples of the Muddle Caused by Municipalisation

|

2. The Cadets

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The
    Cadets









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 2. The Cadets







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

2. The Cadets

Like all the parties, the Cadets came out in their true
colours in the Second Duma. They “found themselves” by
occupying the Centre and criticising the Rights and the Lefts from the
“state point of view”. They revealed their
counter-revolutionary nature by an obvious turn to the Right. How did they
mark that turn on the agrarian question? They marked it by finally throwing
overboard the last remnants of the idea of land nationalisation, by
completely abandoning the plan for a “state land reserve” and
by supporting the idea of making the land the peasants’
property. Yes, conditions in the Russian revolution have become
such that turning to the Right means turning to wards the private ownership
of land!  

Ex-minister Kutler, the Cadet Party’s official spokesman on the
agrarian question, at once proceeded to criticise the Left (12th session,
March 19, 1907). “Since nobody proposes to abolish property in
general,” exclaimed that worthy colleague of Witte and Durnovo,
“it is necessary with all emphasis. to recognise the existence of
landed property” (737). This argument fully coincides with that of
the Black Hundreds. The Black-Hundred spokesman, Krupensky, like the Cadet
Kutler, shouted: “If you are going to divide, divide
everything” (784).  

Like a true bureaucrat, Kutler dealt in particular detail with the
question of different norms of “allotment” to the peasants. Not
backed by any compact class, this liberal. intellectual and bureaucrat
playing at liberalism evades the question of how much
land the landlords have and how much can be taken. He prefers to
talk about “norms” in order, on the pretext of raising the question
to the state level, to obscure the issue, to conceal the fact that
the Cadets propose that landlord economy be retained. “Even
the government,” said Mr. Kutler, “has taken the path of
extending peasant land tenure” (734), so there is nothing infeasible
about the Cadets’ proposal, which is of the same bureaucratic type! By
insisting on what is practical and feasible, this Cadet, of course, throws
a veil over the fact that his criterion is whether it is possible to secure
the landlords’ consent, in other words, to adapt his plan

    

to their interests, to pander to the Black Hundreds under the
guise of a lofty striving for the conciliation of classes. “I think,
gentlemen,” said Kutler, “that it is possible to envisage the
political conditions under which a Bill for the nationalisation of the land
could acquire the force of law, but I cannot envisage in the immediate
future the political conditions under which that law could really be put
into effect” (733). To put it bluntly, it is. possible to envisage
the overthrow of the rule of the Black-Hundred landlords, but I cannot
envisage that and, therefore, I adapt myself to this rule.  

Urging that peasant ownership of land is preferable to the Trudoviks’
plan in general, and to “equalised tenure” in particular,
Mr. Kutler argued as follows: “If for this purpose [equalising
holdings] special officials are appoint ed, it will mean the introduction
of an incredible despotism, an interference in the lives of the people such
as we have never known before. Of course, it is proposed to place this
matter in the hands of local self-governing bodies, in the hands of persons
elected by the people themselves; but can it be taken that the people will
be fully guaranteed against the tyranny of these persons, that these
persons will always act in the interests of the people, and that the latter
will suffer no hardship? I think that the peasants who are present here
know that very often their own elected representatives, their volost and
village elders, oppress the people as much as the government officials
do” (740). Can one conceive of hypocrisy more revolting than that?
The Cadets themselves propose the setting up of land committees on which
the landlords will predominate (equal representation for landlords and
peasants, the chairman to be a government official or a landlord), but the
peasants are warned of the danger of despotism and tyranny on the part of
those whom they themselves elect! Only shameless political charlatans can
argue like this against equalised holdings, for they have neither
the principles of socialism (adhered to by the Social-Democrats, who
maintain that equalisation is impossible, but wholly support the election
of local committees), nor the principles of the landlords who maintain that
private property is the only salvation (adhered to by the Bobrinskys).

 

Unlike either the Right or the Left, the plan of the Cadets is
characterised not by what they say, but what they keep quiet about, viz.,
their proposal for the composition of the land committees, which are to
compel the peasants to accept a “second emancipation”,
i.e:, to take poor plots at an exorbitant price. To obscure the
crux of the matter, the Cadets in the Second Duma (as in the
First) resort to downright chicanery. Take Mr. Shingaryov. He poses as a
progressive, repeats the current liberal catchwords against the flight and,
as is the fashion, bewails violence and anarchy, for which France
“paid with a century of severe upheavals” (1355). But see how
he dodges the question of the land-surveying committees: 

“On the question of the land-surveying committees,” he says,
“we were opposed by Deputy

      Yevreinov.[1]

I do not know [sic!!] what his objections are based on; up to now
we have not said anything about this [a lie!]; I do not know what
Bill he is speaking about, or why he talks about not trusting the
people. No such Bill has yet been introduced in the State Duma; evidently,
his objections are based on a misunderstanding. I wholly associate myself
with those deputies on the Left, Uspensky and Volk-Karachevsky, who spoke
of provisional rules, of the necessity of setting up local bodies to carry
out land surveying on the spot. I think such bodies will be set up, and
probably, within the next

    

few days, the Party of People’s Freedom will introduce a Bill to that
effect and we shall discuss it” (1356).


Now, is that not fraud? Are we really to believe that this person knew nothing
about the debates in the First Duma on the question of local committees, or
about the article in Rech at that time? Could he really have failed to
understand Yevreinov’s perfectly plain statement?


But he promised to introduce a Bill “within the next few
days”, you will say. In the first place, a promise to restore what
has been obtained by fraudulent means does not cancel the fact of
fraud. Secondly, what happened “within the next few days”, was
this. Mr. Shingaryov spoke on March 29, 1907. On April 9, 1907, the Cadet
Tatarinov spoke and said: “I will now, gentlemen, deal with one more
question which, I think [he only “thinks”!], is creating considerable
controversy, namely, the question that has been raised by all the parties
on our Left: the question of local land committees. All these parties urge
the necessity of setting up local land committees on the basis of
universal, equal, and direct suffrage by secret ballot with the object of
settling the land question in the localities. We quite categorically
expressed our opposition to such committees last year, and we categorically
express it now” (1783).  

Thus, on the extremely important question of the
actual terms of the Cadet proposal for “compulsory
alienation”, two Cadets say different things, swing from one side to
another under the blows of the Left parties which bring to light what the
Cadets wanted to keep secret! First, Mr. Shingaryov says: “I do not
know”; then: “I agree with the Left”; and then: “a
Bill within the next few days”. Mr. Tatarinov says: ”Now, as
before, we are categorically opposed”. And he adds arguments to the
effect that the Duma must not be split up into a thousand Dumas, that the
settlement of the agrarian question must not be postponed until political
reforms are carried out, until universal, etc., suffrage is introduced. But
that is just another evasion. The point at issue is not the moment when a
particular measure is to be carried out: the Left members of the Second
Duma could have no doubts whatever on that score. The point is: what are
the Cadets’ real plans? Who is to compel whom in their scheme for
“compulsory alienation”? Are the landlords to

    

compel the peasants, or are the peasants to compel the landlords? This
question can be answered only by the composition of the land
committees. The Cadets’ view of what this composition should be was set
forth in Milyukov’s leading article in Rech, in
Kutler’s Bill, and in Chuprov’s article

    (quoted above)[2]

;

but in the Duma, the Cadets kept silent about it, they did not
answer the question bluntly put by Yevreinov.  

It cannot be too strongly emphasised that this conduct of the
party’s representatives in parliament is nothing more than
deception of the people by the liberals. Scarcely anybody is
deceived by the Bobrinskys and Stolypins; but very many of those who do not
want to analyse, or who are incapable of understanding, the real meaning of
political slogans and phrases are deceived by the Cadets.  

Thus, the Cadets are opposed to any form of socialised land tenure in any

form,[3]

they are opposed to alienation without compensation, opposed to local land
committees in which the peasants will predominate, opposed to revolution in
general and to a peasant agrarian revolution in particular. Light is thrown
on their manoeuvring between the Left and Right (to betray the peasants to
the landlords) by their attitude towards the Peasant “Reform”
of 1861. The Left, as we shall see later on, speak of it with disgust and
indignation as of a noose put round the peasants’ necks by the
landlords. The Cadets are at one with the Bight in their affection for this
reform.  
 

Count Bobrinsky said: “Dirt has been thrown here at the cleanest
and brightest page in Russian history.... The emancipation of the peasants
is a matter beyond all reproach... the great and glorious day, February 19,
1861” (March 29, pp. 1289, 1299).  

Kutler said: “the great Reform of 1861... the government, in the
person of the Chairman of the Council of Ministers, is renouncing Russian
history, renouncing its best and brightest pages” (May 26,
pp. 1198-99).  

This appraisal of compulsory alienation as it was actually carried out throws
more light on the Cadet agrarian programme than all their Bills and speeches,
the object of which was to conceal their thoughts. If people regard the
dispossession of the peasants of their land by the landlords, triple redemption
payments for poor plots, and the implementation of the

charters[4] by brute military force as the brightest page, then it
becomes obvious that what they are after is a “second
emancipation”, a second enthralment of the peasants by means of
redemption payments. Bobrinsky and Kutler are at one-in their estimation of
the Reform of 1861. But Bobrinsky’s estimation directly and truly
expresses the rightly understood interests of the landlords— and
therefore it clarifies the class-consciousness of the broad masses. Praise
from the Bobrinskys means that the land lords got the best of
it. Kutler’s estimation, expressing the poverty of intellect of a
petty official who all his life has cringed to the landlords, is sheer
hypocrisy and befogs the consciousness of the masses.  
In this connection, one more aspect of the Cadets’ policy on the
agrarian question must be noted. All the Left deputies openly side with the
peasants as a fighting force, explain the need for a struggle, and show
the landlord character of the government. The Cadets, together with the
Right deputies, take the “state point of view” and repudiate
the class struggle.  

Kutler declares that there is no need “radically to reconstruct
agrarian relations” (732). Savelyev warns against “touching a
mass of interests” and says: “The principle of completely
rejecting ownership would scarcely be expedient, and its application may
give rise to very big and grave complications, particularly if we bear in
mind that

    

the big owners with over 50 dessiatins have very much land, namely,
79,440,000 dessiatins” (March 26, 1907, p. 1088—the peasant
points to the latifundia to prove the necessity of doing away with them;
the liberal does so to prove that it is necessary to cringe). Shingaryov
thinks it would be “an immense disaster” if the people
themselves took the land (1355). Rodichev warbles: “We do not foment
class enmity. We would like to forget the past” (632, May 16,
1907). Kapustin follows suit: “Our task is to sow everywhere peace
and justice and not to sow and foment class enmity” (1810, April
9). Krupensky is indignant at the speech of the Socialist-Revolutionary
Zimin because it was “full of hatred towards the propertied
classes” (783, March 19). In short, in condemning the class struggle,
the Cadets and the Rights are at one. But the Rights know what they are
doing. The preaching of class struggle cannot hut be harmful and dangerous
to the class against which the struggle is directed. The Rights are
faithfully guarding the interests of the feudal landlords. And what of the
Cadets? They are waging a struggle—they say they are waging
a struggle!—they want to “compel” the landlords who are
in power, and yet they condemn the class struggle! Did the bourgeoisie that
really fought instead of acting as lackeys of the landlords behave in that
way, for instance in France? Did not that bourgeoisie call upon the people
to fight; did it not foment class enmity?  Did it not create a theory of
the class struggle?  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Yevreinov, a Socialist-Revolutionary, had said at the same session
(18th session, March 29, 1907): “These [land] committees, according to the
assumption of the Party of People’s Freedom, are to consist of equal
numbers of landowners and peasants, with government officials acting as
conciliators, which, of course, will undoubtedly give preponderance to the
non-peasants. Why does the party which calls itself the party of the
‘people’s freedom’ distrust committees elected not in a
bureaucratic, but in a democratic way? Probably be cause, if the committees
are elected in that way, the vast majority of those elected will be
peasants, i. e., representatives of the peasants’ interests. That
being the case, I ask, does the Party of People’s Freedom trust the
peasants? It will be remembered that in 1858, in connection with the
agrarian reform, the government bad this matter transferred to local
bodies, to committees. True, those committees consist ed of members of the
nobility, but the government is not a party of the people’s freedom,
it is a government that represents the rich and the propertied classes
generally. It relies on the nobility and trusts them. The Party of
People’s Freedom, however, wants to rely on the people, but does not
trust the people” (1326).  —Lenin

[2]
See p. 245 of this volume.— Ed. 

[3]
Particularly noteworthy in this respect was the debate in the First
Duma on the question of sending the Land Bill of the 33 (for the abolition
of the private ownership of land) to committee. The Cadets (Petrunkevich,
Mukhanov, Shakhovskoi, Frenkel, Ovchinnikov, Dolgorukov, and Kokoshkin)
fiercely opposed the sending of such a Bill to committee, and in
this they were fully supported by Heyden. Their reasons were a disgrace to
any self-respecting liberal— they were simply police excuses used by
lackeys of the reactionary government. To refer the Bill to committee, said
Mr. Petrunkevich, means recognising that, to a certain degree, the
standpoint of such a Bill is “possible”. Mr. Zhilkin put the Cadets to
shame (23rd session, June 8, 1906) by saying that he would send to
committee both this Bill and the Bill of the extreme Right. But the Cadets
and the Right defeated the motion to send the Bill to committee by 140
votes to 78!  —Lenin
 



[4]
Charters—deeds defining the landowning relations of the
temporarily-bound peasants and landlords upon the abolition of serfdom in
1861. These charters indicated the amount of land the peasant used before
the Reform, and defined the size of the allotment remaining in his hands
after the Reform. It also listed the duties the peasant had to perform for
the landlord. The charter served as a basis for determining the amount of
the peasant’s redemption payment.

 

 
  

1. The Rights and the Octobrists

|

3. The Right Peasants

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Right
    Peasants









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 3. The Right Peasants







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

3. The Right Peasants

Actual Right peasants are to be found in the Second Duma
only by way of exception—Remenchik (Minsk Gubernia) is one, perhaps
the only one, who will-not hear of any village communes or “land
funds” and stoutly defends private ownership (in the First Duma there
were many Polish and West-Russian peasants who stood for ownership). But
even Remenchik is in favour of alienation “at a fair price”
(648), i. e., he in effect turns out to be a Cadet. We place the other
“Right peasants” in the Second Duma in a special group because
they are undoubtedly more Left than the Cadets. Take Petrochenko (Vitebsk
Gubernia). He begins by saying that he “will defend tsar and country
unto death”

    

(1614). The Rights applaud. But then he passes on to the question of
“land hunger”. “You can hold all, the debates you
like,” he says, “but you will never Create another
world. Therefore you will have to give us this, land. One speaker said here
that our peasants are backward and ignorant and, therefore, it is useless
giving them a lot of land, because it won’t be any good to them all
the same. To he sure, the land has not been of much good to us up to now,
that is to those who have not had any. As for our being ignorant, well, all
we are asking for is some land in order, in our stupidity, to grub about
in. Personally, I don’t think it’s dignified for a nobleman to busy
himself with the laud. It has been said here that private landed property
must not be touched because it is against the law. Of course, I agree that
the law must he upheld, but to do away with land hunger a law must be
passed to make all that lawful. And so that nobody should have any
grievance, Deputy Kutler proposed that good terms be offered. Of course,
being a wealthy man, he has named a high figure, and we, poor peasants,
cannot pay such a price. As for how we should live—in communes, on
separate holdings, or on khutors—I, for my part, think that
everybody should be allowed to live as he finds convenient” (1616).


There is a wide gulf between this Right peasant and the Russian
liberal. The former vows devotion to the old regime, but actually he is out
to get land, he is fighting the landlords and will not agree to pay the
amount of compensation the Cadets propose. The latter says that he is
fighting for the people’s freedom, but actually he is engineering a
second enthralment of the peasants by the land lords and the old
regime. The latter can move only to the Right, from the First Duma to the
Second, from the Second to the Third. The former, finding that there is no
hope of the landlords “giving up” the land, will move the
other way. The “Right” peasant will, perhaps, be found going
our way more than the “liberal”, “democratic”
Cadet....  

Take the peasant Shimansky (Minsk Gubernia). “I have come here to
defend our faith, tsar, and country, and to demand land ... not by robbery,
of course, but in a peaceful way, at a fair value.... Therefore, in the
name of all the peasants I call upon the landlord members of the Duma to

    

come on to this rostrum and say that they are Willing to cede land to the
peasants at a fair valuation, and then our peasants will, of course, say
thank you, and I think our Father the Tsar, will also say thank you. As for
those land lords who refuse to do this, I propose that the Duma impose a
progressive tax on their land, and undoubtedly they too will yield in time,
because they will learn that they have bitten off more than they can
chew” (1617).  

By compulsory alienation and fair valuation this Right peasant means
something entirely different from what the Cadets have in mind. The Cadets
are deceiving not only the Left peasants but also the Right. What
the Right peasants’ attitude towards the Cadet plans for setting up the
land committees (according to Kutler, or according to Chuprov: see The
Agrarian Question, Vol. II) would have been, had they studied them, is
evident from the following proposal made by the peasant Melnik (Octobrist,
Minsk Gubernia). “I consider it a duty,” he said, “that
60 per cent of the members of the committee [agrarian] should be peas ants
who have practical acquaintance with want [!] and are familiar with the
conditions of the peasant class, and not peasants who, perhaps, are
peasants only in name. This is a question of the peasants’ welfare and of
the poor people generally, and has no political significance
whatever. People must be chosen who can settle the question practically and
not politically for the good of the people” (1285). These Right
peasants will go a long way to the Left when the counter-revolution reveals
to them the political significance of “the questions that concern the
welfare of the poor people”!  

To show how infinitely wide apart are the representatives of the
monarchist peasantry and the representatives of the monarchist bourgeoisie,
I shall quote passages from the speech delivered by the
“Progressist” Rev. Tikhvinsky, who sometimes spoke in the name
of the Peasant Union and Trudovik Group. “Our peasants, in the mass,
love the tsar,” be said. “How I wish I had the cap of
invisibility and could fly on a magic carpet to the foot of the throne and
say:

Sire, your chief enemy, the chief enemy of the people, is the irresponsible
ministry.... All that the toiling peasantry demands is the strict
application of the principle; ‘All

    

the land to all the people.’... [on the question of redemption
payments:]... Have no fear, gentlemen of the Right, you can rely on our
people not to treat you unfairly.” (Voices from the Right:
“Thank you! Thank you!”) “I now address myself to the spokesman
from the Party of People’s Freedom. He says that the programme of the
Party of People’s Freedom is close to that of the peasantry and of the
Trudovik Group. No, gentlemen, it is remote from that programme. We heard
the speaker say: ‘Our Bill may be less just, but it is more
practical’. Gentlemen, justice is sacrificed to practical
expediency!” (789.)  

In political outlook, This deputy is oil the level of a Cadet. But what
a difference there is between his rural simplicity and the “business
men” of the bar, the bureaucracy, and liberal journalism!  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

2. The Cadets

|

4. The Non-Party Peasants

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Non-Party
    Peasants









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 4. The Non-Party Peasants







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

4. The Non-Party Peasants

The non-party peasants are of special interest as the spokesmen of the least
politically conscious and least organised rural masses. We shall, therefore,
quote, passages from the speeches of all the non-party

      peasants,[1]

especially as there are not many of them: Sakhno, Semyonov, Moroz, and
Afanasyev.  


   “Gentlemen, people’s representatives,” said Sakhno
   (Kiev Gubernia), “it is difficult for peasants’ deputies to get up on
   this rostrum and oppose tile rich landed gentry. At the present time the
   peas ants are living very poorly because they have no land.... The peasant
   has a lot to put up with at the hands of the landlord; he suffers be cause
   the landlord sorely oppresses him.... Why can a landlord own a lot of land,
   while the peasant has only the kingdom of heaven?... And so, gentlemen,
   when the peasants sent me here they instructed me to champion their needs,
   to demand land and freedom for them, to demand that all state, crown,
   private, and monastery lands be compulsorily alienated without
   compensation.... I want you to know, gentlemen, people’s
   representatives, that a hungry man cannot keep quiet when he sees that, in
   spite of his suffering, the government is

    

   on the side of the landed gentry. He cannot help demanding land, even if it
   is against the law; want compels him to demand it. A hungry man is capable
   of anything, for want makes him reckless, being hungry and poor”
   (1482-86).  


Just as artless, and just as powerful in its simplicity was the speech of the
non-party peasant Semyonov (Podolsk Gubernia, peasant deputy):



   ...“Bitter is the lot of those peasants who have been suffering
   for ages without land. For two hundred years they have been waiting or
   fortune to drop from the skies, but it has not come. Fortune is in the
   pockets of the big landed gentry who obtained this land together with our
   grandfathers and fathers; but the earth is the Lord’s, not the
   landlords’.... I know perfectly well that the land belongs to the whole of
   the working people who till the land.... Deputy Purishkevich says:

   ‘Revolution! Help!’ What does that mean? Yes, if the land is taken from
   them by compulsory alienation, they will be the revolution, but not we, we
   shall all be fighters, the kindest of people.... Have we got 150 dessiatins
   like the priest? And what about the monasteries and the churches?  What do
   they want it for? No, gentlemen, it is time to stop collecting treasure and
   keeping it in your pockets; it is time to live reasonably. The country will
   under stand, gentlemen, I understand perfectly, we are honest citizens, we
   do not engage in politics, as one of the preceding speakers said.... They
   [the landlords] only go about and grow fat on our sweat and blood. We shall
   not forget them, we shall do them no harm, we shall even give them land. If
   you figure it out, we shall get 16 dessiatins per household, but the big
   landed gentry will still have 50 dessiatins each.... Thousands, millions of
   people are suffering, but the gentry are feasting.... When it comes to
   military service we know what happens: if a man falls sick they say:

   ‘He has land at home’. But where is his home? He has no home! He has a home
   only in the roster which says where he was born, where he is registered,
   what his religion is— but he has no land. Now I say: the people asked
   me to demand that the church, monastery, state, and crown lands, and the
   land compulsorily alienated from the landlords, should be handed over to
   the working people who will till the land; and it should be handed over
   locally: they will know what to do. I tell you that the people sent me here
   to demand land and freedom and all civil liberties; and we shall live, arid
   we shall not point and say, these are gentry and those are peasants; we
   shall all be human, and each will be a gentleman in his place”
   (1930-34).  


When one reads this speech of a peasant who “does not engage in
politics” it becomes palpably clear that the implementation not only
of Stolypin’s but also of the Cadets’ agrarian programme requires
decades of systematic violence against the peasant masses, of systematic
flogging, extermination

    

by torture, imprisonment, and exile of all peasants who think and try to
act freely. Stolypin is aware of this and is acting accordingly. The
Cadets, with the obtuseness characteristic of liberal bureaucrats and
professors, are either unaware of it or else hypocritically conceal it,
“shame facedly remain silent” about it, just as they do about
the punitive expeditions of 1861 and of subsequent years. If this
systematic and unchecked violence is shattered by some internal or external
obstacle, the honest non-party peasant who “does not engage in
politics” will convert Russia into a peasant republic.  

The peasant Moroz, in a short speech, simply said: “The land must
be taken away from the clergy and the landlords” (1955), and then
quoted the Gospel (this is not the first time in history that bourgeois
revolutionaries have taken their slogans from the Gospel).... “Unless
you bring the priest some bread and a half bottle of vodka he won’t
baptise a child for you.... And yet they talk about Holy Gospel and read:

‘Ask and it shall be given you; knock and it will be opened unto you.’ We
ask and ask, but it is not given us; and we knock, but still it is not
given us. Must we break down the door and take it? Gentlemen, don’t
wait until the door is broken down; give voluntarily, and then there will
be freedom, liberty, and it will be good for you and for us” (1955).


Take the non-party peasant Afanasyev, who appraises Cossack
“municipalisation” not from the Cossack point of view, but from
that of “almost a newcomer”. “In the first place,
gentlemen, I must say that I represent the peasants of the Don region,
numbering over a million, and yet I was the only one elected. That alone
shows that we are almost newcomers there... I am infinitely surprised: does
St. Petersburg feed the countryside? No, on the contrary, in the past I
worked in St. Petersburg for twenty odd years, and I noticed even then that
it was not St. Petersburg that fed the countryside, but the countryside
that fed St. Peters burg. And I notice the same thing now. All this
beautiful architecture, all these edifices and buildings, all these fine
houses, they are all built by peasants, as they were twenty-five years
ago.... Purishkevich gave the example of a Cossack who has over twenty
dessiatins of land, and he

    

is also starving.... Why didn’t he tell us where that land is? There
is land, there is land in Russia, too, but who owns it? If he knew there is
so much land there, but did not say where, it shows that he is an unjust
man; but if he didn’t know, he should not have started talking about
it. And if he really didn’t know, then permit me, gentlemen, to tell
him where that land is, how much there is of it, and who owns it. If you
reckon it up you will find that in the Don Cossack Region there are 753,546
dessiatins used as private stud-farms. I will also mention the Kalmyk
stud-farms, what are called nomad camps; they take up in all 165,708
dessiatins. Then there are 1,055,919 dessiatins temporarily leased by rich
people. All that land belongs not to the people Purishkevich mentioned, but
to kulaks, to the rich, who oppress us; when they get cattle—they
skin us of half, we have to pay a ruble per dessiatin, another ruble for
the animal we plough with, but we have to feed our children, and the
Cossack wives and children as well. That is why we are starving.” He
went on to say that leaseholders get 2,700 dessiatins each for supplying
eight horses “for the cavalry”; the peasants could supply
more. “I will tell you that I wanted to convince the government that
it was making a great mistake in not doing this. I wrote a letter to
Selsky Vestnik and asked them to publish it, but they answered
that it was not our business to teach the government.” Thus, on
“municipalised” land transferred to the ownership of a region,
the “central undemocratic government” is de facto
creating new landlords: municipalisation is, as Plekhanov revealed, a
guarantee against restoration....  


   “The government opened the doors wide for us to acquire land
   through the Peasant Bank—that is the yoke that was put on us in
   1861. It wants to make us settle in Siberia ... but would it not be better
   to send there the man who owns thousands of dessiatins? Look how many
   people could live off the land he would leave behind!” (Applause
   on the Left; voices from the Right: “That’s
   stale, that’s stale.”) ... “During the Japanese war I led
   my recruits through those [landlords’] lands that I have mentioned here. It
   took us over forty-eight hours to get to the assembly place. The men asked
   me:

   ‘Where are you taking us?’ I answered:

   ‘Against Japan.’

   ‘What for?’

   ‘To defend our country.’ Being a soldier myself, I felt it was our duty to
   defend our country, but the men said:

   ‘This is not our country— the land belongs to the Lisetskys,
   Bezulovs, and Podkopailovs. There is nothing here that is ours!’  They said
   things to me that I have been

    

   unable to wipe out from my heart for more than two years.... Consequently,
   gentlemen ... to sum up, I must say that as regards all those rights that
   exist in our Russia, from the princes to the nobles, Cossacks, burghers,
   not mentioning the word peasant, all must be Russian citizens and have the
   use of land, all those who till the land, who put their labour into it, who
   cherish and love it. Work, sweat, and benefit from it. But if you do not
   want to live on the land, if you do not want to till it, if you do not want
   to put your labour into it, you have no right to benefit from it”
   (1974) (26th session, 12.IV.1907).  


“Not mentioning the word peasant!” That splendid utterance
“from the depths of the heart” burst from a peasant who wants
to do away with the social estate character of landownership (“all
those rights that exist in our Russia”), who wants to abolish the
very name of the lowest estate, the peasantry. “Let all be
citizens.” Equal right to land for the toilers is nothing else than
the farmer’s point of view applied with the utmost
consistency to the land. There must be no other basis for the
ownership of land (like that “for service” among the Cossacks,
etc.), no other reasons, no other relations, except the right of the
farmer to the land, except the reason that he
“cherishes” it, except the relation that he “puts his
labour” into it. That must he the point of view of the farmer who
stands for free farming on free land, for the removal of everything that is
extraneous, obstructive, and obsolete, the removal of all the old forms
of landownership. Would it not be the stupid application of a
thoughtless doctrine if Marxists were to dissuade such a farmer from
nationalisation and teach him the benefits of private ownership of
allotment land?  

In the First Duma, the peasant Merkulov (Kursk Gubernia) expressed the
same idea about the nationalisation of peasant allotment land as that which
we quoted above from the reports of the congresses of the Peasant
Union. “They try to scare us;” said Merkulov, “by saying
that the peasants themselves will refuse to part with the patch of land
they now possess. To that I say: Who is going to take it from them? Even
with complete nationalisation, only that part of the land will be taken
which the owner does not cultivate by himself, but with hired labour”
(18th session, May 30, 1906, p. 822).  

That was said by a peasant who, as he himself admitted, owns 60 dessiatins of
land. Of course, the idea of abolishing

    

or of prohibiting wage-labour in capitalist society is childish, but we
must scotch wrong ideas at the point where they begin to go wrong, namely,
beginning with “socialisation” and the prohibition of

     wage-labour,[2]

and not with nationalisation.


This same peasant Merkulov opposed the Cadet Bill of the 42, which
coincides With municipalisation in that allotment land is to remain private
property and landlords’ land is to be given out in tenure. This is “a
kind of transitional stage from one system to the
other”... “instead of one we have two forms of ownership:
private ownership and renting, i.e., two forms of landownership that not
only do not hang together, but are the very opposite of each other”
(823).  
 

Notes
 

[1]
In determining the group or party to which the deputies in the Second
Duma belong we have consulted the official publication of the State Duma:
list of deputies according to parties and groups. Some deputies passed from
one party to another, but it is impossible to keep track of these changes
from newspaper reports. Moreover, to consult different sources on this
matter would only cause confusion, —Lenin

[2]
There is no need for us to “scotch” this wrong idea, for the
“sober minded” Trudoviks, headed by the “sober-minded” Peshekhonovs,
have already scotched it.  —Lenin
 

 
  

3. The Right Peasants

|

5. The Narodnik Intellectuals

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Narodnik
    Intellectuals









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 5. The Narodnik Intellectuals







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

5. The Narodnik Intellectuals

In the speeches of the Narodnik intellectuals, particularly those of the
Popular Socialists, i.e., the Narodnik opportunists, two currents must be noted:
on the one hand, sincere defence of the interests of the peasant masses—in
that respect their speeches, for understandable reasons, are much less
impressive than those of the peasants who “do not engage in
politics”; on the other hand, a certain Cadet savour, a touch of
intellectualist philistinism, an attempt to adopt the state point of view. It
goes without saying that, in contrast to the peasants, their commitment
to a doctrine is evident: they are fighting not on account of directly
felt needs and hardships, but to vindicate a certain theory, a system of views
which distorts the real issue of the struggle.


“Land for the toilers,” proclaims Mr. Karavayev in his first
speech, and he characterises Stolypin’s agrarian legislation under
Article 87 as “the destruction of the village commune”, as
pursuing a “political aim”, namely, “the formation of a special
class of rural bourgeois”.  


   “We know that these peasants are really the major props of
   reaction, a reliable prop of the bureaucracy; but in counting on this, the
   government has made a grave mistake: besides this there will be

    

   the peasant proletariat. I do not know which is better, a peasant
   proletariat, or the present land-hungry peasantry which, if certain
   measures were taken, could obtain a sufficient amount of land” (722).
   


This smacks of the reactionary Narodism of Mr. V. V.:

“Better” for whom? For the state? For the landlord state, or for
the bourgeois state? And why is the proletariat not “better”? Because
the land-hungry peasantry “could obtain”, i.e., could more
easily be appeased, more easily brought into the camp of order, than the
proletariat?  That is what it amounts to, according to
Mr. Karavayev: it is as if he were offering Stolypin and Co. a more
reliable “guarantee” against a social revolution!


If Mr. Karavayev were right in essentials, the Marxists could not
support the confiscation of the landlords’ land in Russia. But
Mr. Karavayev is wrong, because the Stolypin “way”, by slowing
down the development of capitalism— in comparison with the peasant
revolution—is creating more paupers than proletarians. Karavayev
himself said, and rightly, that the Stolypin policy was enriching (not the
new, bourgeois elements, not the capitalist farmers, but) the
present landlords, half of whose economies were run on feudal
lines. In 1895, the price of land sold through the “Peasant”
Bank was 51 rubles per dessiatin; but in 1906, the price was 126
rubles. (Karavayev at the 47th session, May 26, 1907, p. 1189.) And
Mr. Karavayev’s party colleagues, Volk-Karachevsky and Delarov,
brought out even more vividly the significance of those figures. Delarov
showed that “up to 1905, during the twenty odd years of its
existence, the Peasant Bank bought up only 7,500,000 dessiatins”; but
between November 3, 1905 and April 1, 1907, it bought up 3,800,000
dessiatins. The price of land was 80 rubles per dessiatin in 1900, 108
rubles in 1902, rising to 109 rubles in 1903, before the agrarian movement,
and before the Russian revolution. Now it is 126 rubles. “While the
whole of Russia was suffering heavy loss as a consequence of the Russian
revolution, the Russian big landowners were amassing
fortunes. During that period they pocketed over 60,000,000 rubles of
the people’s money” (1220—counting 109 rubles as a
“fair” price). But Mr. Yolk Karachevsky reckons far more
correctly in refusing to regard any price as “fair”, simply
noting that after November

    

3, 1905, the government paid out to the landlords 52,000,000 rubles on
account of land purchased by peasants, and 242,000,000 rubles on its own
account; in all, “295,000,000 rubles of the people’s money
were paid to the landed nobility” (1080. All italics
ours). This, of course, is only a fraction of what Junker-bourgeois
agrarian evolution is costing Russia; such is the tribute imposed
on the growing productive forces for the benefit of the feudal landlords
and the bureaucracy!  The Cadets too want to preserve this tribute to the
landlords for the liberation of Russia’s development (redemption
payments). The bourgeois farmers’ republic, on the other hand, would be
compelled to use those sums for developing the productive forces of
agriculture under the new

       system.[1]


Lastly, we must certainly place to the credit of the Narodnik
intellectuals the fact that, unlike the Bobrinskys and Kutlers, they are
aware of the fraud that was perpetrated on the people in 1861 and call that
notorious reform not the great reform, but one “carried out in the
interests of the landlords” (Karavayev, 1193). Reality, justly
observed Mr. Karavayev concerning the post-Reform period, “has
exceeded the gloomiest forecasts” of those who championed the
interests of the peasantry in 1861.  

On the question of peasant ownership of the land,
Mr. Karavayev openly challenged the government’s concern for it by
putting the question to the peasants: “Gentlemen, peasant deputies,
you are the representatives of the people. Your life is the peasants’ life,
your mind is their mind. When you were leaving, did your constituents
complain that they

    

were uncertain about the ownership of land? Did they make it your first
duty in the Duma, your first demand:

‘Mind you ensure private ownership of the land, otherwise you will not be
carrying out our mandate’? No. You will say that you were not given such a
mandate” (1185).  

Far from repudiating that statement, the peasant deputies confirmed it
by the entire content of their speeches. And that, of course, was not
because the Russian peasant is devoted to the “village
commune”, is an “opponent of private ownership”, but
because economic conditions now dictate to him the task of
abolishing all the old forms of landownership in. order to create a new
system of economy.  

To the debit side of the account of the Narodnik intellectuals we must
place their loudly voiced arguments about “norms” of peasant
landownership. “I. think everybody will agree that in order to settle
the agrarian question. properly,” declared Mr. Karavayev, “the
following data are needed: first,. the amount of land necessary for
subsistence, the subsistence norm; and the amount necessary to absorb all
the labour of the household, the labour norm. We must know exactly how much
land the peasants possess; that will enable us to calculate how much they
are short of. Then we must know how, much land can be given” (1.186).


We emphatically disagree with that opinion. And we assert on the
basis of the statements made by the peasants in the Duma that it
contains an element of intellectualist bureaucracy that is alien to the
peasants. The peasants do not talk about “norms”. Norms
are a bureaucratic invention, a hang-over of the feudal Reform of 1861 of
accursed memory. Guided by their true class instinct, the peasants place
the weight of emphasis on the abolition of landlordism and not on
“norms”. It is not a question of how much land is
“needed”. “You will not create another world”, as
the above-mentioned non-party peasant so aptly expressed it. It is a
question of doing away with the oppressive feudal latifundia,
which ought to be done away with even if the “norms” are
reached without it. The Narodnik intellectual slips into this position: if
the “norm” is reached, then, perhaps, there will be no need to
touch the landlords. The peasants’ line of reasoning is different:
“peasants, throw them off your backs” (meaning the
landlords), said the peasant Pyanykb

    

(S.R) in the Second Duma (16th session, March 26, 1907, p. 1101). The
landlords must be thrown off not because there are not enough
“norms” to go round, but because the farmer does not want to
be burdened with donkeys and leeches. There is a “big
difference” between these two arguments.  

The peasant does not talk about norms, but with remark able practical
intuition he “takes the bull by the horns The question is:
Who is to fix the norms? This was excellently put by the clergyman
Poyarkov in the First Duma. “It is proposed to fix a norm of land per
head,” he said. “Who is to fix this norm? If it is to
be fixed by the peasants themselves, then, of course, they will not
neglect their own interests; but if the landlords as well as the peasants
are to do so, then it is a question as to who will gain the upper hand in
working out the norm” (12th session, May 49, 1906, p. 488).  

That exactly hits the mark in regard to all the talk about norms.


In the case of the Cadets it is not mere talk, but down right
betrayal of the peasants to the landlords. And that kindly village
priest Mr. Poyarkov, who has evidently seen liberal landlords in action in
his part of the countryside, instinctively perceived where the falsity lay.


“Another thing people are afraid of,” said th.e same
Poyarkov, “is that there will be a multitude of officials. The peasants
will distribute the land themselves!” (488-89.) That is the crux of
the matter. “Norms” do, indeed, smack of officialdom. It is
different when the peasant speaks:

We shall distribute the land on the spot. Hence the idea of setting up
local land committees, which expresses the true interests of the peasantry
in the revolution and naturally rouses the hatred of the liberal

     scoundrels.[2]

Under such a plan of nationalisation all that is left to
the state is to

    

determine what lands can serve for colonisation or may require
special intervention (“forests and waters of national
importance”, as our present programme puts it), i.e.. all that is
left is what even the “municipalisers” deem necessary
to put in the hands of the “democratic state” (they should
have said: republic).  

Comparing the talk about norms with the economic facts, we see at once that the
peasants are men of deeds, whereas the Narodnik. intellectuals are men of
words. The “labour” norm would be of real importance if
attempts were made to prohibit hired labour. The majority of the peasants have
turned down these attempts, and the Popular Socialists have admitted that they
are impracticable. That being the case, the question of “norms” does not
arise, and there remains division among a given number of farmers. The
“subsistence” norm is a poverty norm, and in capitalist
society the peasants will always flee from such a “norm” to the
towns (we shall deal with this separately later on). Here too, then, it is not
at all a matter of a “norm” (which, moreover, changes with every
change in the crop and technical methods), but a matter of dividing the land
among a given number of farmers, of “sorting out” the real farmers
who are capable of “cherishing” the land (with both labour and
capital) from the inefficient farmers who must not be retained in
agriculture—and, to attempt to retain them in it would be reactionary.


As a curiosity, showing what the Narodnik theories lead to, we shall
quote Mr. Karavayev’s reference to Denmark. Europe, you see,
“was handicapped by private ownership”, whereas our village communes
“help to solve the problem of co-operation”. “In this respect,
Denmark provides a splendid example.” It is indeed a splendid example
that tells against the Narodniks. In Denmark we see the most typical
bourgeois peasantry, which concentrates both dairy cattle (see The
Agrarian Question and the “Critics of Marx”,

      Chapter X[3]

)

and the land. Of the total number of crop farms in Denmark, 68.3 per cent
occupy up to 1 hartkorn, i.e., up to about 9 dessiatins each. They account
for 11.1 per cent of all the land. At the other pole are 12.6 per cent

    

of the farms with 4 hartkorns and over (36 dessiatins and over)
each; they account for 62 per cent of all the land.  (N. S., Agrarian
Programmes, Novy Mir Publishers, p. 7.) Comment is
superfluous.  

It is interesting to note that in the First Duma Denmark was put forward as a
trump card by the liberal Herzenstein, to which the Right deputies (in both
Dumas) retorted:

in Denmark there is peasant ownership. We need nationalisation in
our country in order to create freedom for the old farms to reorganise
“on Danish lines” on the “unfenced” land. As for
converting tenancy into ownership, there will be no obstacle to that if the
peasants themselves demand it, in such a matter the entire
bourgeoisie and the bureaucracy will always support the peasantry. What is
more, under nationalisation the development of capitalism (a development
“on Danish lines”) will be more rapid as a consequence
of the abolition of private ownership of land.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
See Kautsky’s The Agrarian Question in Russia on the
necessity of spending enormous amounts of capital for the promotion of
peasant agriculture. Here the “municipalisers” may protest that the
bourgeois republic will spend money on the republic’s armed forces,
whereas the democratic Zemstvo ... will have the money taken away from it
by the undemocratic central government, most highly esteemed
municipalisers!  Besides, the very rise of such a Zemstvo is impossible
under an undemocratic central government; this is but the pious wish of a
petty bourgeois. The only true comparison is that between a bourgeois
republic (which spends more than other states on the development of
productive forces: North America, for example), and a bourgeois monarchy
(which for decades pays tribute to the Junkers: Germany, for
example).  —Lenin

[2]
Workers’ governments in the towns, peasant. committees in the
villages (which at a certain moment will he transformed into bodies elected
by universal, etc., suffrage)—such is the only possible form of
organisation of the victorious revolution, i. e., the dictatorship of the
proletariat and peasantry. It is not surprising that the liberals hate
these forms of organisation of the classes that are lighting for freedom!
—Lenin

[3]
See pp. 171-82 of this volume.—Ed.  
 

 
  

4. The Non-Party Peasants

|

6. The Trudovik Peasants (Narodniks)

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Trudovik
    Peasants









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 6. The Trudovik Peasants (Narodniks)







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

6. The Trudovik Peasants (Narodniks)

The Trudovik peasants and the Socialist-Revolutionary
peasants do not differ essentially from the non-party peas ants. A
comparison of their speeches clearly reveals the same needs, the same
demands, and the same outlook. The party peasants are merely more
politically conscious, they express themselves more clearly, and grasp more
fully the connection between the different aspects of the question.  

The best speech of all, perhaps, was that of the peasant Kiselyov, a
Trudovik, at the 26th session of the Second Duma (April 12, 1907). In
contrast to the “state point of view” of the liberal petty
bureaucrat, he emphasised the fact that “our government’s
entire domestic policy, which is actually controlled by the
landlords, is directed to keeping the land in the possession of its present
owners” (1943). The speaker showed that that was the reason why the
people were kept “in abysmal ignorance”, and then he went on to
deal with the speech delivered by the Octobrist, Prince
Svyatopolk-Mirsky. “You have, of course, not forgotten the horrible
things he said:

‘Abandon all idea of increasing the area of peasant landownership. Preserve
and support the private owners. Without landlords, our backward and

    

ignorant peasant mass would be a flock without a shepherd’. Fellow-peasants,
need anything be added to this to make you understand what these gentlemen, our
benefactors, are hankering after? Is it not clear to you that they are still
longing and sighing for serfdom? No, shepherd gentlemen, enough.... The only
thing I would like is that the words of the noble

Rurikovich[4] should be well remembered by the whole backward peasantry
of Russia, by the whole of the land of Russia; that these words should
burn, within the heart of every peasant and light up more brightly than the
sun the gulf that lies between us and these uninvited benefactors. Enough,
shepherd gentlemen.... Enough. What we need is not shepherds, but leaders;
arid we shall find them without you, and with them we shall find the road
to light and truth, the road to the promised land” (1947).  

The Trudovik has exactly the same standpoint as the revolutionary
bourgeois who is under the delusion that the nationalisation of the land
will bring him to the “promised land”, but who is fighting
devotedly for the present revolution and detests the idea of
limiting its scope: “The Party of People’s Freedom rejects the
just settlement of the agrarian question.... Gentlemen, representatives of
the people,. can a legislative institution like the State Duma, in its
actions, sacrifice justice to expediency? Can you pass laws knowing in
advance that they are unjust?... Are the unjust laws our bureaucracy has
bestowed upon us not enough that we ourselves should make still
more?... You know perfectly well that, for reasons of expediency—the
need to pacify Russia—punitive expeditions have been sent out and the
whole of Russia has been proclaimed in a state of emergency; for reasons of
expediency summary military tribunals have been instituted. But tell me
please, who among us goes into raptures over this expediency? Have you not
all been cursing it? Do not ask, as some here have done:

‘What is justice?’

[The speaker is evidently referring to the Cadet landlord Tatarinov who, at
the 24th session, on April 9, said: “Justice, gentlemen, is a rather
relative term,” “justice is an ideal towards which we are all
striving, but this ideal remains” (for the Cadet) “only an
ideal, and whether it will be possible to achieve it is still an open
question for me.” 1779.]

Man is justice. When a

    

man is born—it is just that he should live, and to live it is just
that he should have the opportunity to earn his bread by his labour.”...


You see: this ideologist of the peasantry adopts the typical standpoint
of the French eighteenth-century enlightener. He does not understand
the historical limitedness, the historically-determined content of his
justice. But for the sake of this abstract justice he wants to, and the
class he represents is able to completely sweep away all the vestiges
of medievalism. That is the real historical content of the demand that
justice must not be sacrificed to “expediency”. It means: no
concessions to medievalism, to the landlords, to the old regime. It is the
language of the members of the Convention. For the liberal Tatarinov, however,
the “ideal” of bourgeois freedom “remains only an
ideal”, for which he does not fight in earnest, does not sacrifice
everything for its realisation, but makes a deal with the landlords. The
Kiselyovs can lead the people to a victorious bourgeois revolution, the
Tatarinovs can only betray them.



   ...“For the sake of expediency, the Party of People’s
   Freedom proposes that no right to land be created. It is afraid that such a
   right will draw masses of people from the towns into the countryside, and
   in that case each will get very little. I would like, first of all, to ask:
   What is the right to land?  The right to land is the right to work, the
   right to bread, the right to live—it is the inalienable right of
   every man. How can we deprive anybody of that right? The Party of
   People’s Freedom says that if all citizens are granted that right,
   and if the land is divided among them, each will get very little: But a
   right and the exercise of that right in practice are by no means the same
   thing. Every one of you here has the right to live in, say, Chukhloma, but
   you live here; on the other hand, those who live in Chukhloma have the same
   right to live in St. Petersburg, but they stick in their lair. Therefore,
   the fear that to grant the right to land to all those who are willing to
   till it will draw masses of people away from the towns is totally
   groundless. Only those who have not broken their ties with the countryside,
   only those who have left the country side recently, will leave the
   towns.... The people who have assured means of livelihood in the towns will
   not go into the, countryside.... I think that only the complete and
   irrevocable abolition of private ownership of the land ... etc. ... only
   such a solution can be regarded as satisfactory” (1950).  


This tirade, so typical of the Trudovik, raises an interesting question: Is
there any difference between such speeches

    

about the right to work and the speeches about the right to work delivered by
the French petty-bourgeois democrats of 1848? Both are certainly declamations of
a bourgeois democrat vaguely expressing the real historical content of
the struggle. The declamations of the Trudovik, however, vaguely
express the actual aims of the bourgeois revolution which objective
conditions make possible (i. e., make possible a peasant agrarian revolution in
twentieth-century Russia), whereas the declamations of the French

      Kleinbürger[1]

in 1848 vaguely expressed the aims of the socialist revolution,
which was impossible in France in the middle of the last century. In other
words: the right to work demand ed by the French workers in the middle of
the nineteenth century expressed a desire to remodel the whole of
small production on the lines of co-operation, socialism, and so forth, and
that was economically impossible. The right to work demanded by
the Russian peasants in the twentieth century expresses the desire to
remodel small agricultural production on nationalised
land, and that is economically quite possible. The twentieth
century Russian peasants’ “right to work” has a real bourgeois
content in addition to its unsound socialistic theory. The right to work
demanded by the French petty bourgeois and worker in the middle of the
nineteenth century contained nothing but an unsound socialistic
theory. That is the difference that many of our Marxists overlook.  

But the Trudovik himself reveals the real content of his theory:
not everybody will go on the land, although every body “has an
equal right”. Clearly, only farmers will go on the land, or
establish themselves there. Doing away with private ownership of the land means
doing away with all obstacles to the farmers establishing themselves on
the land.


It is not surprising that Kiselyov, imbued with deep faith in the peasant
revolution and with a desire to serve it, speaks scornfully about the Cadets,
about their wish to alienate not all, but only a part of the land, to make the
peasants pay for the land, to transfer the matter to “unnamed land
institutions”, in short, about “the plucked bird which the Party of
People’s Freedom is offering the peasants”

    

(1950-51). Neither is it surprising that Struve and those like him were
bound to hate the Trudoviks, especially after the Second Duma: the
Cadets’ plans cannot succeed as long as the Russian peasant remains a
Trudovik. But when the Russian peasant ceases to be a Trudovik, the
difference between the Cadet and the Octobrist will completely disappear!


We shall briefly mention the other speakers. The peasant Nechitailo says:
“The people who have drunk the blood and sucked the brains of the peasants
call them ignorant” (779). Golovin interrupted: The landlord can insult
the peasant, but the peasant insulting the landlord?... “These lands that
belong to the people—we are told: buy them. Are we foreigners, who have
arrived from England, France, and so forth? This is our country, why should we
have to buy our own land? We have already paid for it ten times over with blood,
sweat, and money” (780).


Here is what the peasant Kirnosov (Saratov Gubernia) says: “Nowadays we
talk of nothing but the land; again we are told: it is sacred, inviolable. In my
opinion it can not be inviolable; if the people wish it, nothing
can be

   inviolable.[2]

(A voice from the Right: “Oh-ho!”) Yes,
oh-ho!

(Applause on the Left.) Gentlemen of the nobility, do you think we do
not know when you used us as stakes in your card games, when you bartered us for
dogs? We do. It was all your sacred, inviolable property.... You stole the land
from us.... The peasants who sent me here said this: The land is ours. We have
come here not to buy it, but to take it”

       (1144).[3]

 

Here is what the peasant Vasyutin (Kharkov Gubernia) says: “We
see here in the person of the Chair-man of the Council of Ministers not the
minister of the whole country, but the minister of 130,000
landlords. Ninety million peasants are nothing to him.... You [addressing
the Right] are exploiters, you lease your land out at exorbitant rents and
skin the peasants alive.... Know that if the government fails to meet the
people’s needs, the people will not ask for your consent, they will
take the land.... I am a Ukrainian [he relates that Catherine made Potemkin
a gift of a little estate of 27,000 dessiatins with 2,000
serfs].... Formerly land was sold at 25 to 50 rubles per dessiatin, but now
the rent is 15 to 30 rubles per dessiatin, and the rent of hayland is 35 to
50 rubles. I call that fleecery. (A voice from the Right:
“What? Fleecery?” Laughter.) Yes, don’t
get excited (applause on the Left); I call it skinning the
peasants alive” (643, 39th session, May 16).  

The Trudovik peasants and the peasant intellectuals have in common a vivid
recollection of serfdom. They are all united by burning hatred for the landlords
and the landlord state. They are all animated with an intense revolutionary
passion. Some spontaneously exert their efforts to “throw them off our
backs”, without thinking of the future system they are to create. Others
paint that future in utopian colours. But all of them detest compromise with
the old Russia, all are fighting to shatter to bits accursed medievalism.


Comparing the speeches of the revolutionary peasants in the Second Duma with
those of the revolutionary workers, one is struck by the following
difference. The former are imbued with a far more spontaneous revolutionary
spirit, a passionate desire to destroy the landlord regime immediately, and
immediately to create a new system. The peasant is eager to fling himself upon
the enemy at once and to strangle him. Among the workers this revolutionary
spirit is more abstract, aimed, as it were, at a remoter goal. This difference
is quite understandable and legitimate. The peasant is making his,
bourgeois, revolution now, at this moment, and does not see its inherent
contradictions, he is not even aware that there are such contradictions. The
Social-Democratic worker does see them and because he

    

sets himself aims of world socialism, cannot make the fate of the
working-class movement hinge on the outcome of a bourgeois revolution. Only
we must not conclude from this that the worker must support the liberals in
the bourgeois revolution. The conclusion to be drawn from it is that, while
merging with no other class, the worker must with all his
energy help the peasant to carry through this bourgeois revolution to
the end.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Kleinbürger—petty bourgeois.—Ed.  

[2]
A characteristic expression by a simple peasant of the revolutionary
idea of the sovereignty of the people. In our revolution there is no
bourgeoisie other than the peasantry to carry out this demand of the
proletarian programme.  —Lenin

[3]
The Trudovik peasant Nazarenko (Kharkov Gubernia) said in the First
Duma: “If you want to judge how the peasant looks on the land, I will tell
you that to us peasants land is as essential as its mother’s breast
is to an infant. That is the only standpoint from which we regard the
land. You probably know that not so very long ago the gentry compelled our
mothers to suckle pups. The same is happening now. The only difference now
is that it is not the mothers who bore us who are suckling the
gentry’s pups, but the mother that feeds us— the land” (495).
—Lenin
 



[4]
Rurikovichi—off shoots of Rurik, a semi-legendary prince
of ancient Russia, from, whom many aristocratic families in tsarist Russia
claimed descent. The present allusion is to Prince Svyatopolk
Mirsky.

 

 
  

5. The Narodnik Intellectuals

|

7. The Socialist-Revolutionaries

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The
    Socialist-Revolutionaries









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 7. The Socialist-Revolutionaries







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

7. The Socialist-Revolutionaries

The speeches of the Socialist-Revolutionary intellectuals
(we dealt with the S.R. peasants above when dealing with the Trudoviks) are
full of the same scathing criticism of the Cadets and bitter enmity towards
the landlords. Not to repeat what we have said above, we shall merely point
out a new feature that this group of deputies possesses. Unlike
the Popular Socialists who, instead of the ideal of socialism, are
inclined to paint the ideal of ... Denmark, and unlike the peasants, who
are strangers to all doctrine and directly express the sentiments of the
oppressed person who just as directly idealises emancipation from the
existing form of exploitation, the Socialist-Revolutionaries introduce into
their speeches the doctrine of their own
“socialism”. Thus, Uspensky and Sagatelyan (a member of
“Dashnaktsutyun”—which stands very close to the
Socialist-Revolutionaries, and the “young ones” of which even
belong to the S. R. Party) raise the question of the village
commune. The latter speaker rather naïvely observes: “it
must be noted with regret that in developing the wide theory of
nationalisation of the land, no special emphasis is laid on the living,
surviving institution, on the basis of which alone progress can be
made.... The safeguard against all these horrors [the horrors of Europe,
the destruction of small farming, etc.] is the Village commune”
(1122).  

The “regret” of this worthy knight of the village commune will be
understood if we bear in mind that be was the twenty-sixth speaker on
the agrarian question.


He was preceded by not less than fourteen Left members; Trudoviks, and others,
and “no special emphasis was laid on the living, surviving
institution” by any one of them!

    

There is reason for “regret” when one sees among the peas ants in
the Duma the same indifference towards the village commune as was displayed by
the congresses of the Peas ant Union. Sagatelyan and Uspensky took up the cause
of the village commune like true sectarians in the midst of the peasant
revolution, which does not want to hear of the old agrarian
associations. “I sense a certain danger to the village commune,”
mourned Sagatelyan (1123). “Now is just the time at which the village commune
must be saved at all costs” (1124). “This form [i. e., the village
commune] may develop into a world movement, capable of offering a solution to
all economic problems” (1126). Apparently, Mr. Sagatelyan gave vent to all
these arguments about the village commune “sadly and
irrelevantly”. And his colleague Uspensky, criticising Stolypin’s
legislation against the village communes, expressed time desire that “the
mobilisation of landed property be reduced to the utmost limits, to the last
degree” (1115).


This Narodnik’s wish is undoubtedly reactionary. Curiously
enough, the Socialist-Revolutionary Party, in whose name this wish was
expressed in the Duma, advocates the abolition of private ownership of
land, without realising that this involves the utmost mobilisation
of the land, that it creates the freest and easiest conditions for the laud
to pass from farmer to farmer, the freest and easiest conditions for the
penetration of capital into agriculture! Confusing private ownership of
land with the domination of capital in agriculture is a characteristic
mistake of the bourgeois laud nationalisers (including Henry George, and
many others). In their endeavour to “reduce mobilisation”, the
Socialist—Revolutionaries are at. one with the Cadets, whose
representative Kutler openly stated in his speech: “The Party of
People’s Freedom proposes to limit their [the peasants’] rights only
in respect of alienation and mortgage, i. e., to prevent, in the future,
the wide development of the sale and purchase of land” (12th session,
March 19, 1907, p. 740).  

The Cadets link this reactionary aim with methods of solving the agrarian
problem (domination of time landlords and the bureaucracy) that make possible
stupid bureaucratic restrictions and red-tape that will help to enthral the
peasants.

    

The Socialist-Revolutionaries link the reactionary aim with measures that
preclude the possibility of bureaucratic restraints (local land committees
elected on the basis of universal, etc., suffrage). In the case of the
former, what is reactionary is their entire (bureaucratic-landlord) policy
in the bourgeois revolution. In the case of the latter, what is reactionary
is their petty-bourgeois “socialism”, which they mistakenly
want to force upon the consistent bourgeois revolution.  

On the question of the Socialist-Revolutionaries’ economic theories, it
is interesting to note the arguments of their Duma representatives about
the influence of agrarian reforms upon the development of industry. The
naïve point of view of bourgeois revolutionaries, barely concealed by
a veneer of Narodnik doctrine, stands out very strikingly. Take, for
example, the Socialist-Revolutionary Kabakov (Perm Gubernia), known in the
Urals as the organiser of the Peasant Union, as “the President of the
Alapayevsk

Republic”,[2] and also as

     “Pugachov”.[1]

In the purely peasant manner he bases the peasants’ right to the land on
the grounds, among other things, that the peasants have never refused to
defend Russia against her enemies (1953). “why allot the land?”
he exclaims. “We bluntly declare that the land must be the common
property of the toiling peasantry, and the peasants will be able to divide
the land among themselves in the local areas without the interference of
any government officials, who, we have long known, have never been of any
use to the peasantry” (1954). “In our region, the Urals, entire
factories have come to a stand still because there is no sale for sheet
iron, yet in Russia all the peasants’ huts have straw-thatched roofs. Those
huts should have been roofed with sheet iron long ago.... There is a
market, but there are no buyers. Who constitute the mass of buyers in our
country? The hundred mil lion toiling peasants—that is the foundation
of the mass of buyers” (1952).  

Yes, that correctly expresses the conditions for real capitalist production in
the Urals in place of the age-old,

    

semi-feudal stagnation of “possessional”

production.[3] Neither the Stolypin nor the Cadet agrarian policy can
bring about any appreciable improvement in the conditions of life of
the masses, and unless these conditions are improved, really
“free” industry will not develop in the Urals. Only a peasant
revolution could quickly transform wooden Russia into iron Russia. The
Socialist-Revolutionary peasant has a truer and broader conception of the
conditions necessary for the development of capitalism than have the sworn
servants of capital.  

Another Socialist-Revolutionary, the peasant Khvorostukhin (Saratov Gubernia),
said: “Yes, gentlemen, of course, many spokesmen of the Party of
People’s Freedom have accused the Trudovik Group of wanting to transfer
the land to those who wish to till it. They say that then a lot of people will
leave the towns, and this will make things worse. But I think, gentlemen, that
only those who have nothing to do will leave the towns, but those who have work
are used to work, and since they have work they will not leave the
towns. Indeed, why should land be given to those who do not want to cultivate
it?”... (774.) Is it not obvious that this “S.R.” does not in the
least want universal, equalised land tenure, but the creation of free and equal
farming on free land?... “It is necessary, at all costs, to release
economic freedom for the whole people, particularly for the people who have
suffered and starved for so many years” (777).


Do not think that this correct formulation of the
real content of S.R.-ism (“release economic freedom”)
is due only to the clumsy, peasant way of expression. It is more
than that. The S.R. leader Mushenko, an intellectual, who replied to the
debate on the agrarian question on be half of the Socialist-Revolutionary
Party, was far more naïve in expressing his economic views than the
peasants Kabakov and Khvorostukhin.  


   “We say,” declared Mushenko, “that proper
   resettlement, proper dispersion, will be possible only when the land is
   unfenced, when all the barriers erected by the principle of private
   ownership of the land are removed. Further, the Minister spoke about the
   increase in the population of our country.... It turned out that for this
   increase alone [1,600,000] about 3,500,000 dessiatins of land will be
   needed. He says: Thus, if you have equalised the land, where will you get
   land

    

   for such an increase in the population? But I ask: Where, in what state
   [sic!] is the whole increase in the population absorbed, in
   agriculture? The law that regulates the distribution of the population
   according to social-estates, according to occupations, operates In the
   reverse direction [our italics]. If a state, if a country is not
   degenerating, but is developing industrially, it shows that on the
   foundation of agriculture, which is satisfying the elementary needs in food
   and raw materials, more and more economic storeys are being erected. Demand
   grows, new industrial products appear, new branches of industry spring up;
   the manufacturing industry ,attracts larger and larger numbers of
   workers. The urban population grows faster than the agricultural and
   absorbs the major pan of the population increase. It sometimes happens,
   gentlemen, that the agricultural population diminishes not only relatively,
   but even absolutely. If this [!] process is slow in our country, it, is
   because there is nothing on which to build those new economic
   storeys. Peasant economy is too shaky a foundation; the market for industry
   is too small. Create a healthy, numerous, and vigorous agricultural
   population by potting the land at the disposal of the people, and you will
   see what a demand there will be for industrial products, and what a mass of
   workers will be needed for the factories and mills, in the towns”
   (1173), 


Now, isn’t he delightful, this
“Socialist-Revolutionary” who calls the programme for the
development of capitalism a programme for the socialisation of the land? He
has no inkling that the law of the more rapid increase in the urban
population is exclusively a law of the capitalist mode of
production. It never occurs to him that this “law” does not and
cannot operate otherwise than through the disintegration of the peasantry
into a bourgeoisie and a proletariat, through the “sorting out”
among the cultivators, i. e., the ousting of the “pauper” by
the “real farmer”. The economic harmony which this S.R. depicts
on the basis of a capitalist law is pathetically naïve. But it is not
the harmony preached by the vulgar bourgeois economist who wants to conceal
the struggle between labour and capital. It is the harmony of the
unconscious bourgeois revolutionary who wants to make a clean sweep of the
survivals of autocracy, serfdom, medievalism.  

The victorious bourgeois revolution of which our present agrarian
programme dreams cannot proceed except by means of such a bourgeois
revolutionary. And the class-conscious worker must support him for the
sake of social development, without allowing himself for a moment to be taken
in by the childish prattle of the Narodnik “economists”

    

     

Notes
 

[1]
See List of Members of the Second State Duma, privately
published by an anonymous author, St. Petersburg, 1907.  —Lenin
 



[2]
Alapayevsk Republic—the name which tsarist officials
gave to the Alapayevsk Volost in the Verkhnyaya Tura Uyezd, Perm Gubernia.
G. I. Kabakov, the Socialist-Revolutionary peasant deputy in the Second
Duma whom Lenin mentions, succeeded in organising a Peasant Union in the
Alapayevsk Volost in 1905 with as many as 30,000 members.

 
a



[3]
Possessional production—industrial enterprises based on
the exploitation of possessional peasants. This category of peasants was
introduced by Peter the Great (1721), who allowed serf peasants to be
bought for work at the manufactories. These serfs were attached to the
enterprise and could not be sold apart from the manufactory.  

Possessional ownership was abolished in 1863 following the abolition of
serfdom in 1861.

 

 
  

6. The Trudovik Peasants (Narodniks)

|

8. The “Nationals”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The
    “Nationals”









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 8. The 'Nationals'







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

8. The “Nationals”

Among the representatives of the non-Russian nationalities in the Duma who
spoke on the agrarian question were Poles, Byelorussians, Letts and Ests,
Lithuanians, Tatars, Armenians, Bashkirs, Kirghiz, and Ukrainians. Here is how
they expounded their points of view.


The

National-Democrat[4] Dmowski said in the Second Duma “on behalf of
the Poles—the representatives of the Kingdom of Poland and of the adjacent
western part of the country” (742): “Although our agrarian relations
are already in the stage of transition to West-European relations, nevertheless,
the agrarian question exists for us too, and land hunger is the curse of our
life. One of the chief points of our social programme is:

increase in the area of peasant landownership” (743).  


   “The big agrarian disturbances that occurred in the Kingdom of
   Poland in the form of the seizure of landlord estates were confined to the
   eastern areas, namely, Wlodawa Uyezd, where the peasants were told that
   they, as members of the Orthodox Church, would receive allotments of
   landlords’ land. Those disturbances occurred only among the population
   belonging to the Orthodox Church” (745).  

   “Here [in the Kingdom of Poland] agrarian affairs, like all other
   social reforms, ... can be settled in conformity with the requirements of
   life only by an assembly of representatives of the region—only by an
   autonomous Sejm” (747).  


This speech by a Polish National-Democrat provoked violent attacks
against the Polish landlords on the part of the Right Byelorussian peasants
(Gavrilchik, Minsk Gubernia, Szymánski, and Grudzinski); and Bishop
Eulogius, of course, seized the opportunity to deliver a jesuitical
police-minded speech in the spirit of the Russian politicians of 1863 about
the Polish landlords oppressing the Russian peasants (26th session, April
12).  

“What a simple plan!” answered the National-Democrat Grabski
(32nd session, May 3). “The peasants will receive land; the Russian
landlords will keep their estates; the peasants, as in the good old days,
will support the, old regime, and the Poles will be duly punished for
raising the question of a Polish Sejm” (62). And the speaker,
vehemently exposing the shameless demagogy of the Russian Government,
demanded that “the settlement of the agrarian reform in our region be
transferred to a Polish Sejm” (75).  
 

To this we will add that the above-mentioned peasants demanded
additional allotments with right of ownership (see, for example,
p. 1811). In the First Duma, too, the Polish and Western peasants, in
demanding land, spoke in favour of private ownership. “I am a peasant
with little land from Lublin Gubernia,” said Nakonieczny on June
1,1906. “Compulsory alienation is needed in Poland as well. One
dessiatin forever is better than five dessiatins for an indefinite
period” (881-82). The same was said by Poniatowski (Volhynia
Gubernia) in the name of the Western Region (May 19, p. 501), and by Trasun
from Vitebsk Gubernia (418, May 16, 1906). Girnius (Suvalki Gubernia)
opposed the idea of an imperial stock of distributable land and demanded
local distributable lands (June 1, 1906, p. 879). During the same debate,
Count Tysczkiewiez stated that he regarded the idea of forming a national
stock of distributable land as “impracticable and risky”
(874). Stecki also spoke (May 24, 1906, pp. 613-14) in favour of private
ownership as against renting.  

A speaker from the Baltic Region in the Second Duma was Juraszewski (Courland
Gubernia), who demanded the abolition of the feudal privileges of the big
landowners (May 16, 1907, p. 670) and the alienation of all landlords’ land over
and above a definite norm. “While admitting that present-day agriculture
in the Baltic Region developed on the principle of private ownership, or
hereditary lease, that was practised there, one must come to the conclusion,
however, that for the future regulation of agricultural relations it is
necessary immediately to introduce in the Baltic Region local self-government on
broad democratic lines which could correctly solve this problem”
(672).

The representative of Estland Gubernia, the Progressist Jurine, introduced a
separate Bill for this gubernia (47th session, May 26, 1907, p. 1210). He spoke
in favour of a “compromise” (1213), in favour of “hereditary
or perpetual leasing” (1214). “The one who cultivates the land, who
makes the best use of it, shall have possession of the land”
(ibid.). While demanding compulsory alienation for this purpose, he rejects
confiscation of the land (1215). In the First Duma, Cakste (Courland Gubernia)
demanded the

    

transfer to the peasants of church (parish) land as well as landlords’ land
(4th session, May 4,1906, p. 195). Tenison (Livland Gubernia) agreed to
vote for the address, i.e., for compulsory alienation, and expressed the
opinion that “all the supporters of the individualisation of the
land” (ibid., p. 209) could do this. Kreuzberg (Courland Gubernia),
on behalf of the Courland peasants, demanded the “expropriation of
the latifundia” and the allotment of land to peasants with little or
no land, and, of course, “with right of ownership” (12th
session, May 19, 1906, p. 500). Ruth (Livland Gubernia) demanded compulsory
alienation, etc. “As regards converting the land into a state stock
of distributable land,” be said, “our peasants are fully aware
that this is a new form of serfdom. Therefore, we must de fend small
peasant farming and productivity of labour, and protect them from the
encroachments of capitalism. Thus, if we convert the land into a state
stock of distributable land we shall create capitalism on the largest
scale” (497, ibid.). Ozolins (Livland Gubernia), on behalf of the
Lettish peasants, spoke in favour of compulsory alienation and private
ownership; he was emphatically opposed to the creation of a reserve of
state distributable land and was in favour only of local, regional
distributable lands (13th session, May 23, 1906, p. 564).  

Leonas, “representative of Suvalki Gubernia, namely, of the
Lithuanian nationality” (39th session, May 16, 1907, p. 654), spoke
in favour of the plan proposed by the Constitutional-Democratic Party, to
which he belongs. Bulat, another Lithuanian autonomist from the same
gubernia, associated himself with the Trudoviks, but proposed that a
decision on the question of redemption payments and so forth, be postponed
until the matter was discussed by the local land committees (p. 651,
ibid.). Povilius (Kovno Gubernia), in the name of the “Duma group of
Lithuanian Social-Democrats” (ibid., p. 681, supplement) put forward
this group’s precisely-formulated agrarian programme, which coincides
with our R.S.D.L.P. programme, with this difference, however, that
“the local distributable land within the borders of
Lithuania” is to be placed at the disposal of “the
Lithuanian organ of autonomous self-government” (ibid., Point 2).

 

On behalf of the Moslem group in the Second Duma Khan Khoisky
(Elisavetpol Gubernia) said: “We Moslems, who number over 20,000,000
in the total population of the Russian state, are following the debate on
the agrarian question with the same keen interest and are looking for ward
to its satisfactory settlement with the impatience” (20th session,
April 2, 1907, p. 1499). In the name of the Moslem group the speaker agreed
with Kutler and sup ported compulsory alienation based on a fair valuation
(1502). “But to whom are these alienated lands to go? On this matter
the Moslem group is of the opinion that the alienated lands should form not
a state stock,, but regional stocks of distributable land, each within the
borders of the given region” (1503). Deputy Mediev (Taurida
Gubernia), the “representative of the Crimean Tatars”, in an
ardent revolutionary speech, demanded “land and
liberty”. “The longer the debate goes on the clearer we hear
the demand of the people that the land must go to those who till it”
(24th session, April 9,1907, p. 1789). The speaker snowed “how sacred
landed property was established in our border regions” (1792), how
the land of the Bashkirs was plundered, how ministers, councillors of
state, and chiefs of the gendarmerie received tracts ranging from two to
six thousand dessiatins. He cued the mandate of his “Tatar
brethren”, complaining of the way the

wakf lands[5] were plundered. He also quoted the answer, dated December
15, 1906, which the Governor-General of Turkestan gave a certain Tatar to
the effect that only persons of the Christian faith could settle on state
land. “Do not those documents smell of decay, of the Arakcheyev

regime[6] of the last century?” (1794.)  

The spokesman for the Caucasian peasants—besides our Party
Social-Democrats, whom we shall speak of later on— was the
above-mentioned Sagatelyan (Erivan Gubernia) who shares the
Socialist-Revolutionary standpoint.

Ter-Avetikyants  (Elisavetpol Gubernia), another representative
of the “Dashnaktsutyun” Party, spoke in the same strain:
“The land must belong to the toilers, i.e., the working people, and
to nobody else, on the basis of village commune ownership”
(39th session, May 16, 1907, p. 644). “On behalf of all the Caucasian
peasants I declare ... at the decisive

    

moment, all the Caucasian peasants will go hand in hand with their elder
brothers—the Russian peasants— and win for themselves land and
liberty” (646). Eldarkhanov “on behalf of his
constituents—the natives of the Terek Region—requests that
plunder of the natural wealth be stopped pending the settlement of the
agrarian question” (32nd session, May 3, 1907, p. 78). It was the
government that was stealing the land, taking the best part of the high
land zone, robbing the land of the Kumyk people and laying claim to its
minerals (this must have been before the Stockholm lectures of Plekhanov
and John on municipalised land being out of the reach of the undemocratic
state power).  

Speaking on behalf of the Bashkirs, Deputy Khasanov (Ufa Gubernia)
mentioned the stealing by the government of two million dessiatins of land,
and demanded that this land “be taken back” (39th session, May
16, 1907, p. 641). Deputy Syrtlanov from Ufa made the same demand in the
First Duma (20th session, June 2, 1906, p. 923). The spokesman for the
Kirghiz-Kaisak people in the Second Duma was Deputy Karatayev. (Urals
Region) who said: “We Kirghiz-Kaisaks... deeply understand and
sympathise with the land hunger of our brother-peasants, we are ready and
willing to make room for them” (39th session, p. 673), but
“there is very little surplus land”, and “re-settlement
at the present time entails the eviction of the Kirghiz Kaisak
people”.... “The Kirghiz are evicted not from the land, but
from their dwellings” (675). “The Kirghiz Kaisaks always
sympathise with all the opposition groups” (675).  

The spokesman for the Ukrainian group in the Second Duma was the
Cossack Saiko, from Poltava Gubernia. Speaking on March 29, 1907, he quoted
the Cossack song: “Hey, Tsarina Catherina, look what you have done!
Boundless steppe and happy land to the landlords you have flung. Hey,
Tsarina Catherina, pity us and give us land, happy land and shady
woods...", and supported the Trudoviks, demanding only that the
words “national stock of distributable land” in § 2
of the Bill of the 104 be amended to “regional national [sic!] stock
of distributable land to serve as the beginning of socialist
organisation”, “The Ukrainian

    

group is of the opinion that the greatest injustice in the world is the
private ownership of the land” (1318).  

In the First Duma, Deputy Chizhevsky from Poltava said: “As an
ardent advocate of the autonomy idea, as an ardent advocate of Ukrainian
autonomy in particular, I should very much like the agrarian question to be
settled by my people, by individual autonomous bodies, in that autonomous
system of our state that I regard as the ideal” (14th session, May
24, 1906, p. 618). At the same time, this Ukrainian autonomist deems state
distributable lands to be absolutely essential, and he clarifies an issue
which our “municipalisers” have muddled up. “We must
firmly and positively establish the principle,” said Chizhevsky,
“that the state distributable lands must be managed exclusively by
local self-governing Zemstvo or autonomous bodies when these are set up. It
may be asked: What sense is there in the term

‘state distributable lands’ if in every particular case they will be
managed by local government bodies? I think there is very much
sense.... First of all ... part of the state lands should be at the
disposal of the central government... our state colonisation
lands.... Secondly, the sense of establishing a state stock of
distributable land, and the sense of calling it such, is this: although the
local bodies will be free to dispose of that land in their respective
areas, they will be able to do so only within certain limits”
(620). This petty-bourgeois autonomist understands the significance of
state power in a society centralised by economic development far better
than our Menshevik Social-Democrats.  

By the way, in dealing with Chizhevsky’s speech, we cannot leave
unmentioned his criticism of “norms”. “Labour norm is an empty
sound,” he says bluntly, pointing out the diversity of agricultural
conditions,. and on the same grounds he also rejects the
“subsistence” norm. “I think land should be allotted to the
peasants not according to a norm, but according to the amount of land
available.... The peasants should be given all that can be given in the
particular locality,” —for example, in Poltava Gubernia “land
should be taken away from all the landowners, who should be left with an average
of 50 dessiatins each at the most” (621). Is it surprising that the Cadets
chatter about norms in order to conceal their plans regarding the actual

    

amount of land to be alienated? Although criticising the Cadets, Chizhevsky does
not yet realise

this.[1]


The conclusion to be drawn from our review of the Duma speeches on the
agrarian question delivered by the “nationals” is
obvious. Those speeches fully confirm what I said in opposition to Maslov
in the pamphlet Revision, etc., on p. 18

   (first edition)[2]

on the question of the relation between municipalisation arid the rights of
the nationalities, namely, that it is a political question, which
is fully dealt with in the political section of our programme, and
is dragged into the agrarian programme merely because of philistine
provincialism.  

In Stockholm, the Mensheviks worked with comical zeal to “purge
municipalisation of nationalisation” (the words of the Menshevik
Novosedsky, Minutes of the Stockholm Congress, p. 146). “Some
historical regions, such as Poland and Lithuania,” said Novosedsky,
“coincide with national territories, and the transfer of land to
these regions may serve as the basis for the successful development of
nationalist-federalist tendencies, which will again, in effect, transform
municipalisation into nationalisation piecemeal.” And so Novosedsky
and Dan proposed and secured the adoption of an amendment: for the words,
“self-governing large regional organisations” in
Maslov’s draft substitute the words: “large local
self-governing bodies that will unite urban and rural districts”.


An ingenious way of “purging municipalisation of nationalisation”,
I must say. To substitute one word for another—is

    

it not obvious that this will automatically lead to the reshuffling of the
“historical regions”?.  

No, gentlemen, no substitution of words will help you to rid
municipalisation of its inherent, “nationalist-federalist”
nonsense. The Second Duma showed that what the
“municipalisation” idea did in fact was only to
promote the nationalist tendencies of various groups of the
bourgeoisie. It was these groups alone, not counting the Right
Cossack Karaulov, that “took upon themselves” the protection of
various “territorial” and “regional” distributable
lands. In so doing these nationals threw out the agrarian content
of provincialisation (for actually Maslov “gives” the land to
provinces and not to “municipalities”, so the word
provincialisation is more exact): nothing is to be decided beforehand,
everything—the question of redemption payment, the question
of ownership, and so forth—is to be left to the autonomous Sejms, or
to regional, etc., self-governing bodies. The result is the fullest
confirmation of my statement that “just the same, the law
transferring the Trans Caucasian lands to the Zemstvo will have to be
passed by a constituent assembly in St. Petersburg, because, surely, Maslov
does not want to give any region freedom to retain landlordism”
(Revision, etc.,

       p. 18).[3]


Thus, events have confirmed that to argue the case for municipalisation on the
basis of the nationalities’ agreement or disagreement is a poor argument. The
municipalisation in our programme turns out to be in conflict with the
definitely expressed opinion of very diverse nationalities.


Events have confirmed, in fact, that municipalisation serves not as a guide for
the mass, nation-wide peasant movement, but as a means of breaking this movement
up into provincial and national streams. The only thing that
life absorbed from Maslov’s idea of regional stocks of
distributable land is national-autonomist “regionalism”.


The “nationals” stand somewhat aloof from our agrarian
question. Many non-Russian nationalities have no independent peasant
movement at the heart of the revolution, such as we have. It is quite
natural, therefore, that in their

    

programmes the “nationals” often keep somewhat aloof from the
Russian agrarian question, as much as to say:

it has nothing to do with us, we have our own problem. For the nationalist
bourgeoisie and petty bourgeoisie such a standpoint is inevitable.  

For the proletariat, however, such a standpoint is impermissible; but
it is precisely into this impermissible bourgeois nationalism that our
programme actually falls. Just as the “nationals”, at
best, only associate themselves with the all-Russian movement, without the
intention of strengthening it tenfold by uniting and concentrating the
movement, so the Mensheviks draft a programme which associates
itself with the peasant revolution instead of presenting a programme
to guide the revolution, to unite it, and advance it. Municipalisation is
not a slogan of the peasant revolution, but an artificial plan of
petty-bourgeois reformism added on from outside in a backwater of the
revolution.  

The Social-Democratic proletariat cannot alter its programme in order
to win the “agreement” of this or that nationality. Our task is
to unite and concentrate the movement by advocating the best path, the best
agrarian system possible in bourgeois society, by combating the force of
tradition, prejudice, and conservative
provincialism. “Disagreement” with the socialisation of the
land on the part of the small peasants cannot alter our programme of the
socialist revolution; it can only cause us to prefer action by
example. The same applies to the nationalisation of the land in a
bourgeois revolution. No “disagreement” with it on the part of
a nationality or several nationalities can make us alter the doctrine that
it is in the interest of the entire people that they should be freed to the
utmost extent from medieval landownership and that private ownership of the
land should be abolished. The “disagreement” of considerable
sections of the toiling masses of this or that nationality will make us
prefer influence by example to every other form of influence. The
nationalisation of the land avail able for colonisation, the
nationalisation of forest land, the nationalisation of all the land in
central Russia, cannot exist for long side by side with private ownership
of the land in some other part of the country (once the unification

    

of this country is due to the really main current of economic
evolution). One or the other system must gain the upper hand. Experience
will decide that. Our task is to explain to the people what conditions are
most favourable for the proletariat and for the toiling masses in a
capitalistically developing country.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
Chizhevsky also brings out very strikingly the thesis of the
unconsciously-bourgeois Trudoviks, with which we are already familiar,
namely, growth of industry and a decrease in the movement to the
land in the event of a consistent peasant revolution. “The peas ants
in our district, the very electors who sent us here, have made, for
example, the following calculation:

‘If we were a little richer and if each of our families could spend five or
six rubles on sugar every year, several sugar refineries would arise in
each of the uyezds where it is possible to grow sugar beet, in addition to
those that are already there’.

Naturally, if those refineries were to arise, what a mass of bands would be
required for intensified farming! The output of the sugar refineries would
increase,” etc. (622). That is precisely the programme of “American”
farming and of the “American” development of capitalism in Russia.  —Lenin

[2]
See present edition, Vol. 10, p. 182.—Ed.  

[3]
See present edition, Vol. 10, pp. 182-83.—Ed.  
 



[4]
National-Democrat—member of the National-Democratic
Party, the chief, reactionary, nationalist party of the Polish landlords
and bourgeoisie, closely associated with the Catholic Church. The party was
founded in 1897, its leaders being R. Dmowski, Z. Balicki, W. Grabski, and
others. The N.D.’s put forward the slogans of “class harmony”
and “national interests”. They tried to win influence over the
masses and draw them into the current of their reactionary policy. They
preached aggressive nationalism and chauvinism as a means of struggle
against the socialist and

   

general democratic movement among the Polish people, which they attempted
to isolate from the Russian revolutionary movement. During the revolution
of 1905-07 they sought to make a deal with tsarism to secure Polish
autonomy, and openly supported it in its struggle against the revolution by
every means in their power, including informing, lock-outs, and
assassination”. The Fifth (London) Congress of the R.S.D.L.P. adopted
a special resolution emphasising the need “unremittingly and relentlessly
to expose the counter-revolutionary Black-Hundred physiognomy and
activities of the National-Democrats as the allies of tsarism in its fight
against the revolution” (see “The C.P.S.U. in Resolutions
and Decisions of Its Congresses, Conferences, and Plenary Meetings of the
Central Committee, Part I, 1954, p. 168). During the First World War
(1914-18) the N.D.’s unreservedly supported the Entente, counting on the
victory of tsarist Russia, the uniting of Polish territories which had been
under the heel of Austria and Germany, and the granting of autonomy to
Poland within the framework of the Russian empire. The downfall of the
tsarist regime impelled the N.D.’s towards a pro-French orientation. Bitter
enemies of the October Socialist Revolution and the Soviet state though
they were, the N.D.’s, in keeping with their traditional anti-German
attitude, did not always give whole-hearted support to the adventurist
anti-Soviet foreign policy pursued by the Pilsudski clique which ruled
Poland beginning from. 1926. At the present time various groups of the
National-Democratic Party are active among reactionary Polish
émigrés.

 



[5]
Wakf lands—lands in areas with a Moslem population,
which could not be sold or transferred. The revenue derived from such land
was disposed of

cheifly  by the Moslem clergy. Under the Soviet
government the wakf lands became state property.

 



[6]
Arakcheyev, A.A.—reactionary tsarist statesman of the
late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries. He greatly influenced home
and foreign policies in the reigns of Paul I and Alexander I. His
name stands for an epoch of unlimited police despotism and a brutal
military regime.

 

 
  

7. The Socialist-Revolutionaries

|

9. The Social-Democrats

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The
    Social-Democrats









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: 9. The Social-Democrats







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

9. The Social-Democrats

Of the eight Social-Democratic speeches on the agrarian
question in the Second Duma only two contained a defence of
municipalisation and not merely a reference to it. One was that of Ozol,
and the other the second speech of Tsereteli. The rest of the speeches
consisted mainly, almost exclusively, of attacks on landlordism in general,
and of explanations of the political aspect of the agrarian
question. Highly characteristic in this respect was the artless speech
delivered by the Right peasant Petrochenko (22nd session, April 5, 1907),
which expressed the general impression made on a rural deputy by the
spokesmen of the different parties. “I will not waste your time by
going over what has been said here; permit me to put it in simple
words. Deputy Svyatopolk-Mirsky made a long speech here. Evidently, that
speech was meant to prepare us for something. Briefly, it amounts to this:
you have no right to take the land which belongs to me, or which I possess,
and I will not give it up. In answer to this Deputy Kutler said:

‘Those times have gone, you must give it up, do so and you will be paid for
it’. Deputy Dmowski says:

‘Do what you like with the land, but we must have autonomy, without
fail’. At the same time Deputy Karavayev says:

‘We need both, but throw everything in one heap and later on we’ll share it
out’. Tsereteli says:

‘No, gentlemen, we cannot share it out because the old government still
exists and it will not permit it. Better for us to try to seize power and
then we can share out as we please’" (p. 1615).  

Thus, this peasant grasped what he found to be the only distinction between the
speech of the Social-Democrat and that of the Trudovik, namely, that the former
explained the necessity of fighting for power in the state, of “seizing
power”. He failed to grasp the other distinctions—they

    

did not seem important to him! In his first speech Tsereteli did, indeed,
expose the fact that “our bureaucratic aristocracy is also a landed
aristocracy” (725). The speaker showed that “for several
centuries the state authority handed out into private ownership land that
belonged to the whole state, land that was the property of the whole
people” (724). The statement he made at the end of his speech on
behalf of the Social-Democratic group, which was a recapitulation of our
agrarian programme, was not backed by any argument, and was not contrasted
to the programmes of the other “Left” parties. We are saying
this not in order to blame anybody; on the contrary, we think that
Tsereteli’s first speech, a short, lucid speech which concentrated on
explaining the class character of the landlord government, was a very good
one. We are saying this in order to explain why the Right peasant (and
probably all the peasants) failed to see the specifically Social-Democratic
features of our programme.  

The second Social-Democratic speech on the agrarian question was delivered at
the next “agrarian session” of the Duma (16th session, March 26,
1907) by a worker Fomichov (Taurida Gubernia), who often used the words:

“we peasants”. Fomichov made a stinging retort to Svyatopolk-Mirsky,
whose famous phrase that the peasants without the landlords are “a flock
without a shepherd” did more to stir up the peasant deputies than a number
of other Left speeches. “Deputy Kutler, in a lengthy speech, expounds ed
the idea of compulsory alienation, but with compensation. We, the
representatives of the peasants, cannot agree to compensation because it will be
another noose round the necks of the peasants” (1113). Fomichov ended up
by demanding that “all the land be handed over to the working people on
the terms proposed by Deputy Tsereteli” (1114).


The next speech was delivered by Izmailov, also a worker, who was elected by the
peasant curia in Novgorod Gubernia (18th session, March 29, 1907). He replied
to the peasant Bogatov, his fellow-deputy from Novgorod, who, in the name of the
Novgorod peasants, had agreed to compensation. Izmailov indignantly opposed
compensation. He spoke of the terms of the “emancipation” of the
Novgorod peasants who, out of ten million dessiatins of arable land,

    

had received two million dessiatins, and out of six million dessiatins of
forest, land had received only one million dessiatins. He described the
poverty of the peasants who have been reduced to such a state that not
only “have they used the fences round their huts for decades to heat
their stoves”, but “saw off the corners of their own
huts”; “out of big old huts they build small ones in order,
when rebuilding, to save a log or two for firewood” (1344). “In
face of these conditions, under which our peasants live, the gentle men on
the Right sigh for culture. In their opinion, culture has been
killed by the muzhik, you see. But can a cold and hungry peasant think of
culture? Instead of land they want to offer him this culture; but I
don’t trust them here either, I think they, too, will be
glad to sell their land, only they will bargain to make the peasant pay
dearly for it. That’s why they agree. In my opinion—and the peasants
particularly should know this—it is not a question of the
land, gentlemen. I think I shall not be mistaken
in saying that there is something else behind this land, some other kind
of power, which the feudal nobility are afraid to hand over to the people,
are afraid to lose together with the land. I mean political power,
gentlemen. They are willing to give up the land, and they will do so, but
in such a way that we remain their slaves as of old. If we fall into debt
we shall never free ourselves from the power of the feudal
landlords” (l345). It is difficult to imagine anything more striking
and apt than this exposure by a worker of the essence of the Cadets’ plans!


The Social-Democrat Serov, during the 20th-session, April 2, 1907,
mainly criticised the views of the Cadets, as the “representatives of
capital” (1492), “representatives of capitalist
landownership”. He quoted detailed figures showing what redemption meant
in 1861 and rejected the “elastic principle” of a fair
Valuation. Serov, from the Marxist standpoint, gave a faultlessly correct
answer to Kutler’s argument that it was impossible to confiscate the land
without confiscating capital. “We do not at all put forward the argument
that the land is nobody’s, that the land is not the creation of human
hands” (1497). “having achieved self-consciousness, the proletariat,
represented here by the Social-Democratic Party, rejects all forms of
exploitation,

    

both feudal and bourgeois. As far as the proletariat is concerned, the
question which of these two forms of exploitation is more just does not exist;
the question always before it is: are the historical conditions ripe for
emancipation from exploitation?” (1499.) “According to the
calculations of the statisticians, if the land is confiscated up to 500,000,000
rubles, representing the unearned incomes of the landlords, will pass to the
people. The peasants will, of course, use this income to improve their farms, to
expand production, and to increase consumption” (1498).


At the 22nd session of the Duma (April 5, 1907), speeches on the
agrarian question were delivered by Anikin and Alexinsky. The former
stressed the connection between “the higher bureaucracy and big
landownership” and argued that the struggle for freedom could not be
separated from the struggle for land. The latter, in a lengthy speech,
explained the feudal character of the labour-service system of farming that
predominates in Russia. The speaker thus expounded the basis of the Marxist
view of the peasants’ struggle against, landlordism, and then showed the
dual role played by the village commune (a “survival of olden
times” and an “apparatus for influencing the landlords’
estates”), and the purpose of the laws of November 9 and 15, 1906 (to
align the kulaks with the landlords as a “main stay”). The
speaker gave figures showing that “the peasants’ land hunger means
the nobility’s land surfeit” and explained that the Cadets’
scheme for “compulsory” alienation meant “coercing the
people for the benefit of the landlords” (1635). Alexinsky quoted the
“Cadet organ Rech” (1639), which had admitted the
Cadet truth that it wanted the land lords to predominate on the proposed
land committees. The Cadet Tatarinov, who spoke at the next session but one
after Alexinsky, was thus driven into a corner, as we have already seen.


Ozol’s speech at the 39th session (May 16, 1907) is an example of
the arguments, unworthy of Marxists, to which some of our Social-Democrats
have been driven by Maslov’s famous “criticism” of
Marx’s theory of rent and by his corresponding distortion of the
concept of nationalisation of the land. Ozol argued against the S.R.’s as
follows:

Their “Bill is hopeless, in my opinion, for it proposes to

    

abolish private ownership of the means of production, in this case of the
land, while preserving private ownership of factory buildings, and not only
of factory buildings, but also of the dwellings and structures. On page 2
of the Bill we read that all the buildings erected on the land, and
exploited on capitalist lines, are to remain private property; but every
private owner will say: Be so good as to pay all the expenses for the
nationalised lands, for paving the streets, and so forth, and I will
receive rent from these houses. This is not nationalisation, but simply an
easier means of receiving capitalist income in the most developed
capitalist form” (667).  

So there it is, this Maslovism! First, it repeats the banal argument of
the Rights and the Cadets that it is impossible to abolish feudal
exploitation without affecting bourgeois exploitation as well. Secondly, it
reveals amazing ignorance of political economy; the “rent” from
urban houses, etc., contains the lion’s share of ground
rent. Thirdly, our “Marxist”, following Maslov, entirely
forgets about (or denies?)  absolute rent. Fourthly, it appears as though a
Marxist rejects the desirability of “the most developed
capitalist form” advocated by a Socialist-Revolutionary! Pearls of
Maslov’s municipalisation.  

Tsereteli, in a lengthy concluding speech (47th session, May 26, 1907),
defended municipalisation more thought fully, of course, than Ozol did; but
it was Tsereteli’s pains taking, thoughtful, and lucid defence that
most glaringly revealed the utter fallacy of the municipalisers’ chief
arguments.  

Tsereteli’s criticism of the Right deputies at the beginning of
his speech was quite correct from the political angle. His remarks about
the charlatans of liberalism, who were trying to scare the people with the
bogey of upheavals like the French Revolution, were magnificent. “He
[Shingaryov] forgets that it was after the confiscation of the landlords’
estates and because of it that France was regenerated for a new and
vigorous life” (1228). Quite correct too was Tsereteli’s chief
slogan: “the complete abolition of landlordism and the complete
liquidation of the landlord bureaucratic regime” (1224). But as soon
as he proceeded to deal with the Cadets, the erroneous position of
Menshevism,

    

made itself felt. “The principle of compulsory alienation of the
land,” said Tsereteli, “is, objectively, the principle of the
movement for liberation, but not all those who stand for this principle are
aware of, or want to admit, all the necessary implications of this
principle” (1225). That is the fundamental view of Menshevism,
namely, that the “watershed” of the major political divisions
in our revolution runs right of the Cadets and not left, as we
believe. That this view is wrong is abundantly made clear by
Tsereteli’s lucid formula, for after the experience of 1861 it is
beyond dispute that compulsory alienation is possible together with the
predominance of the landlords’ interests, with the preservation of their
rule, with the imposition of a new form of bondage. Still more
fallacious was Tsereteli’s statement that “on the question of the
forms of land tenure, we [Social-Democrats] are farther removed from
them” (the Narodniks) than from the Cadets (1230). The speaker then
went on to criticise labour and subsistence “norms”. In this he
was a thousand times right, but the stand taken by the Cadets on this
question is not a bit better than that of the Trudoviks, for
the Cadets misuse “norms” far more. That is not all. The fuss
the Cadets are making about the stupid “norms” is a result of
their bureaucratic outlook and of their tendency to betray the
peasants. As for the peasants, “norms” were brought to them
from outside by the Narodnik intellectuals; and we have seen above, from
the example of the deputies in the First Duma, Chizhevsky and Poyarkov, how
trenchantly the practical people from the rural districts criticise all
“norms”. Had the Social-Democrats explained this to
the peasant deputies, had they moved an amendment to the Trudovik Bill
repudiating norms, had they theoretically explained the significance of
nationalisation, which has nothing in common with “norms”,
they, the Social-Democrats, would have become the leaders of the peasant
revolution as against the liberals. The stand taken by Menshevism, however,
is that of subordinating the proletariat to liberal influence. It was
particularly strange to say in the Second Duma that we Social-Democrats are
farther removed from the Narodniks, since the Cadets declared
in favour of restricting the sale and mortgaging
of land!  
 

Proceeding to criticise nationalisation, Tsereteli adduced three
arguments;

(1) “an army of officials”,

(2) “gross injustice to the small nationalities”,

(3) “in the event of restoration” “a weapon would be
placed in the hands of the enemy of the people” (1232).

That is a conscientious exposition of the views of those who secured the
adoption of our Party programme, and as a Party man, Tsereteli had to
expound those views. We have shown above how untenable those views are and
how superficial this exclusively political criticism is.  

In support of municipalisation Tsereteli adduced six arguments:

(1) under municipalisation “the actual expenditure of these resources
[i.e., rent] to meet the people’s 1!] needs will be ensured”
(sic! p. 1233)—an optimistic assertion;

(2) “the municipalities will strive to improve the conditions of the
unemployed”—as, for example, in democratic and decentralised America
(?);

(3) “the municipalities can take over these [big] farms and organise
model farms”, and

(4) “during an agrarian crisis ... will lease land free of charge to
landless, propertyless peas ants” (sic! p. 1234). This is
demagogy. worse than that of the S.R.’s; it is a programme of
petty-bourgeois socialism in a bourgeois revolution.

(5) “A bulwark of democracy”—like Cossack local
self-government;

(6) “the alienation of allotment land ... may give rise to a
frightful counter revolutionary movement”—probably against the will
of all the peasants who declared for nationalisation.  

Sum and substance of the speeches of the Social-Democrats in the Second Duma:
leading role on the question of compensation and of the connection between
landlordism and the present state power, and an agrarian programme that slips
into Cadetism, betraying failure to understand the economic and political
conditions of the peasant revolution.


Sum and substance of the entire debate on the agrarian question in the Second
Duma: the Right landlords displayed the clearest understanding of their class
interests, the most distinct conception of both the economic and political
conditions needed for the preservation of their class rule in bourgeois
Russia. In effect, the liberals aligned themselves with these landlords and
sought to betray the

    

peasants to them by the most despicable and hypocritical methods. The
Narodnik intellectuals introduced in the peasant programmes a touch of
bureaucracy and philistine moralising. The peasants,, in the most vigorous
and forth right manner, expressed the spontaneous revolutionariness of
their struggle against all the survivals of medievalism, and against all
forms of medieval landownership, although they lacked a sufficiently clear
conception of the political conditions of this struggle and naïvely
idealised the “promised land” of bourgeois freedom. The
bourgeois nationals aligned themselves with the peasants’ struggle more or
less timidly, being greatly imbued with the narrow views and prejudices
that are engendered by the insularity of the small nationalities. The
Social-Democrats resolutely championed the cause of the peasant revolution
and explained the class character of the present state power, but they were
unable to lead the peasant revolution consistently owing to the erroneous
character of the Party’s agrarian programme.  
 

Notes
 
 

 
  

8. The “Nationals”

|

Conclusion

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Conclusion









Lenin: 1907/agrprogr: Conclusion







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907



    

Conclusion

The agrarian question is the basis of the bourgeois revolution in Russia and
determines the specific national character of this revolution.


The essence of this question is the struggle of the peasantry to
abolish landlordism and the survivals of serfdom in the agricultural system of
Russia, and, consequently, also in all her social, and political institutions.


Ten and a half million peasant households in European Russia own
75,000,000 dessiatins of land. Thirty thousand, chiefly noble, but partly
also upstart, landlords each own over 500 dessiatins— altogether
70,000,000 dessiatins. Such is the main background of the picture. Such are
the main reasons for the predominance of feudal landlords in the
agricultural system of Russia and, consequently, in the Russian state
generally, and in the whole of Russian life. The owners of the latifundia
are feudal landlords in the economic sense of the term: the basis of their
landownership was created by the history of serfdom, by the history of
land-grabbing by the nobility through the centuries. The basis of their
present methods of farming is the labour-service

    

system, i. e., a direct survival of the corvée, cultivation
of the land with the implements of the peasants and by the virtual
enslavement of the small tillers in an endless variety of ways: winter
hiring, annual leases, half-share métayage, leases based on labour
rent, bondage for debt, bondage for cut-off lands, for the use of forests,
meadows, water, and so on and so forth, ad infinitum. Capitalist
development in Russia has made such strides during the last half-century
that the preservation of serfdom in agriculture has become
absolutely impossible, and its abolition has assumed the forms of
a violent crisis, of a nation-wide revolution. But the abolition of serfdom
in a bourgeois country is possible in two ways.  

Serfdom may be abolished by the feudal-landlord economies slowly evolving
into Junker-bourgeois economies, by the mass of the peasants being turned into
landless husbandmen and Knechts, by forcibly keeping the masses down to a
pauper standard of living, by the rise of small groups of Grossbauern, of rich
bourgeois peasants, who inevitably spring up under capitalism from among the
peasantry. That is the path that the Black-Hundred landlords, and Stolypin,
their minister, have chosen. They have realised that the path for the
development of Russia cannot be cleared unless the rusty medieval forms
of landownership are forcibly broken up. And they have boldly set out to break
them up in the interests of the landlords. They have thrown overboard
the sympathy for the semi-feudal village commune which until recently was
widespread among the bureaucracy and the landlords. They have evaded all the
“constitutional” laws in order to break up the village communes by
force. They have given the kulaks carte blanche to rob the peasant
masses, to break up the old system of landowner ship, to ruin thousands of
peasant farms; they have handed over the medieval village to be “sacked
and plundered” by the possessors of money. They cannot act
otherwise if they are to preserve their class rule, for they have realised the
necessity of adapting themselves to capitalist development and not fighting
against it. And in order to preserve their rule they can find no other allies
against the mass of the peasants than the “upstarts”, the
Razuvayevs and

Kolupayevs.[3] They have no alternative but to shout to these

    

Kolupayevs: Enrichissez-vous! — enrich yourselves! We shall make
it possible for you to gain a hundred rubles for every ruble, if you will help
us to save the basis of our rule under the new conditions. That path of
development, if it is to be pursued successfully, calls for wholesale,
systematic, unbridled violence against the peasant masses and against
the proletariat. And the landlord counter-revolution is hastening to organise
that violence all along the line.


The other path of development we have called the American path of development
of capitalism, in contrast to the former, the Prussian path. It, too, involves
the forcible break-up of the old system of landownership; only the obtuse
philistines of Russian liberalism can dream of the possibility of a painless,
peaceful outcome of the exceedingly acute crisis in Russia.


But this essential and inevitable break-up may be carried out in the interests
of the peasant masses and not of the landlord gang. A mass of free farmers may
serve as a basis for the development of capitalism without any land lord economy
whatsoever, since, taken as a whole, the latter form of economy is
economically reactionary, whereas the elements of free farming have been
created among the peasantry by the preceding economic history of the
country. Capitalist development along such a path should proceed far
more broadly, freely, and swiftly owing to the tremendous growth of the home
market and of the rise in the standard of living, the energy, initiative, and
culture of the entire population. And Russia’s vast lands
available for colonisation, the utilisation of which is greatly hampered by the
feudal oppression of the mass of the peasantry in Russia proper, as well as by
the feudal-bureaucratic handling of the agrarian policy—these lands will
provide the economic foundation for a huge expansion of agriculture and for
increased production in both depth and breadth.


Such a path of development requires not only the abolition of landlordism. For
the rule of the feudal landlords through the centuries has left its imprint on
all forms of landownership in the country, on the peasant allotments as
well as upon the holdings of the settlers in the relatively free borderlands:
the whole colonisation policy of the autocracy is permeated with the Asiatic
interference of a hide-bound

    

bureaucracy, which hindered the settlers from establishing themselves
freely, introduced terrible confusion into the new agrarian relationships,
and infected the border regions with the poison of the feudal bureaucracy
of

   central Russia.[1]

Not only is landlordism in Russia medieval, but so also is the peasant
allotment system. The latter is incredibly complicated. It splits the
peasantry up into thousands of small units, medieval groups, social
categories. It reflects the age-old history of arrogant interference in the
peasants’ agrarian relationships both by the central government and the
local authorities. It drives the peasants, as into a ghetto, into petty
medieval associations of a fiscal, tax-levying nature, into associations
for the ownership of allotment land, i. e., into the village communes. And
Russia’s economic development is in actual fact tearing the
peasantry out of this medieval environment—on the one hand, by
causing allotments to be rented out and abandoned, and, on the other hand,
by creating a system of farming by the free farmers of the future (or by
the future Grossbauern of a Junker Russia) out of the fragments of
the most diverse forms of landownership: privately owned allotments, rented
allotments, purchased property, land rented from the land lord, land rented
from the state, and so on.  

In order to establish really free farming in Russia, it is
necessary to “unfence” all the land, landlord as well
as allotment land. The whole system of medieval landownership must
be broken up and all lands must be made equal for free farmers upon a free
soil. The greatest possible facilities must be created for the exchange of
holdings, for the free choice of settlements, for rounding off holdings,
for the creation of new, free associations, instead of the rusty,
tax-levying village communes. The whole land must be “cleared”
of all medieval lumber.  

The expression of this economic necessity is the nationalisation of the land,
the abolition of private ownership of the land, and the transfer of all
the land to the state,

    

which will mark a complete break with the feudal relations in the
countryside. It is this economic necessity that has turned the
mass of Russian peasants into supporters of land
nationalisation. The mass of small owner cultivators declared in favour of
nationalisation at the congresses of the Peasant Union in 1905, in the
First Duma in 1906, and in the Second Duma in 1907, i. e., during the whole
of the first period of the revolution. They did so not because the
“village commune” had imbued them with certain special
“rudiments”, certain special, non-bourgeois “labour
principles”. On the contrary, they did so because life required of
them that they should seek emancipation from the medieval village
commune and from the medieval allotment system. They did so not because
they wanted or were able to build a socialist agriculture, hut because they
have been wanting and have been able to build a really bourgeois
small-scale farming, i. e., farming freed as much as possible from
all the traditions of serfdom.  

Thus, it was neither chance nor the influence of this or that doctrine (as some
short-sighted people think) that determined this peculiar attitude towards
private ownership of the land on the part of the classes that are fighting in
the Russian revolution. This peculiar attitude is to be explained by the
conditions of the development of capitalism in Russia and by the requirements of
capitalism at this stage of its development. All the Black-Hundred landlords,
all the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie (including the Octobrists and the
Cadets) stand for private ownership of the land. The whole of the peasantry
and the proletariat are opposed to the private ownership of the land. The re
formative path of creating a Junker-bourgeois Russia pre supposes the
preservation of the foundations of the old system of landownership and their
slow adaptation to capitalism, which would be painful for the mass of the
population. The revolutionary path of really overthrowing the old order
inevitably requires, as its economic basis, the destruction of all the old forms
of landownership, together with all the old political institutions of
Russia. The experience of the first period of the Russian revolution has
conclusively proved that it can be victorious only as a peasant agrarian
revolution, and that the latter cannot

    

completely fulfil its historical mission unless the land is nationalised.


Social-Democracy, as the party of the international proletariat, the party
which has set itself world-wide socialist aims, cannot, of course, identify
itself with any epoch of any bourgeois revolution, nor can it tie its destiny to
this or that outcome of this or that bourgeois revolution. What ever the
outcome, we must remain an independent, purely proletarian party, which
steadfastly leads the working masses to their great socialist goal. We cannot,
therefore, under take to guarantee that any of the gains of the bourgeois
revolution will be permanent, because impermanence and inherent contradiction
are immanent features of all the gains of the bourgeois revolution as
such. The “invention” of “guarantees against
restoration” can only be the fruit of shallow thinking. We have but one
task: to rally the proletariat for the socialist revolution, to support every
fight against the old order in the most resolute way, to fight for the best
possible conditions for the proletariat in the developing bourgeois
society. From this it inevitably follows that our Social-Democratic programme
in the Russian bourgeois revolution can only be nationalisation of the
land. Like every other part of our programme, we must connect it with
definite forms and a definite stage of political reform, because the scope of
the political revolution and that of the agrarian revolution cannot but be the
same. Like every other part of our programme, we must keep it strictly free from
petty-bourgeois illusions, from intellectualist-bureaucratic chatter about
“norms”, from reactionary talk about strengthening the village
communes, or about equalised land tenure. The interests of the proletariat do
not demand that a special slogan, a special “plan” or
“system” shall be invented for this or that bourgeois revolution,
they only demand that the objective conditions for this revolution shall be
consistently expressed and that these objective, economically
unavoidable conditions be stripped of illusions and utopias. Nationalisation of
the land is not only the sole means for completely eliminating medievalism in
agriculture, but also the best form of agrarian an relationships conceivable under
capitalism.


Three circumstances have temporarily deflected the

    

Russian Social-Democrats from this correct agrarian programme. First,
P. Maslov, the initiator of “municipalisation” in Russia,
“revised” the theory of Marx, repudiated the theory of absolute
rent, and revived the semi-decayed bourgeois doctrines about the law of
diminishing returns, its connection with the theory of rent, etc. To
repudiate absolute rent is to deny that private landownership has any
economic significance under capitalism, and, consequently, this inevitably
led to the distortion of Marxist views on nationalisation. Secondly, not
having before them visible evidence that the peasant revolution had
begun, Russian Social-Democrats could not but regard its
possibility with caution, because the possible victory of the revolution
requires a number of especially favourable conditions and an especially
favourable development of revolutionary consciousness, energy, and
initiative on the part of the masses. Having no experience to go
on, and holding that it is impossible to invent bourgeois
movements, the Russian Marxists naturally could not, before the
revolution, present a correct agrarian programme. But even
after the revolution had begun, they committed the following
mistake: instead of applying the theory of Marx to the special
conditions prevailing in Russia (Marx and Engels always taught that their
theory was not a dogma, but a guide to action), they uncritically
repeated the conclusions drawn from the application of Marx’s theory
to foreign conditions, to a different epoch. The German
Social-Democrats, for instance, have quite naturally abandoned all the old
programmes of Marx containing the demand for the nationalisation of the
land, because Germany has taken final shape as a Junker-bourgeois country,
and all movements there based on the bourgeois order have become completely
obsolete, and there is not, nor can there be, any people’s movement
for nationalisation. The preponderance of Junker-bourgeois elements has
actually transformed the plans for nationalisation into a
plaything, or even into an instrument of the Junkers for robbing the
masses. The Germans are right in refusing even to talk about
nationalisation. But to apply this conclusion to Russia (as is done in
effect by those of our Mensheviks who do not see the connection between
municipalisation and Maslov’s revision of the theory of

    

Marx) is to reveal an inability to think of the tasks each
Social-Democratic party has to perform in special periods of its historical
development.  

Thirdly, the municipalisation programme obviously reflects the
erroneous tactical line of Menshevism in the Russian bourgeois revolution,
namely, a failure to understand that only “an alliance between the
proletariat and the

      peasantry[2]

can ensure the victory of this revolution, a failure to understand the
leading role the proletariat plays in the bourgeois revolution, a striving
to push the proletariat aside, to adapt it to a half-way outcome of the
revolution, to convert it from a leader into an auxiliary (actually into a
drudge and servant) of the liberal bourgeoisie. “Never enthusing,
adaptation using, forward then slowly, ye workers so lowly”—these
words of

Nartsis Tuporylov[4] against the “Economists” (=the first
opportunists in the R.S.D.L.P.), fully express the spirit of our
present agrarian programme.  

Combating the “enthusiasm” of petty-bourgeois socialism
should lead not to the contraction, but to the expansion of the scope of
the revolution and its aims as determined by the proletariat. It is not
“regionalism” that we should encourage, no matter how strong it
may be among the back ward strata of the petty bourgeoisie or the
privileged peasantry (Cossacks), not the exclusiveness of various
nationalities—no, we should make the peasantry see how important
unity is if victory is to be achieved, we should advance slogans that will
widen the movement, not narrow it, and that will place the responsibility
for the incomplete bourgeois revolution on the backwardness of the
bourgeoisie and not on the lack of understanding of the proletariat. We
should not “adapt” our programme to “local”
democracy; we should not invent a rural “municipal socialism”,
which is absurd and impossible under an undemocratic central government; we
should not adjust petty-bourgeois socialist reformism to the bourgeois
revolution, but concentrate the attention of the masses on the actual
conditions for the victory of the revolution as a bourgeois revolution, on
the



    

need for achieving not only local, but “central” democracy,
i.e., the democratisation of the central government of the state—and
not merely democracy in general, but the absolutely fullest, highest forms
of democracy, for otherwise the peasant agrarian revolution in Russia will
become utopian in the scientific sense of the term.  

And let it not be thought that at the present moment of history, when the
Black-Hundred die-hards are howling and raging in the Third Duma, when the
nec plus ultra of rampant counter-revolution has been reached and reaction is perpetrating savage acts of political vengeance upon the revolutionaries
in general and the Social-Democratic deputies in the Second Duma in
particular—let it not be thought that this moment is
“unsuitable” for “broad” agrarian programmes. Such a
thought would be akin to the backsliding, despondency, disintegration, and
decadence which have spread among wide sections of the petty-bourgeois
intellectuals who belong to the Social-Democratic Party, or sympathise with
this Party in Russia. The proletariat can only gain by having this rubbish swept
clean out of the ranks of the workers’ party. Yes, the more savagely reaction
rages, the more does it actually retard the inevitable economic development,
the more successfully does it prepare the wider upsurge of the democratic
movement. And we must take advantage of the temporary lulls in mass action in
order critically to study the experience of the great revolution, verify this
experience, purge it of dross, and pass it on to the masses as a guide
for the impending struggle.

November-December 1907
 

Notes
 

[1]
Mr. A. Kaufman, in his Migration and Colonisatian
(St. Petersburg, 1905), gives an outline of the history of Russian
colonisation policy. Like a good “liberal”, he is excessively deferent to
the feudal landlord bureaucracy.  —Lenin

[2]
That is how Kautsky expressed it in the second edition of his
pamphlet Social Revolution.  —Lenin
 



[3]
Razuvayev and Kolupayev—types of capitalist sharks
portrayed by Saltykov-Shchedrin, the Russian satirist.

 



[4]
Nartsis Tuporylov (Narcissus Blunt-Snout)—the pseudonym
under which Y. 0. Martov published his satirical poem “Hymn of the
Contemporary Russian Socialist”, which appeared in Zarya,
No. 1, April 1901.

 

 
  

9. The Social-Democrats

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Postscript









Lenin: Postscript







V. I.  

      Lenin
Postscript[1]




Written: September 28, 1917 

Published:

      Published in 1917 in The Agrarian Programme of Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1905-1907.

      Published according to the book text.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 430-431.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.
Other Formats:  
Text
• README



 

The present work was written at the end of 1907. It was
printed in St. Petersburg in 1908, but was seized and destroyed by the
tsarist censor. Only one copy was saved, but the end of it was missing
(after page 269 of that edition). This, has now been added.  

At the present time the revolution poses the agrarian question in
Russia in an immeasurably broader, deeper, and sharper form than it did in
1905-07. Knowledge of the his tory of our Party programme in the first
revolution will, I hope, contribute to a more correct understanding of the
aims of the present revolution.  

It is particularly necessary to emphasise the following. The war has
caused such untold calamities to the belligerent countries and has at the
same time accelerated the development of capitalism to such a tremendous
degree, converting monopoly capitalism into state-monopoly capitalism, that
neither the proletariat nor the revolutionary
petty-bourgeois democrats can keep within the limits of
capitalism.  

Life has already overstepped those limits and has placed on the order
of the day the regulation of production and distribution on a national
scale, universal labour service, compulsory syndication (uniting in
unions), etc.  

Under these circumstances, the question of the nationalisation of the
land must inevitably be presented in a new way in the agrarian programme,
namely: nationalisation of the land is not only “the last word”
of the bourgeois revolution, but also a step towards
socialism. The calamities due to the war cannot be combated unless
such steps are taken.  
 

The proletariat, leading the poorest section of the peasantry, is
compelled, on the one hand, to shift the weight of emphasis from the
Soviets of Peasants’ Deputies to the Soviets of Agricultural Workers’
Deputies, and on the other hand, to demand the nationalisation of faint
implements in the landlords’ estates and also the conversion of those
estates into model farms under the control of these latter Soviets.  

I cannot, of course, deal with these extremely important questions in
greater detail here; I must refer the readers who are interested in them
to the current Bolshevik literature and to my pamphlets: Letters on
Tactics and The Tasks of the Proletariat in Our Revolution
(Draft of a Platform for the Proletarian Party).  
The Author
September 28, 1917

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin wrote this Postscript for the 1917 edition of the book.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers









Lenin: The Debate on the Extension of the Duma's Budgetary Powers







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers[2]




Published:
Sotsial-Demokrat, No. 1, February 1908.

      Published according to the text in Sotsial-Demokrat.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 432-438.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The question of extending the budgetary powers of the Duma was debated at three
sessions held on January 12, 15, and 17. The Cadet Party brought in a Bill for
that purpose signed by forty Duma members. Representatives of all the parties
spoke on the subject and the Minister of Finance made two long speeches on
behalf of the government. A representative of the Social-Democratic Labour Party
also spoke. Arid the debate concluded with the unanimous (so says

Stolichnaya Pochta[3]

for January 18) adoption of the Octobrists’ motion that the Bill
for the extension of the Duma’s budgetary powers be referred to
committee “without going into the extent of these
changes”, i.e., the changes to the Rules of March 8, which
considerably restricted the budgetary powers of the Duma.  

How could such a strange thing happen? How could the Third Duma, a parliament of
Black-Hundred die-hards, unanimously adopt a motion of the Octobrists,
which virtually falls in with the government’s wishes and was presented
after the first speech of the Minister of Finance, who anticipated just
such an outcome. In substance, the Cadets’ Bill is unacceptable; on particular
points—why not modify the law. So declared the Black-Hundred Minister. And
the Octobrists worded their proposal accordingly, stressing the fact that they
did not go into the extent of those changes in the law.


That the Octobrists saw eye to eye with the Black-Hundred Minister is not
surprising. Nor, to anyone familiar with the nature of the
Constitutional-Democratic Party,

    

was it surprising that the Cadets withdrew their wording (in which, of course,
nothing was mentioned about their not going into the extent of the
changes which they themselves had outlined!). But that the Social-Democrats
could be a party to this kind of unanimity is incredible, and we should
like to believe that Stolichnaya Pochta did not tell the truth, and
that the Social-Democrats did not vote for the Octobrists’ motion.


However, there is a more important issue here than the question whether the
Social-Democrats voted for or against the Octobrists. And that is the question
of the mistake undoubtedly committed by the Social-Democratic deputy
Pokrovsky 2nd. It is to this mistake and to the real political significance of
the debate of January 12, 15, and 17, that we wish to draw the attention of our
readers.


The Russian Duma has no budgetary powers, for “by law” the
rejection of a budget does not prevent it from being put into execution. That
law, promulgated by the counter revolutionary government after the defeat of the
December uprising (February 20, 1906, the notorious “Fundamental
Laws”), makes a mockery of popular representation at the hands of
the Black Hundreds, the tsar, and the landlords. And the “Rules” of
March 8, 1906, further emphasise this mockery by imposing a multitude
of petty restraints on an examination of the budget in the Duma and by
even laying it down (Article 9) that “during the discussion of the draft
state budget, items of revenue and expenditure which have been inserted in the
draft on the basis of existing laws, civil, lists, and schedules, as well as
royal commands issued by way of supreme governance, cannot be excluded or
modified”. Is this not a mockery? Nothing that conforms to the laws,
to the civil lists, to schedules, or simply to the royal commands, can
be modified! Is it not ridiculous, after this, to talk about
the budgetary powers of the Russian Duma?


The question now arises—what were the tasks of the bourgeois
democrats, if they are really fighting for freedom, in the face of such a
situation? What were the tasks of the workers’ party?—in this
article we are speaking only of the tasks of parliamentary struggle and of the
parliamentary representatives of the respective parties.

 

Obviously, the question of the Duma’s budgetary powers
had to be raised in the Duma in order to make quite clear
to both the Russian people and to Europe the Black-Hundred contemptuous
attitude of tsarism and to show the complete powerlessness of the
Duma. The immediate practical object of such clarification (not to mention
the basic task of every democrat—that of revealing the truth
to the people, making them see the light) was further determined by the
question of the loan. The Black-Hundred government of the tsar could not
have held out after December 1905, and could not hold out even now, without
the help of world capital of the international bourgeoisie in the
shape of loans. And the world bourgeoisie is giving billions in loans to an
obviously bankrupt tsar, not only because it is lured, like all
moneylenders, by the prospect of big profits, but because it realises its
own vested interest in the victory of the old regime over the revolution in
Russia, for it is the proletariat that is marching at the head of this
revolution.  

Thus, the only object of raising and debating this question in
the Duma could be that of exposing the whole truth. Practical reform
activity could not, at this time and in this situation, be the aim
of a democrat, because, first, the impossibility of reforms on the
basis of the existing Fundamental Laws of the Duma’s budgetary powers
is obvious, and secondly, it would be absurd, in a Duma composed of
Black-Hundred die-hards and Moscow merchants, to propose that its
powers, the powers of such a Duma, should be extended. The Russian Cadets
(whom only ignoramuses or simpletons can regard as democrats) did not grasp
this task, of course. In raising the issue, they forthwith placed
it on a false basis—that of a partial reform. We do not, of
course, deny the possibility and necessity of a democrat or a
Social-Democrat sometimes raising the question of a partial reform. But in
such a Duma as the Third Duma, at such a moment as the present, on such a
question as budgetary powers, already hopelessly crippled by
inviolable Fundamental Laws, this was absurd. The Cadets could
raise the question as a matter of partial reform—we are willing to
concede them even that—but democrats could not treat this question
in the way that the Cadets have done.  
 

They stressed the so-called business aspect of the matter, the
inconvenience of the Rules of March 8, their disadvantage even to
the government, and the story of the way various idiotic laws against the
Duma were drafted in the idiotic government offices of Bulygin, Witte, and
others of that gang. The spirit of the Cadets’ presentation of the
issue is most saliently conveyed in the following words of Mr. Shingaryov:
“In the Bill we have introduced there are no encroachments [on the
prerogatives of the monarch], no ulterior motives [!!] whatever. All it
seeks to do is done for the sake of convenience of the Duma’s
work, for the sake of its dignity, for the sake of completing the work
we have been called upon to do” (our italics; p. 1263 of the
official Stenographic Record of the session of January 15, 1908).  

Such a person befogs people’s minds instead of
enlightening them, because what he says is nonsense and a bare faced
lie. We cannot alter this inescapable conclusion, even if this
Mr. Shingaryov and his whole fraternity of Cadet politicians sincerely
believed in the “value” of their “diplomacy”. A
democrat should reveal to the people the gulf that lies between
the powers of parliament and the prerogatives of the monarch, and not
deaden the public mind, not distort the political struggle by
reducing it to an office-routine correction of the laws. In
thus presenting the issue, the Cadets show in fact that
they are rivals of the tsar’s bureaucrats and the Octobrists, and not
champions of freedom, not even freedom for the big bourgeoisie. Only
bureaucrats vulgarly flirting with liberalism, and not representatives of
a parliamentary opposition, can talk like that.  

The speech by the representative of the Social-Democrats, Pokrovsky
2nd, we gladly acknowledge, reveals a quite different spirit,
presenting the issue in a fundamentally different way. The
Social-Democrat stated bluntly and clearly that he considered popular
representation in the Third Duma falsified (we are quoting
Stolichnaya Pochta for January 18, since the verbatim reports of
this session are not yet available). He stressed not minor points, not the
official derivation of the law, but the ruined and oppressed state of the
masses, of the vast millions of the people. He rightly declared that
“one cannot speak of the budgetary powers of the Duma without
irony”, that we were demanding not

    

only the right to recast the whole budget (Kokovtsev, a government official
with a lucrative post, argued in the Duma mainly against Shingaryov and
Adzhemov, government officials without lucrative posts, over the question
whether “recasting " was permissible and to what
extent), but to “remodel the whole financial system”
and “reject the government’s budget”. He concluded with a
no less correct and, for a member of the workers’ party, obligatory demand
for “full power of the people”. On all these points Pokrovsky
conscientiously and correctly upheld the Social-Democratic point of view.


But in doing so, he committed an unfortunate mistake— judging by
newspaper reports, the whole Social-Democratic group committed
that mistake in giving such instructions to its spokesman. Pokrovsky
declared: “We support the proposal of the 40 because it tends
towards an extension of the budgetary powers of a popular representative
assembly.”  

What was the object of this declaration of support for a proposal that was
plainly lacking in principle, that was plainly inadequate, plainly signed by
unprincipled people who were incapable of showing the slightest firmness—a
proposal that was plainly and for all practical purposes worthless? This was not
support for the militant bourgeoisie (a formula which many people like to use
to justify their political spinelessness), but support for the wavering
liberal-Octobrist bourgeoisie. That this was so, was proved immediately by the
facts. The Cadets themselves proved it by withdrawing their
proposal and joining with the Octobrists in the motion to have the
Bill “referred to committee without going into the extent of the
changes in the law” (I). For the hundredth and thousandth time
“support” given to the Cadets led to those who supported them being
deceived. For the hundredth and thousandth time the facts have
revealed how shoddy and impermissible are the tactics of supporting liberal,
Cadet proposals that follow the line,

 etc.[1]

 

If the Cadets, instead of joining with the Octobrists, had put to
the vote a declaration stating clearly and precisely that the Duma was
powerless iii financial matters, that popular representation was falsified,
that the country had been ruined by the autocracy and a financial
débâcle was unavoidable, and that under such circumstances the
democratic representatives would not give their support to any
loans—that would have been an honest act on the part of the bourgeois
democrats, an act of struggle and not an act of dull-witted flunkeyism. It
would have been our duty to support such an act, while not forgetting. to
stipulate our own independent Social-Democratic objectives. Such an act
would have contributed to the enlightenment of the people and the exposure
of the autocracy.  

The defeat of such a declaration in the Duma and the violent opposition
such a proposal would have raised among the Black Hundreds would have been
a historical service rendered by the democrats and probably a new phase in
the struggle for, freedom. But now the Cadets have once again proved
bankrupt. Social-Democratic comrades in the Duma, protect the honour
of the socialist workers’ party! Do not allow yourselves to suffer failure
by giving support to such liberalism!  


One violent member of the Right in the Duma departed from the
Octobrists’ tactics, which aimed at glossing over differences and coaxing
the Cadets into an agreement. The Black-Hundred Kovalenko bluntly declared
in the Duma on January 12 that he was against introducing the Cadets’ Bill
in the Committee (p. 1192 of Stenographic Record). But apparently he voted,
did this hero, with the Octobrists; he was brave only in words. He
admirably illustrated the real state of affairs by
referring in his speech to the following example as proof of the need for
emergency measures: “Take, for instance, the insurrection in Moscow,
the dispatch of punitive detachments. Could the government have had

    

time to follow the ordinary course?”... (p. 1193). It is a pity that
Social-Democrats do not catch these sparks of truth that come from
the Black Hundreds. You are right, deputy colleague—he should have
been told. There is no place here for the ordinary course. Let us drop
hypocrisy and admit that we are living through not “an ordinary
course”, but civil war; that the government is not ruling,
but fighting, that the state of things in Russia is one of barely
restrained insurrection. That would be the truth, and it would do the
people good to be reminded of it more often!  
 

Notes
 

[1]
The

“Bezgolovy”[4]

newspaper Stolichnaya Pochta, through the mouth of a Mr. Saturin,
announces that “the opposition, very sensibly [!] voted for it [for
the Octobrist motion]. As a result the amendment [that is, the motion to
abstain from determining the extent of the changes] was adopted
unanimously” (January 18, p. 4, “From the Assembly

   

Hall”). Long live the unanimity between the Russian “Bezgolovy” liberals
and the Octobrists and ministers of the Black-Hundred tsar!  —Lenin
 



[2]
The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers was
first published in Sotsial-Demokrat, the Central Organ of the

   

R.S.D.L.P., issue No. 1, February 1908. The article was reprinted in the
newspaper Proletary, No. 27, March 26 (April 8) of the same year
with a postscript by Lenin (see p. 439 of this volume).


Sotsial-Demokrat—Central Organ of the R.S.D.L.P., an
illegal newspaper, published from February 1908 to January 1917. Issue
No. 1 appeared in Russia, but thereafter the paper was published abroad,
first in Paris, then in Geneva. The Editorial Board, according to a
decision of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P., was made up of
representatives of the Bolsheviks, the Mensheviks, and the Polish
Social-Democrats. Over eighty articles and other items of Lenin’s
were published in Sotsial-Demokrat. On the paper’s Editorial Board
Lenin fought for a consistent Bolshevik line. Some of the editors (Kamenev
and Zinovyev) took a conciliatory stand towards the liquidators and tried
to obstruct Lenin’s policy. The Menshevik editors Martov and Dan
sabotaged the work of the Editorial Board while at the same time openly
defending the liquidators in Golos
Sotsial-Demokrata. Lenin’s uncompromising fight against the
liquidators led to Martov and Dan retiring from the Editorial Board in June
1911. From December 1911 onwards Sotsial-Demokrat was edited by
Lenin.

 



[3]
Stolichnaya Pochta (Metropolitan Post)—a
Left-Cadet newspaper, published in St. Petersburg from October 1906 to
February 1908.

 
a



[4]
Bezgolovy (Headless)—ironically applied by
Lenin to the Bezzaglavtsi, a group of bourgeois liberals
(S. N. Prokopovich, Y. D. Kuskova, etc..) formed around the journal Bes
Zaglaviya (Without a Title). In 1908, the Bezzaglavtsi
published the newspapers Stolichnaya Pochta and Nasha
Gazeta.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Postscript to the Article “The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers”









Lenin: Postscript to the Article 'The Debate on the Extension of the Duma's Budgetary Powers'







V. I.  

      Lenin
Postscript to the Article “The Debate on the Extension of the Duma’s Budgetary Powers”




Published:
Proletary. No. 27, (April 8) March 26, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      page 439.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At the present time the Duma has started discussing the budget. The bloc of
reactionaries with the betrayers of the people’s freedom forming the
pseudo-opposition showed its face during the very first day of the debates. We
find the same picture in the legal press—the Novoye Vremya people
hail the unity of all, except the “Left fanatics” (read:
the Social-Democrats and the Trudoviks...).

Nasha Gazeta[1] of the “Bezgolovy” fraternity
goes into ecstasies. It was a “business” day that “made
up” for “the drawback of having the budget scrutinised by
separate estimates”....  

The “opposition” trails in the wake of overt reaction. It
is just here that responsibility and the honourable role of true
representatives of the plundered people devolves upon the deputies of the
working class and democracy. Unfortunately, the first budgetary speeches of
our Duma comrades are very lame and deeply mistaken. In the next issue of
Proletary we shall deal in detail with these mistakes and indicate
what we believe to be the necessary line of action for Social-Democrats in
the budgetary debates and

voting.[2]

 

Notes
 
 



[1]
Nasha Gazeta (Our Newspaper)—a newspaper of a
semi-Cadet trend, published in St. Petersburg from 1904 to 1908.





[2]
Proletary (The Proletarian), No. 29, April 16 (29),
1908, published a letter of the Central Committee of the R.S.D.L.P. to the
local organisations concerning the work of the Social-Democratic deputies
in the Duma.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Political Notes









Lenin: Political Notes







V. I.  

      Lenin
Political Notes




Published:
Proletary, No. 21, February 26(13), 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 440-446.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The chauvinists are hard at work. Rumours are increasingly
being spread that the Japanese are arming, that they have concentrated 600
battalions in Manchuria for an attack on Russia. Turkey is reported to be
vigorously arming with the intention of declaring war on Russia in the
spring of this year. It is said that a revolt is being prepared in the
Caucasus with the object of seceding from Russia (all that is lacking is a
clamour about the plans of the Poles!). Feeling against Finland is being
worked up by tales that she is arming. A bitter campaign is being conducted
against Austria over the building of a railway in Bosnia. The attacks of
the Russian press on Germany, which is alleged to be inciting Turkey
against Russia, are becoming more violent. The campaign is being conducted
not only in the Russian but also in the French press, whose bribery by the
Russian Government was recently so opportunely mentioned in the Duma by a
Social-Democrat.  

The serious bourgeois press of the West declines to regard this campaign as a
figment of the imagination of newspaper men or the speculation of
sensation-mongers. Obviously, “ruling circles”—meaning the
Black-Hundred tsarist government, or a secret court cabal like the notorious
“Star Chamber”—have given a very definite cue; some systematic
“line” is being pursued, some “new course” has been
adopted. The foreign press traces a direct connection between this chauvinistic
campaign and the fact that the doors of the Duma Committee of State Defence
have been closed to all members of the Duma not belonging to that Committee,
i.e., not only to the revolutionary parties but also to the Cadets; it is even
said that the Russian Government, as a

    

crowning token of its contempt for “constitutionalism”, intends
to apply for credits for frontier military reinforcements not to the whole
Duma, but only to the Black Hundred-Octobrist Committee.  

Here are some quotations from European newspapers, newspapers which are
anything but socialist and which can not be suspected of optimism with
regard to the Russian revolution: 


   “The German victories over France (in 1870), as Bismarck once
   remarked, fired the ambition of the Russian military, and they too reached
   out for martial laurels. For political, religious, and historical reasons,
   Turkey seemed a most suitable object for this purpose (the war with Turkey
   of 1877-78). Evidently, the same views are held today by certain Russian
   circles who have forgotten the lessons of the Japanese war and who do not
   understand the true needs of the country. As there are no more ‘brothers’
   to be liberated in the Balkans, they have to devise other methods of
   influencing Russian public opinion. And these methods, to tell the truth,
   are even more clumsy than the others: it is being made out that Russia is
   surrounded by internal and external enemies.  

   “Russia’s ruling circles seek to bolster up their position
   by the old methods of forcibly suppressing the internal movement for
   emancipation and diverting public attention from the deplorable internal
   situation by arousing nationalist sentiments and stirring up diplomatic
   conflicts, of which nobody knows what the outcome will be.”  


What is the significance of this new chauvinistic line in the policy of the
counter-revolutionary autocracy? After Tsushima and Mukden, only people from
under whose feet the ground is definitely slipping can embark on such a pol
icy. Notwithstanding all the efforts that have been made, the experience of two
years of reaction has not created any reliable support within the
country for the Black-Hundred autocracy, nor any new class elements capable of
rejuvenating the autocracy economically. And without this no
atrocities, no frenzy of the counter-revolution can save the present political
system in Russia.



Stolypin, the Black-Hundred landlords, and the Octobrists all understand that
unless they create new class sup ports for themselves they cannot remain in
power. Hence their policy of utterly ruining the peasants and forcibly breaking
up the village communes in order to clear the way

    

for capitalism in agriculture at all costs. The Russian liberals,
the most learned, the most educated, and the most “humane” of
them—like the professors of Russkiye Vedomosti— prove
to be incomparably more stupid in this respect than the
Stolypins. “It would not be surprising,” says the editorial in
the February 1st issue of this newspaper, “if in deciding, for
instance, the fate of the November provisional regulations, the formerly
Slavophile advocates of the village commune support the attempt of the
Ministry to destroy the village communes by assigning land to individual
householders as their private property.... It may even be assumed that the
defensive aims common to the conservative majority in the Duma and to the
Ministry will suggest to both measures even more aggressive than the famous
ukases of 1906.... We get an amazing picture: the conservative government,
with the support of representatives of the conservative parties, are
preparing to carry out a radical reform of agrarian relations—which
are the least amenable to drastic changes—and are deciding upon so
radical a measure from abstract considerations about the preferability of
one form of ownership to another.”  

Wake up, mister professor! Shake off the archive dust of old-fashioned
Narodism; look at what two years of revolution have done. Stolypin defeated you
not only by physical force, but also because he correctly understood the most
practical need of economic development, namely, the forcible break-up of the
old form of landownership. The great “advance” which has already
been irrevocably effected by the revolution consists in the fact that formerly
the Black-Hundred autocracy could base itself on medieval forms of
landownership, whereas now it is compelled, wholly and irrevocably
compelled, to work for their destruction with feverish speed. For it has
understood that without the break-up of the old agrarian order
there can be no escape from the contradiction which most profoundly of
all explains the Russian revolution, namely, the most backward system of
landownership and the most ignorant peasantry on the one hand, and the most
advanced industrial and finance capitalism on the other!


So you are for the Stolypin agrarian legislation? the Narodniks will
ask us in horror.  
 

Oh, no. Calm yourselves! We are unreservedly opposed to all the forms
of the old landownership in Russia—both landlordism and peasant
allotment ownership. We are unreservedly in favour of a forcible break-up of
this rotten and decaying antiquity which is poisoning everything new. We are in
favour of bourgeois nationalisation of the land, as the only consistent
slogan of the bourgeois revolution, and as the only practical measure that will
direct the spearhead of the historically necessary break-up against the
landlords by contributing towards the emergence of free farmers from among the
mass of the peasantry.


A feature of the Russian bourgeois revolution is that a revolutionary
policy on the key issue of the revolution—the agrarian
question—is being pursued by the Black Hundreds and by the peasants
together with the workers. The liberal lawyers and professors, on the other
hand, are advocating something that is absolutely lifeless, absurd, and
utopian—namely, a reconciliation of the two antithetical and mutually
exclusive methods of breaking up what is obsolescent; a
reconciliation, moreover, which will mean no break up at all. Either a
victory for the peasant revolt and the complete break-up of the old
landowning system in favour of a peasantry that has been remoulded by the
revolution—in other words, confiscation of the landed estates and a
republic; or a Stolypin break-up which also remoulds—in fact,
remoulds and adapts the old landowning system to capitalist
relationships—but wholly in the interests of the land lords and at
the price of the utter ruin of the peasant masses, their forcible ejection
from the countryside, the eviction, starvation, and the extermination of
the flower of the peas ant youth with the help of jails, exile, shooting,
and torture. For a minority to enforce such a policy against the majority
would not be easy, but economically it is not impossible. We must help the
people to realise this. But the attempt by means of a neat reform,
peacefully and without violence, to escape from that utterly tangled skein
of medieval contradictions, which has been created by centuries of Russian
history, is the stupidest dream of hidebound “men in
mufflers”. Economic necessity will certainly call for, and will
certainly bring about a most “drastic change” in Russia’s
agrarian system. The historical question is whether

    

it will be carried out by the landlords, led by the tsar and Stolypin, or
by the peasant masses, led by the proletariat.  


“Union of the opposition”—such is the topic of
the day in the Russian political press. Stolypin’s police-minded
Rossiya is jubilant: “Union?—that means the Cadets too
are revolutionaries! At the Cadets, at ’em!” The Cadet Rech,
thoroughly imbued with the desire of the loyal government official to prove
that the Constitutional-Democrats can be no less moderate than the
Octobrists, primly purses its lips, pours forth a flood of
“moral” indignation at the unscrupulous attempts to accuse it
of being revolutionary, and declares: We, of course, would welcome the
union of the opposition, but that union must be a movement “from
Left to Right” (editorial of February 2). “We have had
experience of political mistakes and disillusionments. When an opposition
unites, it naturally unites on the minimum programme of the most moderate
of the parties which form it.”  

This programme is perfectly clear: the hegemony of bourgeois
liberalism—those are my terms, say the Cadets, just as Falloux in
1871 said to Thiers, when the latter appealed to him for support: The
monarchy—those are my terms.  

Stolichnaya Pochta realised that it is shameful, disgraceful
to say such things outright, and it therefore “does not agree”
with Rech and confines itself to vague hints at the
“pre-October mood” (the accursed censorship prevents a clearly
stated political programme!) and, in substance, calls for a
deal. Rech, it as much as says, wants to lead, and the
revolutionaries want to lead (the new union), but what about me—am I
not entitled to a commission for acting as an honest broker?  

“Union”—we warmly sympathise with that slogan, especially
when there is a hint—although only a hint!—of
“pre-October moods”. Only, history does not repeat itself, my
dear political intriguers! And no power on earth can erase from the minds
of the various classes the lessons that were taught by the “history
of the three years”. Those lessons are exceedingly rich both in
positive content (the forms, nature, and conditions of the victory of the
mass struggle of the workers and peasants in 1905) and in negative
content

    

(the failure of the two Dumas, in other words, the shattering of
constitutional illusions and of Cadet hegemony).  

Anyone who wants systematically to study, ponder over, understand, and
teach the masses these lessons is welcome to do so—we are
wholly in favour of “union”, union for a relentless struggle
against the renegades of the revolution. You don’t like that? Well,
then our paths diverge.  

The old “pro-October” slogan (“constituent
assembly”) is a good one and (we hope that this will not rouse the
ire of M-d-m of the Our Thought

symposium[1]) we shall not discard it. But it is inadequate. It is too
formal. It contains no recognition of the acute practical issues that life
is raising. We shall reinforce it with the great lesson of the three great
years. Our “minimum programme”, “our programme of
union”, is simple and clear:

(1) confiscation of all landlords’ estates;

(2) a republic. The kind of constituent assembly we need is one
that can achieve this.  

The history of the two Dumas, the Cadet Dumas, showed with striking
clarity that the real struggle of social forces— the struggle which
was not always a conscious one, which did not always break into the open,
but which always exercised a decisive influence upon every big political
issue and which always swept away like dust tile conjuring tricks of the
naïve and knavishly astute “constitutionalist”
ignoramuses—was waged wholly and completely for the sake of the two
above-mentioned “objects”. Not abstract theories, but the real
experience of the struggle of our popular masses under the real conditions
of Russia’s landlord autocracy, has demonstrated to us in practice
the inevitability of precisely these slogans. To those who are capable of
grasping them we propose that we “march separately” but
“strike together”, strike at the enemy who is devastating
Russia and killing off thousands of her finest people.  

“With such a programme of union you will remain isolated.”
That is not true.  

Read the speeches of the non-party peasants in the, first two Dumas,
and you will see that our programme of union only formulates their wishes,
their needs, and the elementarily necessary conclusions to be drawn from
these needs. Against those who do not understand these needs—from the
Cadets to Peshekhonov (he too has preached “union” in

    

Moscow, as we are informed from there)—we shall wage war in the name
of “union”.  

It will be a stubborn war. We knew how to work during the long years
preceding the revolution. Not for nothing do they say we are as hard as
rock. The Social-Democrats have built a proletarian party which will not be
disheartened by the failure of the first armed onslaught, will not lose its
head, nor be carried away by adventures. That party is marching to
socialism, without tying itself or its future to the outcome of any
particular period of bourgeois revolutions. That is precisely why it is
also free of the weaker aspects of bourgeois revolution. And this
proletarian party is marching to victory.  

 
Notes
 
 



[1]
Lenin is possibly referring to the article “Political
Sketches” published in the symposium Nasha Tribuna (Our
Tribune), Book I, Vilna, 1907. The writer of the article—M-d-m
(Medem), a prominent Bundist, argued that after the defeat of the
revolution of 1905-07 Russian Social-Democracy should drop such
revolutionary slogans as that calling for a constituent assembly.










Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Statement of the Editors of Proletary









Lenin: Statement of the Editors of Proletary







V. I.  

      Lenin
Statement of the Editors of Proletary




Published:
Proletary, No, 21, February 26(13), 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      page 447.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In Neue Zeit, No. 20, in the foreword by an unknown translator of
A. Bogdanov’s article on Ernst Mach, we read the following:

“Russian Social-Democracy, unfortunately, reveals a strong tendency
to making this or that attitude towards Mach a question of factional
division within the party. Grave tactical differences of opinion between
the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks are aggravated by a controversy on a
question, which, in our opinion, has no bearing whatever on these
differences, namely, whether Marxism, from the point of view of theory, is
compatible with the teaching of Spinoza and Holbach, or of Mach and
Avenarius.”  

In this connection the Editorial Board of Proletary, as the
ideological spokesman of the Bolshevik trend, deems it necessary to state
the following. Actually, this philosophical controversy is not a factional
one and, in the opinion of the Editorial Board, should not be so; any at
tempt to represent these differences of opinion as factional is radically
erroneous. Both factions contain adherents of the two philosophical trends.


 
Notes
 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Letter to A. M. Gorky









Lenin: A Letter to A. M. Gorky







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Letter to A. M. Gorky




Published:

      First published in 1924 in Lenin Miscellany I.

      Published according to the manuscript.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 448-454.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 
25.11.1908

Dear A. M.,


I did not answer your letter immediately because, strange as it may
seem at first glance, we had quite a serious fight on the editorial board
with

Al. Al.[2] over your article, or rather in a certain connection with
it. Ahem, ahem... I spoke not in that place and not on that
subject which you thought!  

It happened like this.


The book, Studies in the Philosophy

of Marxism,[3] has considerably sharpened the old differences
among the Bolsheviks on questions of philosophy. I do not consider myself
sufficiently competent on these questions to rush into print. But I have
always followed our Party debates on philosophy very closely,
beginning with Plekhanov’s struggle against Mikhailovsky and Go. in
the late eighties and up to 1895, then his struggle against the Kantians
from 1898 onwards (here I not only followed it, but participated in it to
some extent, as a member of the Zarya editorial board since 1900),
and, finally, his struggle against the empirio-critics and Co.  

I have been following Bogdanov’s writings on philosophy since his
energeticist book, The Historical View of Nature, which I studied
during my stay in Siberia. For Bogdanov, this position was merely a
transition to other philosophical views. I became personally acquainted
with him in 1904, when we immediately gave each other presents—I,

my Steps,[4] he, one of his current philosophical

works.[5] And I at once (in the spring or the early summer of 1904)
wrote to him in Paris from Geneva that his writings strongly convinced

    

me that his views were wrong and as strongly convinced me that those of
Plekhanov were correct.  

When we worked together, Plekhanov and I often discussed
Bogdanov. Plekhanov explained the fallacy of Bogdanov’s views to me,
but he did not think the deviation a terribly serious one. I remember
perfectly well that in the summer of 1903 Plekhanov and I, as
representatives of the Zarya editorial board, bad a conversation
in Geneva with a delegate from the editors of the symposium Outlines of
a Realistic

World Outlook,[6] at which we agreed to
contribute—I, on the agrarian question, Plekhanov on anti-Machist
philosophy. Plekhanov made it a condition of his
collaboration that he would write against Mach, a condition that the
symposium delegate readily accepted. Plekhanov at that time regarded
Bogdanov as an ally in the fight against revisionism, but an ally who erred
in following Ostwald and, later on, Mach.  

In the summer and autumn of 1904, Bogdanov and I reached a complete
agreement, as Bolsheviks, and formed the tacit bloc, which tacitly
ruled out philosophy as a neutral field, that existed all through the
revolution and enabled us in that revolution to carry out together the
tactics of revolutionary Social-Democracy (= Bolshevism), which, I am
profoundly convinced, were the only correct tactics.  

There was little opportunity to engage in philosophy in the heat of the
revolution. Bogdanov wrote another piece in prison at the beginning of
1906—the third issue of Empirio-monism, I believe. He
presented it to me in the summer of 1906, and I sat downs to study
it. After reading it I was furious. It became clearer to me than ever that
lie was on an absolutely wrong track, not the Marxist track. I thereupon
wrote him a “declaration of love”, a letter on philosophy
taking up three notebooks. I explained to him that I was just an
ordinary Marxist in philosophy, but that it was precisely his lucid,
popular, and splendidly written works that had finally convinced me that he
was essentially wrong and that Plekhanov was right. I showed these note
books to some friends (including Lunacharsky) and thought of publishing
them under the title “Notes of an Ordinary Marxist on
Philosophy”, but I never got round to it. I am sorry now that I did
not have them published at the moment.

    

I wrote to St. Petersburg the other day to have these note books hunted out
and forwarded to

me.[7] 

Now the Studies in the Philosophy of Marxism have appeared. I have read
all the articles except Suvorov’s (I am reading it now), and every article
made me furiously indignant. No,no, this is not Marxism! Our empirio-critics,
empirio-monists, and empirio-symbolists are floundering in a bog. To try to
persuade the reader that “belief” in the reality of the external
world is “mysticism” (Bazarov); to confuse in the most disgraceful
manner materialism with Kantianism (Bazarov and Bogdanov); to preach a variety
of agnosticism (empirio-criticism) and idealism (empirio-monism); to teach the
workers “religious atheism” and “worship” of the higher
human potentialities (Lunacharsky); to declare Engels’s teaching on
dialectics to be mysticism (Berman); to draw from the stinking well of some
French “positivists” or other, of agnostics or metaphysicians, the
devil take them, with their “symbolic theory of cognition”
(Yushkevich)! No, really, it’s too much. To be sure, we ordinary Marxists are
not well up in philosophy, but why insult us by serving this stuff up to us as
the philosophy of Marxism! I would rather let myself be drawn and quartered than
consent to collaborate in an organ or body that preaches such things.


I felt a renewed interest in my “Notes of an ordinary Marxist on
Philosophy” and I began to write

them,[8] but to Al. Al., in the process of reading the
Studies, I gave my impressions bluntly and sharply, of course.


But what has your article got to do with it, you will ask? It has this
to do with it: just at a time when these differences of opinion among the
Bolsheviks threaten to become particularly acute, you are obviously
beginning to expound the views of one trend in your article for
Proletary. I do not know, of course, what you would have made of
it, taken as a whole. Besides, I believe that an artist can glean much that
is useful to him from philosophy of all kinds. Finally, I absolutely agree
with the view that in matters that concern the art of writing you are the
best judge, and that in deriving this kind of views both from your
artistic experience and from philosophy, even in idealistic
philosophy, you can arrive at conclusions that will be of tremendous
benefit to the workers’ party. All that is true; nevertheless
Proletary
    


    

must remain absolutely neutral towards all our divergencies in philosophy
and not give the reader the slightest grounds for associating the
Bolsheviks, as a trend, as a tactical line of the revolutionary wing of the
Russian Social-Democrats, with empirio-criticism or empirio-monism.  

When, after reading and re-reading your article, I told A. A. that
I was against its publication, he grew as black as a thundercloud. The
threat of a split was in the air. Yesterday our editorial trio held a
special meeting to discuss the matter. A stupid trick on the part of
Neue Zeit came unexpectedly to our rescue. In its issue No. 20, an
unknown translator published Bogdanov’s article on Mach, and blurted
out in a foreword that the differences between Plekhanov and Bogdanov had a
tendency, among Russian Social-Democracy, to become a factional
disagreement between the Bolsheviks and the Mensheviks. The fool, whether
man or woman, who wrote this foreword succeeded in uniting us. We agreed at
once that an announcement of our neutrality was now essential in the very
next issue of Proletary. This was perfectly in keeping with my own
frame of mind after the appearance of the Studies. A statement was
drawn up, unanimously endorsed, and tomorrow it will appear in issue No. 21
of Proletary, which will be forwarded to

 you.[1]


As regards your article, it was decided to postpone the matter, explain
the situation to you in letters from each of Proletary’s
three editors, and hasten my and Bogdanov’s trip to see you.  

And so you will be receiving a letter also from Al. Al. and from the

third editor,[9] about whom I wrote you previously.  

I consider it necessary to give you my opinion quite frankly. Some sort
of fight among the Bolsheviks on the question of philosophy I regard now as
quite unavoidable. It would be stupid, however, to split on this. We formed
a bloc in order to secure the adoption of definite tactics in the workers’
party. We have been pursuing these tactics up to now without
disagreement (the only difference of opinion was on the boycott of the
Third Duma, but that, first, was never so sharp among us as to lead to even
a hint of a split, and,

    

secondly, it never corresponded to the disagreement between the
materialists and the Machists, for the Machist Bazarov, for example, was
with me in opposing the boycott and wrote a long article on this in
Proletary).  

To hinder the application of the tactics of revolutionary Social-Democracy in
the workers’ party for the sake of disputes on the question of materialism or
Machism, would be, in my opinion, unpardonable folly. We ought to fight over
philosophy in such a way that Proletary and the Bolsheviks, as a
faction of the party, would not be affected by it. And
that is quite possible.


And you, I think, ought to help in this. You can help by contributing
to Proletary on neutral questions (that is, unconnected with
philosophy) of literary criticism, publicism, belles lettres, and so on. As
for your article, if you wish to prevent a split and help to localise the
new fight— you should rewrite it, and everything that even indirectly
bears on Bogdanov’s philosophy should be placed somewhere else. You
have other mediums, thank God, besides Proletary. Everything that
is not connected with Bogdanov’s philosophy—and the
bulk of your article is not connected with it—you could set
out in a series of articles for Proletary. Any other attitude on
your part, that is, a refusal to rewrite the article or to collaborate with
Proletary would, in my opinion, unavoidably tend to aggravate the
conflict among the Bolsheviks, make it difficult to localise the new fight,
and weaken the vital cause, so essential practically and politically, of
revolutionary Social-Democracy in Russia.  

That is my opinion. I have told you all my thoughts and am now looking forward
to your reply.


We intended to go to you today, but find that we have to postpone our
visit for not less than a week, perhaps two or three weeks.  
With very best regards,
Yours, N. Lenin
 

Notes
 

[1]
See p. 447 of this volume.—Ed.  
 



[2]
Al. Al.—A.A. Bogdanov.

 



[3]
Lenin refers to the collection of articles by V. Bazarov, Berman
A. Lunacharsky, P. Yushkevich, A. Bogdanov, I. Gelfond, and
S. Suvorov.

 



[4]
This refers to Lenin’s One Step Forward, Two Steps Back
which appeared in Geneva in May 1904.

 



[5]
This refers to A. Bogdanov’s book Empirio-monism,
Moscow, 1904.

 



[6]
A collection of articles by A. Lunacharsky, V. Bazarov,
A. Bogdanov. P. Maslov, A. Finn, V. Shulyatikov, V. Fritche, and others,
published in St. Petersburg in 1904. The articles by Plekhanov and Lenin
did not appear in this book.

 



[7]
Lenin’s Notes of an Ordinary Marxist on Philosophy has
not been found.

 



[8]
At that time Lenin had begun to write his book Materialism and
Empirio-criticism.

 



[9]
The third editor was I. F. Dubrovinsky.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The New Agrarian Policy









Lenin: The New Agrarian Policy







V. I.  

      Lenin
The New Agrarian Policy




Published:
Proletary, No. 22, (March 3) February 19, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 455-459.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

On Wednesday, February 13, Nicholas II received 307 deputies of the Third
Duma. The tsar’s amiable conversation with the Black-Hundred
reactionaries Bobrinsky and Chelyshev was a comic aspect of the new ceremonial
kiss of the autocracy and its gang of allies. Far more serious was the statement
by Nicholas that the Duma was shortly to pass new agrarian laws, and that all
thought of compulsory alienation must be dismissed, since he, Nicholas II,
would never sanction such a law. “The tsar’s speech,”
reports the correspondent of Frankfurter Zeitung, “had a
depressing effect on the peasants.”


To be sure, the agitational value of this “agrarian
statement” made by the tsar himself is very important, and we can but
congratulate the talented agitator. But, apart from its agitational
significance, this ominous thrust at compulsory alienation is highly
important as conclusive proof that the landlord monarchy has embarked on a
new agrarian policy.  

The famous extra-Duma ukases under Article 87 of November 9, 1906, and
successive dates, ushered in the era of this new agrarian policy of the tsarist
government. Stolypin confirmed it in the Second Duma; the
Right and the Octobrist deputies approved it; the Cadets (frightened by rumours
picked up in lobbies of the camarilla that the Duma was going to be dissolved)
refrained from denouncing it openly. Now, in the Third Duma, the Land Committee
has recently accepted the basic thesis of the law of November 9, 1906, and has
gone a step further by recognising the proprietary

    

rights of the peasants to their holdings in all village communes which had
not carried out any reallotment in the course of twenty-four years. At the
reception given on February 13, the head of feudal-landlord Russia gave his
public blessing to that policy with the added threat, obviously for the
benefit of the non-party peasants, that he would sanction no law for
compulsory alienation in favour of the peasantry.  

The fact that the government of the tsar, of the landlords, and of the
big bourgeoisie (the Octobrists) bas definitely given its support to the
new agrarian policy is of tremendous historical importance. The destinies
of the bourgeois revolution in Russia—not only the present
revolution, but possible future democratic revolutions as well—depend
most of all an the success or failure of this policy.  

Wherein lies the essence of this change? It lies in the fact that up to
now the sanctity of the old, medieval allotment landownership by the
peasants and their “primordial” village communes had its most
ardent supporters in the master classes of reactionary Russia. The
serf-owning landlords, being the ruling class in pre-Reform Russia, the
politically predominating class throughout the nineteenth century, pursued,
by and large, a policy of preserving the old communal system of
peasant landownership.  

The development of capitalism, completely undermined this system by the
twentieth century. The old village commune with its social estate basis,
the attachment of the peasant to the soil, the routinism of the semi-feudal
countryside came into the sharpest conflict with the new economic
conditions. The dialectics of history were such that the peasantry, who in
other countries with a more or less well-ordered (from the point of view of
the requirements of capitalism) agrarian system are a pillar of the regime,
came forward in Russia during the revolution with the most destructive
demands, including the confiscation of the landlords’ estates and the
nationalisation of the land (the Trudoviks in the First and Second Dumas).


These radical demands, which were even tinctured with the ideas of
petty-bourgeois socialism, were by no means the result of muzhik
“socialism”, but were due to the economic necessity of cutting
the tangled knot of feudal landownership,

    

of clearing the way for the free farmer (the agricultural entrepreneur) on
land freed from all, medieval

     partitions.[1]


Capitalism has already irrevocably sapped all the foundations of the
old agrarian system in Russia. It can make no further progress unless it
breaks up that system, and it certainly and inevitably will break it up; no
power on earth can prevent this. But this system can be broken up in the
landlord way or the peasant way, to clear the path for landlord or peasant
capitalism. The landlord way of breaking up the old order involves the
forcible destruction of the village commune and the accelerated ruination
and extermination of the mass of impoverished owners for the benefit of a
handful of kulaks. The peasant way involves the confiscation of the
landlords’ land, and the transfer of all the land to free proprietors from
among the peasantry (the Narodniks’ “equal right to the land”
means, in effect, the farmers’ right to the land with the
destruction of all medieval partitions).  

The government of the counter-revolution understood this
position. Stolypin had a correct grasp of the matter:

unless the old system of landownership was broken up Russia could not
develop economically. Stolypin and the landlords boldly took the
revolutionary path, ruthlessly breaking up the old order, handing over the
peasant masses as a whole to the mercy of the landlords and kulaks.  

The liberals and petty-bourgeois democrats, beginning with the semi-Octobrist

“Meons”[2] followed by the Russkiye Vedomosti
people, and ending with Mr. Peshekhonov of Russkoye Bogatstvo, are
now raising a big outcry about the destruction of the village communes by
the government, which they accuse of revolutionism! Never has the
betwixt and between position of the bourgeois liberals in the Russian
revolution stood out so sharply. No, gentlemen, whining over the
destruction of the ancient foundations will not mend matters. Three years
of revolution have shattered illusions

    

of conciliation and compromise. The question is clear. Either a bold call
for a peasant revolution, even including a republic, and the thorough
ideological and organisational preparation of such a revolution in
alliance with the proletariat. Or useless whining, political and
ideological impotence in face of the Stolypin-landlord-Octobrist attack on
the village commune.  

Make your choice—those who still have left in them a particle of civic
courage and sympathy for the peasant masses! The proletariat has already made
its choice, and the Social-Democratic Labour Party, now more firmly than ever
before, will explain, propagate, spread among the masses the slogan of a peasant
uprising in alliance with the proletariat as the only possible means
of thwarting the Stolypin method of “renovating” Russia.


We will not say that this method is impracticable—it has been
tested more than once in Europe on a smaller scale— but we shall make
it clear to the people that it can be realised only by endless acts of
violence of the minority over the majority in the course of decades and by
the mass ex termination of the progressive peasantry. We shall not de vote
ourselves to patching up Stolypin’s revolutionary projects, or
attempting to improve them, weaken their effect, and so on. We shall
respond by intensifying our agitation among the masses, especially among
those sections of the proletariat that have ties with the peasantry. The
peasant deputies—even though sifted through a number of police
sieves, even though elected by landlords, even though intimidated by the
Duma diehards—have quite recently shown what their true strivings
are. A group of non-party peasants, some of them from the Right
wing, have declared, as we know from the newspapers, for compulsory
alienation of the land and for local land institutions elected by the
whole population! No wonder one Cadet stated in the Land Committee
that a Right-wing peasant was more Left than the Cadets. Yes, on the

argarian 

question the stand of the “Right” peasants in all three Dumas
has been more Left than the Cadets’,

therebry 

proving that the monarchism of the muzhik is naivete that is dying out, in
contrast to the monarchism of the liberal businessmen, who are monarchists
through class calculation.  
 

The tsar of the feudal-minded gentry shouted at the non-party peasants
that he would not stand for compulsory alienation. Let the working class in
reply shout to the mil lions of “non-party” peasants that it
calls them to the mass struggle for the overthrow of tsarism and for the
confiscation of the landlords’ lands.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
The views here set forth are closely bound up with the criticism of our
Party programme. In issue No. 21 of Proletary this criticism was
touched on as a private opinion; in subsequent issues the question will be
dealt with in

detail.[3] —Lenin
 



[3]
Lenin is referring to his article “Political Notes”
published in the newspaper Proletary, No. 21, February 13 (26),1
908. The question of the Party programme was dealt with more fully in the
article “Pyotr Maslov Corrects Karl Marx’s Rough Notes”
(Proletary, No. 33, July 23 [August 51, 1908). (See present
volume, p. 300, Section 2 of Chapter III of The Agrarian Programme of
Social-Democracy in the First Russian Revolution, 1906-1907.)





[2]
Meons—Russian abbreviation for members of the Peaceful
Renovation Party.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Trade-Union Neutrality









Lenin: Trade-Union Neutrality







V. I.  

      Lenin
Trade-Union Neutrality[5]




Published:
Proletary, No. 22, (March 3) February 19, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 460-469.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

In the previous issue of Proletary we published
the resolution of our Party Central Committee on

trade unions.[6] In reporting the resolution,

Nash Vek[7] added that it had been adopted unanimously in the
C.C., as the Mensheviks voted for it in view of the concessions it contains
compared with the original Bolshevik draft. If this report is true (the
defunct Nash Vek was in general exceptionally well informed about
everything relating to Menshevism), it only remains for us to heartily
welcome the big step towards united Social-Democratic activity in such an
important field as the trade unions. The concessions referred to by
Nash Vek are quite insignificant, and do not in the least affect
the basic principles of the Bolshevik draft (which, incidentally, was
published in Proletary, No. 17, October 20, 1907, along with a
lengthy article in support of it, entitled “The Trade Unions and the
Social-Democratic Party”).  

Our whole Party, consequently, has now recognised that work in the
trade unions must be conducted not in the spirit of trade-union neutrality
but in the spirit of the closest possible relations between them and the
Social-Democratic Party. It is also recognised that the partisanship of the
trade unions must be achieved exclusively by S.D. work within the unions,
that the S.D.’s must form solid Party units in the unions, and that illegal
unions should be formed since legal ones are impossible.  

There can be no doubt that Stuttgart has been strongly instrumental in
bringing the two factions of our Party closer together on the question of
the nature of our work in the trade unions. The Stuttgart Congress
resolution, as Kautsky pointed out in his report to the Leipzig workers,

    

puts an end to recognising the principle of neutrality. The high degree to
which class contradictions have developed, their aggravation latterly in
all countries, the long experience of Germany (where the policy of
neutrality strengthened opportunism in the trade unions without preventing
the appearance of special Christian and Liberal unions), and the widening
of that special area of proletarian struggle which requires joint and
concerted action by both the unions and the political party (the mass
strike and the armed uprising in the Russian revolution, as the prototype
of likely forms of the proletarian revolution in the West)—all these
things have cut the ground from under the neutrality theory.  

Among the proletarian parties the question of neutrality is unlikely
now to evoke any serious controversy. The case is different with the
non-proletarian quasi-socialist parties like our Socialist-Revolutionaries,
who are in fact the extreme Left wing of the revolutionary bourgeois party
of intellectuals and progressive peasants.  

It is highly characteristic that in our country the only people to
defend the idea of neutrality after Stuttgart have been the
Socialist-Revolutionaries and Plekhanov.  And they have done so very
unsuccessfully.  

In the last issue of the Socialist-Revolutionary Party organ,
Znamya Truda (No. 8, December 1907), we find two articles devoted
to the trade-union movement. In those articles the S.R.’s attempt primarily
to ridicule the statement of the Social-Democratic newspaper,

Vperyod,[8] that the Stuttgart resolution settled the question
of the Party’s attitude to the trade unions along the same lines as
the London resolution, namely, in the Bolshevik spirit. Our answer is that
in the very same issue of Znamya Truda the S.R.’s themselves cited
facts which prove such an assessment to be absolutely correct.


“It was at that time, too,” writes Znamya Truda, referring
to the autumn of 1905, “and it is a characteristic fact, that the three
Russian socialist factions: the Menshevik Social-Democrats, the Bolshevik
Social-Democrats, and the S.R.’s, first met face to face to state their views on
the trade-union movement. The Moscow Bureau, which was instructed to select
from its midst a central bureau for convening a congress (of trade unions),
organised a big meeting of worker

    

trade-unionists at the

   Olympia Theatre.[1]

The Mensheviks put forward a classically Marxist, strictly orthodox
delimitation between the aim of the Party and that of the trade unions.

‘The task of the S.D. Party is to establish the socialist system and
abolish capitalist relations; the task of the trade unions is to improve
working conditions within the framework of the capitalist system, so as to
secure for labour advantageous conditions for the sale of its
labour-power’;

the conclusion drawn was that the trade unions are non-partisan, and that
they embrace all workers of a given



    occupation’.[2]


“The Bolsheviks argued that at the present time there could not be
a strict separation of politics from occupation, and hence drew the
conclusion that

‘there must be close unity between the Social-Democratic Party and the
trade unions, which it must lead’. Finally, the S.R.’s demanded that the
unions be strictly non-partisan, in order to avoid a split in the ranks of
the proletariat, but rejected any narrowing down of the tasks and
activities of the trade unions to a limited sphere, formulating this task
as an all-out struggle against capital, and therefore as both an economic
and a political struggle.”  

That is how Znamya Truda itself describes the facts!
And only a person who is blind or totally incapable of thinking can deny
that of these three viewpoints it is the one that speaks of close unity
between the Social-Democratic Party and the unions that “is confirmed
by the Stuttgart resolution, which recommends close ties between the Party
and the trade

      unions.”[3]


To confuse this perfectly clear issue, the S.R.’s, in the most
diverting manner, mixed up the independence of the

    

trade unions in the economic struggle with their non-party
character. “The Stuttgart Congress,” they write;
“definitely stood also for the independence (the non-partisanship) of
the unions, i.e., rejected the viewpoint of both the Bolsheviks and the
Mensheviks.” This conclusion is drawn from the following words in the
Stuttgart resolution: “Each of the two organisations [the Party and
the trade union] has its own sphere, determined by its nature, and within
which it must act quite independently. At the same time, however, there is
an ever expanding sphere,” and so on, as quoted above. Yet we find
wags who mixed up this demand for the “in dependence”
of the trade unions in the “sphere determined by their nature”
with the question of the non-partisanship of the unions or their close
alignment with the Party in the political sphere and in dealing with the
tasks of the socialist revolution!  

In this way our S.R.’s completely suppressed the fundamental issue of
the appraisal of the “neutrality” theory, a theory that in fact
serves to strengthen the influence of the bourgeoisie over the
proletariat. In place of this fundamental issue, they preferred to speak
only of the specifically Russian situation where there are several
socialist parties, and did so in such a way as to throw a false
light on what happened at Stuttgart. “One cannot argue that the
Stuttgart resolution is hazy,” writes Znamya Truda,
“for Mr. Plekhanov removed all haziness and doubt when he addressed
the International Congress as the Party’s official representative;
and so far no statement has been issued by the Central S.D. Committee that

‘such a statement by Comrade Plekhanov disorganises the ranks of the united
party...’"  

Gentlemen of the S.R. Party! You are entitled, of course, to speak
ironically about our C.C. having called Plekhanov to order. You are
entitled to think that one can respect, say, a party which officially
does not condemn Mr. Gershuni’s pro-Cadet conduct. But why
tell a plain untruth? Plekhanov was not the representative of the
S.D. Party at the Stuttgart Congress, but only one of its 33 delegates. And
what he represented was the views not of the S.D. Party but of the present
Menshevik opposition to that Party and to its London decisions. The S.R.’s
cannot but be aware of this, which means they are telling a
deliberate untruth.  
 


   “... In the committee that examined the question of the relations
   between the trade unions and the political party, he [Plekhanov] literally
   said the following:

   ‘There are 11 revolutionary organisations in Russia; with which of them
   should the trade unions align themselves?... Introducing political
   differences into the trade unions in Russia would he harmful’.

   In answer to this the members of the committee all unanimously
   declared that the Congress resolution must not be interpreted in that way,
   that they ‘do not by any means oblige the trade unions and their members to
   join the S.D. Party’, that they, as stated in the resolution, demand their
   ‘complete independence’" (Znamya Truda’s italics).
   


You are mixing things up, gentlemen of Znamya Truda! In the committee a
Belgian comrade asked whether it could be made obligatory for
trade-union members to join the Social-Democratic Party, and everyone
answered that it could not. Plekhanov, on the other hand, proposed an amendment
to the resolution, saying: “Unity of the trade-union organisation,
however, should not be lost sight of”. This amendment was adopted, but not
unanimously (Comrade Voinov, who represented the views of the R.S.D.L.P., voted
for the amendment, and in our opinion was right in doing so). That was how
matters stood.


Social-Democrats should never lose sight of unity of the trade-union
organisation. That is quite right. But this applies also to the S.R.’s, whom we
invite to ponder over this “unity of the trade-union organisation”
when the latter announces its close ties with Social-Democracy! Nobody ever
dreamt of “obliging” trade-union members to join the S.D. Party;
fear made the S.R.’s imagine that. And to suggest that the Stuttgart Congress
prohibited trade unions from declaring their close ties with the
Social-Democratic Party or from establishing such ties in reality, in
actual life, is a cock-and-bull story.


“The Russian S.D.’s,” writes Znamya Truda, “are conducting a
strenuous and unremitting campaign to win the trade unions and subordinate them
to their Party leadership. The Bolsheviks are doing this frankly and openly
... the Mensheviks have chosen a more roundabout way...” Correct, gentle
men of the S.R. Party! For the sake of the prestige of the workers’
International you are entitled to demand of us that we conduct this campaign in
a tactful and restrained way, “not losing sight of the unity of the
trade-union organisation”.

    

We readily admit this, and demand the same admission from you, but we shall
not give up our campaign!  

But then Plekhanov said that it was harmful to introduce political differences
into the unions.... Yes, Plekhanov did say that stupid thing, and the
S.R. gentlemen, naturally, were bound to pounce on it, as they always pounce on
every thing least worthy of imitation. However, we should not be guided by
Plekhanov’s words, but by the Congress resolution, which cannot
be implemented without “introducing political differences”. Here is
a little example. The Congress resolution says that the trade unions should not
be guided by “the theory of the harmony of interests between labour and
capital”. We Social-Democrats assert that the agrarian programme, which
calls for equalised distribution of the land in a bourgeois society, is based on
the theory of the harmony of interests between labour and

       capital.[4]

We shall always declare our opposition to such a difference (or even a
difference with monarchist-minded workers) being made the grounds for
breaking the unity of a strike, etc., but we shall always “introduce
this difference” into the workers’ ranks in general, and into
all workers’ unions in particular.  

Plekhanov’s reference to eleven parties is just as
foolish. First, Russia is not the only country where there are various
socialist parties. Secondly, Russia has only two rival socialist parties of
any importance—the S.D. and the S.R. parties, for it is quite
ridiculous to lump together all the parties of the nationalities. Thirdly,
the question of uniting the really socialist parties is quite a special
one; by dragging it in Plekhanov confuses the issue. We must always and
everywhere stand for the alignment of the unions with the socialist party
of the working class, but the question as to which party in any given
country, among any given nationality, is really socialist and really the
party of the working class, is a special question, which is decided not by
resolutions of international congresses, but by the outcome of the struggle
between the national parties.  
 

How erroneous Comrade Plekhanov’s arguments on this subject are
is shown in a most striking manner by his article in

Sovremenny Mir,[9] No. 12, 1907. On page 55 Plekhanov quotes a
statement by Lunacharsky that trade-union neutrality is supported by the
German revisionists. Plekhanov answers this statement as follows:
“The revisionists say that the unions must be neutral, but understand
by this that the unions must be used to fight orthodox Marxism.” And
Plekhanov concludes: “The elimination of trade-union neutrality will
not help matters at all. Even if we make the unions closely and formally
dependent on the Party, and revisionist ‘ideology’ triumphs in the Party,
the elimination of trade-union neutrality will merely be a fresh victory
for ‘the critics of Marx’."  

This argument is a typical example of Plekhanov’s usual method of dodging the
issue and suppressing the essence of the dispute. If revisionist ideology really
does triumph in the Party, then it will not be.a socialist part.y of the working
class. It is not at all a question of how the party takes shape, and what
struggle and what splits occur in the process. It is a question of the fact
that a socialist party and trade unions exist in every capitalist country, and
it is our job to define the basic relations between them. The class interests
of the bourgeoisie inevitably give rise to a striving to confine the unions to
petty and narrow activity within the framework of the existing social order, to
keep them away from any contact with socialism; and the neutrality theory is the
ideological cover for these strivings of the bourgeoisie. In one way or
another, the revisionists within the S.D. parties will always clear a way for
themselves in capitalist society.


Of course, at the outset of the workers’ political and trade-union
movements in Europe it was possible to uphold trade-union neutrality as a
means of widening the original field of proletarian struggle during the
period when it was comparatively undeveloped and when the bourgeoisie
exerted no systematic influence on the unions. At the present time it is
quite indefensible, from the point of view of international
Social-Democracy, to uphold trade-union neutrality. One can only smile when
reading Plekhanov’s assurances that “even today, Marx would be
in favour of trade-union neutrality in Germany”, especially when
that. kind of argument

    

is based on a one-sided interpretation of a single “quotation”
from Marx, while ignoring the sum and substance of Marx’s statements
and the whole spirit of his teachings.  

“I stand for neutrality, understood in Bebel’s and not the
revisionist sense,” writes Plekhanov. To talk like that means to
swear by Bebel and still get stuck in the mud. Needless to say, Bebel is
such a great authority in the international proletarian movement, such an
experienced practical leader, a socialist so keenly alive to the
requirements of the revolutionary struggle, that in ninety-nine cases out
of a hundred he climbed out of the mud himself when he happened to slip
into it, and he dragged out those who were willing to follow his
lead. Bebel was wrong when, he joined Vollmar in defending the agrarian
programme of the revisionists in Breslau (in 1895), when he insisted (in
Essen) on making a distinction in principle between defensive and offensive
wars, and when he was ready to elevate trade-union “neutrality”
to the level of a principle. We readily believe that if Plekhanov gets
stuck in the mud only in Bebel’s company, it will not happen to him
often or for long. But we still think that Bebel should not be imitated
when Bebel is wrong.  

It is said—and Plekhanov makes a special point of it— that
neutrality is necessary in order to unite all the workers who are beginning
to see the need for improving their material conditions. But those who say
this forget that the present stage of development of class contradictions
inevitably introduces “political differences” even into the
question of how this improvement is to be secured within the bounds of
contemporary society. The theory of the neutrality of the trade unions as
opposed to the theory of the need for close ties between them and
revolutionary Social-Democracy, inevitably leads to preference being given
to methods of securing this improvement that involve a blunting of the
proletarian class struggle. A striking example of this (which,
incidentally, is connected with the appraisal of one of the most
interesting episodes in the modern labour movement) is to be found in
the very same issue of Sovremenny Mir in. which Plekhanov
advocates neutrality. Side by side with Plekhanov, we find here
Mr. E. P., extolling Richard Bell, the well-known English
railwaymen’s leader, who ended a dispute between the workers, and,
the railway company by a

    

compromise. Bell is described as the “soul of the whole railwaymen’s
movement”. “There is not the slightest doubt,”
E. P. writes, “that thanks to his calm, well-considered, and
consistent tactics, Bell has won the complete confidence of the Amalgamated
Society of Railway Servants, the members of which are ready to follow his
lead without hesitation” (Sovremenny Mir, No. 12, page
75). This point of view is not accidental, but is essentially connected
with the neutrality theory, which puts in the forefront unity of the
workers for the improvement of their conditions, and not unity for a
struggle that could promote the cause of proletarian emancipation.  

But this point of view is not at all in accord with the views of the
British socialists, who would probably be very much surprised to learn that
the eulogisers of Bell write, without objection being raised, in the same
journal as prominent Mensheviks like Plekhanov, Iordansky, and Co.  

Justice, the British Social-Democratic newspaper, in a leading
article on November 16, commented as follows on Bell’s agreement with
the railway companies: “We cannot but agree with the almost universal
trade-union condemnation which has been pronounced upon this so-called
treaty of peace ... it absolutely destroys the very reason of existence of
the union.... This preposterous agreement ... cannot. be binding on the
men, and the latter will do well to at once repudiate it.” And in its
next issue, that of November 23, Burnett, in an article entitled
“Sold Again!”, wrote the following about this agreement: “Three
weeks ago the A.S.R.S. was one of the most powerful trade unions in the
country; today it is reduced to the level of a mere benefit society.... All
these changes have taken place not because the railwaymen have fought and
lost, but because their leaders have deliberately or stupidly sold them to
the railway bosses ere the fight began.” And the editor added that a
similar letter had been received from “a Midland Railway
Company’s wage-slave”.  

But perhaps this is the “ardour” of “too revolutionary”
Social-Democrats? No. The Labour Leader, organ of the moderate
Independent Labour Party, which does not even want to call itself socialist, in
its issue of November 15 published a letter from a trade-unionist railwayman in
which, replying to the praise lavished on Bell by the entire capitalist press
(from the radical Reynolds News to the Conservative

    

Times), he stated that the settlement made by Bell was the
“most contemptible one that has ever occurred in the history of Trade
Unionism”, and described Richard Bell as the “Marshal Bazaine
of the trade-union movement”. In the same issue another railwayman
demands that “Mr. Bell ... should be called upon to explain”
the nefarious settlement by which “the railwaymen ... are condemned
to seven years’ penal servitude...”. And the editor of this moderate organ,
in a leading article of the same issue, describes the settlement as
“the Sedan of the British Trade-Union movement”. “Never
has such an opportunity presented itself for a national manifestation of
the power of organised labour.” Among the workers there prevailed
“unprecedented enthusiasm” and a desire to fight. The article
concludes with a scathing comparison between the dire needs of the workers
and the triumph of “Mr. Lloyd George [the Cabinet Minister who played
the role of lackey to the capitalists] and Mr. Bell hastening to prepare
banquets”.  

Only the extreme opportunists, the Fabians, members of a purely
intellectualist organisation, approved the settlement; so that
even The New Age, which sympathises with the Fabians, blushed for
shame and was obliged to admit that while the Conservative bourgeois
Times had published the Manifesto of the Fabian Society’s
Executive Committee in full, apart from these gentlemen “no socialist
organisation, no trade union, and no prominent labour leader”
(December 7th issue, p. 101) had declared in favour of the settlement.


Here you have a specimen of the application of the neutrality theory by
Plekhanov’s colleague, Mr. E. P. The question was one not of
“political differences” but of improving the workers’
conditions in existing society. The entire British bourgeoisie, the
Fabians, and Mr. E. P. declared for “improvement” at the
price of renouncing the struggle and submitting to the tender mercies of
capital; all the socialists and trade-unionist workers were for a
collective struggle of the workers. Will Plekhanov now continue to advocate
“neutrality”, instead of a close alignment of the trade unions
with the socialist party?  
 

Notes
 

[1]
The meeting was attended by about fifteen hundred people.  See the
report in Bulleten Muzeya Sodeistviya Trudu, No. 2, November 26,
1905 (quoted by Znamya Truda).  —Lenin

[2]
It should be said, however, that the Mensheviks’ idea of this
“non-partisanship” was a rather peculiar one.  Thus, their
spokesman illustrated his points in the following way: “A correct
answer to the question of partisanship has been given in the Moscow
Printers’ Union, which proposes that comrades join the S.D. Party as
individuals.”  (Note by Znamya Truda.)  —Lenin

[3]
What the Mensheviks put forward in November 1905 was not orthodox but
vulgar views on neutrality. Let the S.R.  gentlemen remember that!
—Lenin

[4]
Even some S.R.’s realise this now, and have thus taken a definite step
towards Marxism. See the very interesting new book by Firsov and Jacoby,
which we shall soon discuss in detail with readers of

Proletary.[10] —Lenin
 



[5]
Lenin’s article “Trade-Union Neutrality” was
also published in a slightly abbreviated form in the symposium 0
Veyaniyakh Vremeni (Spirit of the Times), St. Petersburg,
Tvorchestvo Publishers and signed VI. Ilyin.

 



[6]
The resolution of the C.C. of the R.S.D.L.P. on trade unions was
published in Proletary, No. 21, February 13 (26), 1908.  

Party members were instructed to set up Party groups within trade-union
organisations and to work in them under the direction of the local Party
centres. Where police persecution made it impossible to organise trade
unions or to recreate those that had been broken up, the C.C. proposed that
trade-union nuclei and trade unions should be organised illegally. As
regards such legal organisations as benefit societies, temperance
societies, and others, the resolution of the C.C. instructed the local
Party organisations to form within them “well-knit groups of
Social-Democrats to conduct Party work among the broadest possible masses
of the proletariat”. To thwart any attempt on the part of the
Mensheviks to interpret this part of the resolution in an opportunist
manner, the resolution pointed out the need for making it clear that
“the organised activity

   

of the proletariat cannot be limited to such societies alone” and
that the legal existence of trade unions “should not belittle, the
militant tasks of organising the proletariat in trade unions”
(Proletary, No. 21, February 13 [26], 1908, p. 4).

 



[7]
Nash Vek (Our Century)—a newspaper, a popular
edition of the Left-Cadet organ Tovarishch, published in
St. Petersburg in 1905-08.

 



[8]
Vperyod (Forward)—a Bolshevik working-class
newspaper directed by Lenin. Published illegally in Vyborg by the Editorial
Board of Proletary from September 10 (23), 1906 to January 19
(February 1), 1908. Twenty issues appeared. Beginning with issue No. 2 it
appeared as the organ of the local committees of the R.S.D.L.P.; No. 2 was
the organ of the Moscow, St. Petersburg, and Moscow District committees;
Nos. 3-7 the organ of the Moscow, St. Peters burg, Moscow District, Perm,
and Kursk committees; Nos. 8-19 the organ of these committees with the
addition of the Kazan committee; the last issue, No. 20, gave the Urals
Regional Committee in place of the Perm and Kazan committees.

 



[10]
The book Revision of the Agrarian Programme and Its
Substantiation by D. Firsov (D. Rosenblum) and M. Yacoby
(M. Hendelman) was issued by the Era Publishers, Moscow, 1908. The
book was confiscated. The analysis of it in Proletary promised by
Lenin did not appear.

 



[9]
Sovremenny Mir (Contemporary World)—a monthly
literary, scientific, and political magazine, published in St. Petersburg
from October 1906 to 1918. The Mensheviks, including Plekhanov, were
closely associated with it. During the bloc with the Plekhanovites and at
the beginning of 1914 the Bolsheviks contributed to the magazine.  

In March 1914, the magazine published Lenin’s article “One
More Annihilation of Socialism” (see present edition,
Vol. 20). During the First World War (1914-18) the magazine became the
mouth piece of the social-chauvinists.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## The Happening to the King of Portugal









Lenin: The Happening to the King of Portugal







V. I.  

      Lenin
The Happening to the King of Portugal




Published:
Proletary, No. 22, (March 3) February 19, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 470-474.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The bourgeois press, even of the most liberal and
“democratic” trend, needs must point a Black-Hundred moral when
discussing the assassination of the Portuguese adventurer.  

Take, for example, the special correspondent of one of Europe’s
best bourgeois-democratic newspapers—the Frankfurter
Zeitung. He begins his story with a semi-humorous account of the way
the flock of correspondents, as if descending on their prey, made a rush
for Lisbon as soon as the sensational news was received. “I shared a
sleeping compartment with a well-known London journalist,” writes
this gentleman, “who began to boast of his experience. He had already
been to Belgrade on the same errand and could consider himself ‘a special
correspondent for cases of regicide’."


Indeed, the happening to the king of Portugal is a truly
“occupational accident” of kings.  

Small wonder that we have professional correspondents specialising in the
description of their Majesties’ professional “misadventures”.


But however strong the element of cheap and vulgar sensationalism is
with such correspondents, the truth has a way of asserting itself. “A
merchant residing in the busiest shopping district” told the
Frankfurter Zeitung correspondent the following: “As soon as
I learned what had happened I hung out a mourning flag. But very soon
customers and acquaintances started coming in and asking whether I had gone
out of my mind and was determined to ruin my custom. Do you mean to say
that no one has any feeling of compassion, I asked. My dear sir,
you wouldn’t believe what kind of answers I received! And so
I removed the mourning flag.”  
 

Commenting on this, the liberal correspondent writes: 


   “A people as innately good-natured and friendly as the
   Portuguese are, must have gone through a harsh school to learn to hate
   so implacably even in the grave. And if this is true—as it
   undoubtedly is, and by keeping silent about it I would be distorting
   historical truth— if not only such mute demonstrations pronounce
   judgement on the crowned victim, if at every turn you hear words of
   abuse, even from ‘law-abiding people’, levelled at the victim of
   assassination, you naturally find yourself wanting to study the rare
   combination of circumstances which has made the psychology of a people
   so abnormal. For a people which does not concede to death its ancient
   and sacred right of atoning for all earthly sins, must be either morally
   degenerate already, or there must exist conditions engendering an
   unfathomable feeling of hatred, which clouds the clear eye of fair
   judgement.”  


O, liberal hypocrites! Why do you not brand as moral degenerates those
French scholars and writers, who even to this day hate and virulently abuse
not only the leading personalities of the 1871 Commune but even t.hose of
1793? Not only the fighters of the proletarian revolution, but even those
of the bourgeois revolution? Because the “democratic” lackeys
of the modern bourgeoisie regard it as “normal” and
“moral” that the people should “good-naturedly”
endure every possible indignity, outrage, and atrocity at the hands of
crowned adventurers.  

Otherwise, continues the correspondent (i.e., other wise than as a
result of exceptional conditions), “one could not understand the fact that
already today one monarchist newspaper speaks about innocent victims from
among the people with almost greater sorrow than it does about the king,
and we already see quite clearly how legends are be ginning to form that
will invest the assassins with a halo of glory. Whereas in almost all cases
of assassination the political parties hasten to dissociate themselves from
the assassins, the Portuguese Republicans are frankly proud of the fact
that the ‘martyrs and heroes of February 1st’ came from their ranks...”.


The bourgeois democrat, in his excessive zeal, goes to the length of
being ready to describe as a “revolutionary legend” the respect
which Portuguese citizens pay to the men who sacrificed themselves in order
to remove a king who had made a mockery of the constitution!  
 

The correspondent of another bourgeois newspaper, the Milan
Corriere della Sera, reports the severe censorship imposed in
Portugal after the assassination. Telegrams are not passed. Ministers and
kings are not characterised by that “good nature” which appeals
so strongly to the honest bourgeois in the case of the mass of the people!
In war, as in war—rightly argue the Portuguese adventurers who have
taken the place of the assassinated king. Communication has become almost
as difficult as in war. Reports have to be sent by a roundabout route,
first by post to Paris (perhaps to some private address), and thence
transmitted to Milan. “Not, even in Russia,” writes the
correspondent on February 7, “during the most violent revolutionary
periods, did the censorship clamp down so hard as it now does in Portugal.”


“Some Republican newspapers,” this correspondent reports on
February 9 (New Style), “write today [the day of the king’s
funeral] in terms which I positively dare not repeat in a telegram.”
In a report dated February 8, which arrived after that of the 9th, the
comment of the newspaper Pays on the funeral arrangements is
quoted: 


   “The mortal remains of two monarchs were borne past—the use
   less ashes of a wrecked monarchy, which had been sustained by treachery and
   privileges, and whose crimes have smirched two centuries of our history.”
   


“This is a Republican newspaper, of course,” the
correspondent adds, “but is not the appearance of an article thus
worded on the day of the king’s funeral an eloquent fact?”  

For our part, we will merely add that we regret one thing— that
the Republican movement in Portugal did not settle accounts with all the
adventurers in a sufficiently resolute and open manner. We regret that in
the happening to the king of Portugal there is still clearly visible the
element of conspiratorial, i.e., impotent, terror, one that essentially
fails to achieve its purpose and falls short of that genuine, popular,
truly regenerative terror for which the Great French Revolution became
famous. Possibly the republican movement in Portugal will mount still
higher. The sympathy of the socialist proletariat will always he on the
side of the Republicans against the monarchy. But what they have succeeded

    

in doing so far in Portugal is only to frighten the monarchy by
the assassination of two monarchs, but not to destroy it.  

The socialists in all European parliaments have expressed, to the best
of their ability, their sympathy with the Portuguese people and the
Portuguese Republicans, their loathing for the ruling classes, whose
spokesmen condemned the assassination of the adventurer and expressed their
sympathy towards his successors. Some socialists openly declared their
views in parliament, others walked out during the expressions of sympathy
towards the “sufferer”—the monarchy. Vandervelde in the Belgian
parliament chose a “middle” way—the worst way—by
squeezing out of himself a phrase to the effect that he honoured “all
the dead”, meaning both the king and those who had killed him. We
trust that Vandervelde will be a solitary exception among the socialists of
the world.  

Republican tradition has weakened considerably among the socialists of
Europe. This is understandable and to some extent justifiable, inasmuch as
the imminence of the socialist revolution diminishes the practical
importance of the struggle for a bourgeois republic. Often,
however, the slackening of republican propaganda signifies, not vigour in
the striving for the complete victory of the proletariat, but a weak
consciousness of the proletariat’s revolutionary aims in general. Not
without reason did Engels, in criticising the Erfurt Draft Programme in
1891, impress upon the German workers with the greatest possible emphasis
the importance of the struggle for a republic, and the possibility of such
a struggle becoming the order of the day in Germany as

well.[1]


With us in Russia the struggle for a republic is a matter of immediate
practical significance. Only the most contemptible petty-bourgeois
opportunists like the Popular Socialists or the “S. D.”
Malishevsky (see Proletary, No. 7, in regard to him) could
draw from the experience of the Russian revolution the conclusion that in
Russia the struggle for the republic is relegated to the background. On the
contrary, the experience of our revolution has proved that the struggle for
the abolition of the monarchy is inseparably bound up in Russia with the
peasants’ struggle for the land,

    

with the whole people’s struggle for freedom. The experience of our
counter-revolution has shown that a struggle for freedom which does not
affect the monarchy is no struggle at all, but petty-bourgeois cowardice
and flabbiness or down right deception of the people by the careerists of
bourgeois parliamentarism.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
See Friedrich Engels, Zur Kritik des sozial-demokratischen
Programmentwurfes von 1891, Die Neue Zeit, Jg. XX, 1901, B. II, H. 1.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Lessons of the Commune









Lenin: Lessons of the Commune







V. I.  

      Lenin
Lessons of the Commune[1]




Published:
Zagranichnaya Gazeta, No. 2 March 23, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Zagranichnaya Gazeta.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 475-478.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

After the coup d état, which marked the end of the
revolution of 1848, France fell under the yoke of the Napoleonic regime for
a period of 18 years. This regime brought upon the country not only
economic ruin but national humiliation. In rising against the old regime
the proletariat under took two tasks—one of them national and the
other of a class character—the liberation of France from the German
invasion and the socialist emancipation of the workers from
capitalism. This union of two tasks forms a unique feature of the Commune.


The bourgeoisie had formed a “government of national
defence” and the proletariat had to fight for national independence
under its leadership. Actually, it was a government of “national
betrayal” which saw its mission in fighting the Paris
proletariat. But the proletariat, blinded by patriotic illusions, did not
perceive this. The patriotic idea had its origin in the Great Revolution of
the eighteenth century; it swayed the minds of the socialists of the
Commune; and Blanqui, for example, undoubtedly a revolutionary and an
ardent supporter of socialism, could find no better title for his newspaper
than the bourgeois cry: “The country is in danger!”  

Combining contradictory tasks—patriotism and socialism—was
the fatal mistake of the French socialists. In the Manifesto of the
International, issued in September 1870, Marx had warned the French
proletariat against being misled by a false national

idea[2]; the Great Revolution, class antagonisms had sharpened, and
whereas at that time the struggle against the whole of European reaction
united the entire revolutionary

    

nation, now the proletariat could no longer combine its interests with the
interests of other classes hostile to it; let the bourgeoisie bear the
responsibility for the national humiliation—the task of the
proletariat was to fight for the socialist emancipation of labour from the
yoke of the bourgeoisie.  

And indeed the true nature of bourgeois “patriotism” was
not long in revealing itself. Having concluded an ignominious peace with
the Prussians, the Versailles government proceeded to its immediate
task—it launched an attack to wrest the arms that terrified it from
the hands of the Paris proletariat. The workers replied by proclaiming the
Commune and civil war.  

Although the socialist proletariat was split up into numerous sects,
the Commune was a splendid example of the unanimity with which the
proletariat was able to accomplish the democratic tasks which the
bourgeoisie could only proclaim. Without any particularly complex
legislation, in a simple, straightforward manner, the proletariat, which
had seized power, carried out the democratisation of the social system,
abolished the bureaucracy, and made all official posts elective.  

But two mistakes destroyed the fruits of the splendid victory. The
proletariat stopped half-way: instead of setting about “expropriating
the expropriators”, it allowed itself to be led astray by dreams of
establishing a higher justice in the country united by a common national
task; such institutions as the banks, for example, were not taken over, and
Proudhonist theories about a “just exchange”, etc., still
prevailed among the socialists. The second mistake was excessive
magnanimity on the part of the proletariat: instead of destroying its
enemies it sought to exert moral influence on them; it underestimated the
significance of direct military operations in civil war, and instead of
launching a resolute offensive against Versailles that would have crowned
its victory in Paris, it tarried and gave the Versailles government time to
gather the dark forces and prepare for the blood-soaked week of May.  

But despite all its mistakes the Commune was a superb example of the great
proletarian movement of the nineteenth century. Marx set a high value on the
historic significance

    

of the Commune—if, during the treacherous attempt by the Versailles
gang to seize the arms of the Paris proletariat, the workers had allowed
themselves to be disarmed without a fight, the disastrous effect of the
demoralisation, that this weakness would have caused in the proletarian
movement, would have been far, far greater than the losses suffered by the
working class in the battle to defend its

arms.[3] The sacrifices of the Commune, heavy as they were, are made up
for by its significance for the general struggle of the proletariat: it
stirred the socialist movement throughout Europe, it demonstrated the
strength of civil war, it dispelled patriotic illusions, and destroyed the
naïve belief in any efforts of the bourgeoisie for common national
aims. The Commune taught the European proletariat to pose concretely the
tasks of the socialist revolution.  

The lesson learnt by the proletariat will not be forgotten. The working
class will make use of it, as it has already done in Russia during the
December uprising.  

The period that preceded the Russian revolution and prepared it bears a
certain resemblance to the period of the Napoleonic yoke in France. In
Russia, too, the autocratic clique has brought upon the country economic
ruin and national humiliation. But the outbreak of revolution was held back
for a long time, since social development had not yet created the
conditions for a mass movement and, notwithstanding all the courage
displayed, the isolated actions against the government in the
pre-revolutionary period broke against the apathy of the masses. Only the
Social-Democrats, by strenuous and systematic work, educated the masses to
the level of the higher forms of struggle—mass actions and armed
civil war.  

The Social-Democrats were able to shatter the “common
national” and “patriotic” delusions of the young
proletariat and later, when the Manifesto of

October 17th[4] had been wrested from the tsar due to their direct
intervention, the proletariat began vigorous preparation for the next,
inevitable phase of the revolution—the armed uprising. Having shed
“common national” illusions, it concentrated its class forces
in its own mass organisations—the Soviets of Workers’ and Soldiers’
Deputies, etc. And notwithstanding all the differences in the aims and
tasks of the Russian revolution,

    

compared with the French revolution of 1871, the Russian proletariat had to
resort to the same method of struggle as that first used by the Paris
Commune—civil war. Mindful of the lessons of the Commune, it knew
that the proletariat should not ignore peaceful methods of
struggle—they serve its ordinary, day-to-day interests, they are
necessary in periods of preparation for revolution—but it must never
forget that in certain conditions the class struggle assumes the form of
armed conflict and civil war; there are times when the interests of the
proletariat call for ruthless extermination of its enemies in open armed
clashes. This was first demonstrated by the French proletariat in the
Commune and brilliantly confirmed by the Russian proletariat in the
December uprising.  

And although these magnificent uprisings of the working class were
crushed, there will be another uprising, in face of which the forces of the
enemies of the proletariat will prove ineffective, and from which the
socialist proletariat will emerge completely victorious.  
 

Notes
 
 



[1]
The article “Lessons of the Commune” published in
Zagranichnaya Gazeta (Foreign Gazette), No. 2, March23,
1908 is the verbatim report of a speech made by Lenin. The editors of the
newspaper introduced the article with the following remark: “An
international meeting was held in Geneva on March 18 to commemorate three
proletarian anniversaries: the twenty-fifth anniversary of the death of
Marx, the sixtieth anniversary of the March revolution of 1848, and the
anniversary of the Paris Commune. Comrade Lenin on behalf of the
R.S.D.L.P. spoke at the meeting on the significance of the Commune.”  


Zagranichnaya Gazeta—a newspaper published by a group of
Russian emigrants in Geneva in March-April 1908.

 



[2]
See K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, 1958,
p. 497.

 



[3]
For Marx’s evaluation of the historical role of the Paris
Commune, as a forerunner of the new society, see The Civil War In
France (K. Marx and F. Engels, Selected Works, Vol. 1, 1958,
pp. 473-545) and letters to Kugelmann for April 12 and 17, 1871 (K. Marx
and F. Engels, Selected Correspondence, Moscow,
pp. 318-20).

 



[4]
This refers to the Manifesto of October 17th, 1905 in which the tsar,
frightened by the revolution, promised the people civic liberties and a
constitution.

 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## A Police-Patriotic Demonstration Made to Order









Lenin: A Police-Patriotic Demonstration Made to Order







V. I.  

      Lenin
A Police-Patriotic Demonstration Made to Order




Published:
Proletary, No. 25, March (25) 12, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 479-484.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

The Duma’s “big parliamentary day” of
February 27 has evoked a touchingly unanimous appreciation from our
bourgeois parties. All are pleased, all are elated and deeply moved, from
the Black Hundreds and Novoye Vremya to the Cadets and
Stolichnaya Pochta, which managed “on the eve of
death”, to write (in its issue for February 28): 

“The general impression [of the Duma session of February 27] was a
very good one.”... “For the first time in Russian socio-political
life the government has openly given its views to the country on questions
of foreign policy.”...  

We too are prepared to admit that the big parliamentary day has very
strikingly, if not “for the first time”, revealed the deep
unanimity of the Black Hundreds, the government. the liberals, and the
“democrats” of the Stolichnaya Pochta brand, a
unanimity on the cardinal questions of “socio political
life”. Therefore, all attentive examination of the stand taken that
day and in connection with that day by all the parties seems to us
absolutely necessary.  

The leader of the Octobrist government party is Mr. Guchkov. He
addresses “a request to the government spokesmen” to explain
the true state of affairs in the Far East. He ex plains from the eminence
of the Duma rostrum the importance of cutting down expenditure—50,000
rubles per annum, say, to the Ambassador in Tokio instead of 60,000. We are
making reforms, so don’t laugh! He says that disturbing reports about
Far-Eastern policy and the threat of war with Japan “have found their
way into the press”. Naturally, the leader of the capitalists says
nothing about the Russian press being muzzled—why should he? Freedom
of the press can be left as

    

an item in the programme. That is essential for a “European”
party. But as to actually fighting against the gagging of the
press, openly exposing the notorious venality of t.he influential organs of
the Russian press—it would be ludicrous to expect that of Mr. Guchkov
or of Mr. Milyukov. On the other hand, Mr. Guchkov did tell the truth about
the connection between domestic and foreign policy, that is, he blurted out
the true motives for the comic scene which the Duma enacted on February 27.


“The fact,” lie announced, “that we are moving swiftly
towards pacification and tranquillisation should show our opponents that
the attempts [by Russia] to defend her interests will this time definitely
succeed.” The Black Hundreds and Octobrists applaud. Of course! They,
if anybody, understood only too well from the very beginning that the
crux of the question under discussion and of the
government’s solemn declaration made through the medium of
Mr. Izvolsky lay in proclaiming the counter-revolutionary policy of our

Muravyov-hangmen[1] to be a matter of pacification and
tranquillisation. Europe and the whole world had to be shown that the
“external enemy” was confronted by a “united
Russia”, which was pacifying and tranquillising a handful of rebels
(a mere hundred million or so of peasants and workers!) to ensure the
success of the “attempts to defend her interests”.  

Yes, Mr. Guchkov managed to say what he wanted to say, what
the combined landlords and capitalists wanted him to say.  

Professor Kapustin, a “Left” Octobrist, the hope of the
Cadets and mainstay of the advocates of peace between society and the
authorities, hastened to follow in the footsteps of Guchkov, whose policy
he seasoned with unctuous liberal hypocrisy. “God grant that the fame
[the Duma’s] of our saving public money becomes widespread.” Fifty
thousand a year for an ambassador—is that not a saving of a clear ten
thousand rubles? Is that not a “splendid example” which will be
“set by our highest dignitaries, who are alive to the grave and
distressing moment which Russia is living through”?... “We are faced
with the prospect of drastic reforms in the most diverse spheres of our
country’s life, and large funds are needed for that purpose.”  
 

Judas Golovlyov[2] falls far short in comparison with this
parliamentarian! A professor at the Duma rostrum going into raptures over
the splendid example set by the highest dignitaries.... But why talk of an
Octobrist when the liberals and bourgeois democrats are not far removed
from this toadyism.  

Let us pass to the speech made by Mr. Izvolsky, the Minister for Foreign
Affairs. All he needed, of course, was a peg of the kind which Kapustin so
obligingly offered. And the Minister dilated on the need for
retrenchment—or for re vising the staff lists in order to help ambassadors
“who have no independent means”. Izvolsky stressed that he was
speaking with the permission of Nicholas II, and sang praises to “the
strength, intelligence, and patriotism of the Russian people”, who would
“exert all their energies, both material and spiritual, for consolidating
Russia’s present Asiatic possessions and developing them to the
utmost”.


The Minister said what the camarilla told him to say. Then
Mr. Milyukov, the leader of the opposition, spoke. He declared
straightaway: “The Party of People’s Freedom, represented by
the Duma group present here, has listened to the words of the Foreign
Minister with profound satisfaction, and considers it its duty to applaud
his first public statement made before the country’s representative
assembly clarifying questions concerning Russian foreign policy. Without a
doubt, at the present moment... the Russian Government needs ... to have
the backing of Russian public opinion for its views.”  

Indeed, there is no doubt about that at all. For their intention, the
government of the counter-revolution needs the backing of what abroad could
be taken for (or be passed off as) Russian public opinion. This is
particularly necessary in order to receive a loan, without which the whole
Stolypin policy of tsarism, planned with a view to long-range measures of
systematic and mass violence against the people, is faced with the threat
of bankruptcy and ruin.  

Mr. Milyukov quite understood the true significance of this ceremonial
entrance of Izvolsky, Guchkov, and Co. This entrance was arranged by the
Black-Hundred gang &f Nicholas II. Every little detail of this
police-patriotic demonstration was planned in advance. The Duma puppets

    

enacted a comedy, dancing to the tune of the autocratic camarilla, for
without the support of the West-European bourgeoisie Nicholas II could not
hold out. The entire Russian bourgeoisie, Left as well as
Right, had to be made to formally express its confidence in the government,
in its “peaceful policy”, its stability, its intentions and
ability to pacify and tranquillise. It was necessary as the blank
endorsement of a bill. For that purpose, Mr. Izvolsky was brought into play
as being most “pleasing” to the Cadets; for that purpose all
that impudent hypocrisy was organised about the saving of public money,
about reforms, and the government’s “public” statement
“clarifying” its foreign policy, although it was clear to one
and all that it clarified nothing and that there was no intention that it
should clarify anything.  

As for the liberal opposition, they dutifully fulfilled the role of
puppets in the hands of the Black-Hundred-police monarchy! At a time when
an explicit statement of the truth by the Duma bourgeois minority would
undoubtedly have played an important role and have prevented (or hindered)
the government from borrowing thousands of millions for new punitive
expeditions, gallows, prisons, and intensified security measures, the party
of the Cadets “prostrated them selves” before the adored
monarch in an effort to ingratiate themselves. Mr. Milyukov curried favour
by trying to prove his patriotism. He posed as an expert on foreign policy,
on the basis of having obtained information in some antechamber about
Izvolsky’s liberal views. Mr. Milyukov deliberately endorsed the bill
by solemnly “applauding” the tsarist minister on behalf of the
whole Cadet Party, knowing full well that on the very next day all the
European newspapers would declare, as if under orders: The Duma has
unanimously (not counting the Social-Democrats) expressed confidence in the
government, has approved its foreign policy....  

In three years Russian liberalism has gone through an evolution which,
in Germany, took over thirty years, and in France over a hundred—an
evolution from adherents of freedom to spineless and contemptible henchmen
of absolutism. The specific weapon of struggle which the bourgeoisie
possesses—the possibility of putting pressure on the purse, of
withholding funds, of upsetting the “delicate”

    

approaches for new loans—this weapon could have been used by the
Cadets many times during the Russian revolution. And on each occasion, in
the spring of 1908 just as in the spring of 1906, they surrendered their
weapon to the enemy, licking the hand of the pogrom-makers and swearing
loyalty to them.  

Mr. Struve took care in good time to put this practice on a firm
theoretical basis. In the magazine Russkaya Mysl, which should
really be called Black-Hundred

Mysl,[3] Mr. Struve already advocates the idea of a “Great
Russia”, the idea of bourgeois nationalism; he attacks “the
intelligentsia’s hostility to the state”, for the thousandth
time striking out at “Russian revolutionism”,
“Marxism”, “renegades”, the “class
struggle”, and “banal radicalism”.  

We can only rejoice at this evolution in the ideology of Russian
liberalism, for in fact it has already shown itself in the Russian
revolution to be exactly what Mr. Struve has been trying systematically,
wholeheartedly, deliberately and “philosophically” to make
it. The elaboration of a consistent counter-revolutionary ideology
is the key when there is a fully developed class that has acted in a
counter-revolutionary manner at crucial periods in the country’s
life. The ideology conforming to the class position and the class policy of
the bourgeoisie will help all and everyone to discard their last vestiges
of faith in the “democratism” of the Cadets. And it will do
good to discard them. They need to be discarded to enable us to make
progress in regard to the really mass struggle for the democratisation of
Russia. Mr. Struve wants a frankly counter-revolutionary liberalism. We
want it, too, because this “frankness” of liberalism will best
of all enlighten both the democratic peasantry and the socialist
proletariat.  

Reverting to the Duma session of February 27, it should be said that
the only honest and proud word of a democrat came from a
Social-Democrat. Deputy Chkheidze took the floor and declared that
the Social-Democratic group would vote against the Bill. He
started to give the reasons, but after his first words: “Our
diplomacy in the West has always been a bulwark of reaction and served the
interests of ..."  the Chairman stopped the mouth of the workers’ deputy.
"The instructions allow a member to give his reasons for

    

voting,” muttered the Cadets. “Besides reasons there is such a
thing as form,” answered the bandit who calls himself Chairman of
the Third Duma.  

He was right from his point of view: who cares about instructions when the
successful staging of the police-sponsored, patriotic demonstration was at
stake.


The workers’ deputy stood isolated on this question. This is all the more to his
credit. The proletariat should show, and it will show, that it is capable of
defending the behests of the democratic revolution despite all the treacheries
of liberalism and the waverings of the petty bourgeoisie.


 

Notes
 
 
a



[1]
Muravyov, M. N. (1796-1866)—a reactionary statesman of
tsarist Russia. In the capacity of Governor-General of Vilna, Muravyov
crushed the insurrection of 1863 in Poland, Lithuania, and Byelorussia with
great cruelty, for which he earned the name of “hangman”.

.  



[2]
Judas Golovlyov—a type of sanctimonious, hypocritical
landlord serf-owner described in Saltykov-Shchedrin’s The
Golovlyov Family.  



[3]
Russkaya Mysl (Russian Thought)—a monthly
magazine of the liberal bourgeoisie, published in Moscow from 1880 to the
middle of 1918. After the revolution of 1905 it became the organ of the
Right wing of the Cadet Party.

 









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## Deception of the People by the Liberals









Lenin: Deception of the People by the Liberals







V. I.  

      Lenin
Deception of the People by the Liberals




Published:
Proletary, No. 25, March (25) 12, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 485-489.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

At the last, London, congress of the Russian
Social-Democratic Labour Party the question of the attitude to wards
bourgeois parties was discussed and a resolution adopted on the
subject. Controversy was particularly aroused at the Congress by the
passage in this resolution which speaks of deception of the people
by the

      liberals.[1]

The Social-Democrats of the Right wing of our Party thought this pas sage
to be highly incorrect. They even declared that it was not Marxist to speak
in the resolution about the liberals’ “deception” of the
people, i.e., to account for certain sections of the population joining a
given party (in this case the Cadet Party) not by the class interests of
these sections, but by the “immoral” political practices of one
or another group of parliamentarians, lawyers, journalists, and so on.


As a matter of fact, these specious arguments, arrayed in ostensibly
Marxist garb, concealed a policy of weakening the class independence of the
proletariat and subordinating it (in effect) to the liberal
bourgeoisie. For these gentlemen do not seriously defend the interests of
the democratic petty bourgeoisie who follow the Cadets, but betray
them by their policy of intrigues and deals with the government, with the
Octobrists, with the “historic authority” of the tsarist
autocracy.  

Extremely interesting material throwing new light, on this
question—one of the fundamental questions of Social-Democratic
tactics in all capitalist countries—is afforded by the present
struggle for universal suffrage in the Prussian Landtag (Diet). German
Social-Democracy raised the banner of that struggle. The proletariat of
Berlin, followed by all

    

the large cities of Germany, came out into the street, organised imposing
demonstrations of tens of thousands of people, and inaugurated a broad mass
movement, which already, at its very outset, has led to violent acts on the
part of the constitutional authorities, to the use of military force and
the beating up of the unarmed masses. Struggle grows out of struggle! The
leaders of the revolutionary proletariat met these acts of violence proudly
and bravely. But here the question came up of the attitude towards the
democratic (and liberal) bourgeoisie in the struggle for the franchise. The
debates on this question between the German revolutionary Social-Democrats
and the opportunists (revisionists, as they are called in Germany) bear a
remarkably close re semblance to our own disputes on the subject of the
deception of the people by the liberals.  

The central organ of the German Social-Democratic Labour Party,
Vorwärts, published a leading article, the gist and substance
of which is clearly expressed in its heading: “The Struggle for the
Franchise Is a Class Struggle!” As was to be expected, this article
was received by the opportunists as a challenge, although it set forth in a
positive form only established Social-Democratic axioms. The gauntlet was
taken up. Comrade Südekum, a well-known worker in the field of
municipal socialism, launched an aggressive campaign against this
“sectarians’ tactic”, against the “isolation of the
proletariat”, against “Social-Democratic support of the Black
Hundreds” (the Germans use the milder term—reactionaries). For
to a German opportunist too the introduction of the class struggle into a
cause common to both the proletariat and the liberals means supporting the
reactionaries! “The introduction of universal suffrage in Prussia
instead of the present three-class system is not the concern of any single
class”, wrote Südekum. This, he said, was the affair of
“the urban population against the agrarians, of democracy against the
bureaucracy, of the peasantry against the land lords, of Western Prussia
against Eastern Prussia” (i. e., the industrially and
capitalistically advanced part of the country against the economically
backward part). “What has to be done now is to unite on this point
all the friends of the reform, whatever the other issues which may divide
them.”  
 

The reader sees that these are all very familiar arguments, that here,
too, the garb is strictly and orthodoxly “Marxist”, inclusive
of the reference to the economic position and interests of definite
elements of bourgeois democracy (the “urban democracy”, the
peasantry, etc.). There is hardly any need to add that the German
liberal-bourgeois press has been harping systematically on this note for
decades, accusing Social-Democracy of sectarianism, of supporting the
reactionaries, and of inability to isolate the reactionaries.  

What arguments did the German revolutionary Social-Democrats
use to refute this reasoning. We shall list their chief arguments so as to
enable the reader—viewing German affairs as a
“bystander”, “without anger or bias”—to judge
whether the predominant part is played here by references to special
conditions of place and time or to general principles of Marxism.  

Yes, our freethinkers “demand” universal suffrage in their
programmes, said Vorwärts. Yes, they have become more than
usually zealous in making grandiloquent speeches about it today. But are
they fighting for reform? Do we not see, on the contrary, that the
truly popular movement, the street demonstrations, the broad agitation
among the masses, the unrest of the masses, evoke in them ill-concealed
fear, aversion, and at best, in rare cases, indifference?  

We must distinguish between the programmes of the bourgeois parties,
between the banquet and parliamentary speeches of the liberal careerists
and their actual participation in the real struggle of the
people. Bourgeois politicians, one and all, in all parliamentary countries,
have always paid lip-service to democracy while betraying it.  

Yes, “within the Centre and the Party of freethinkers
[the Liberal Party] there are undoubtedly elements who are
interested in universal and equal suffrage”, said
Vorwärts. But it is not these elements that lead the
bourgeois parties, not the petty artisans, not the semi-proletariat, not
the semi-ruined peasants. They follow the lead of the liberal bourgeois,
who try to keep them away from the struggle by making compromises with
reaction behind their backs, by corrupting their class-consciousness and
not really defending their interests.  
 

To draw these elements into the struggle for universal suffrage it is
necessary to arouse their class-consciousness, to win them away from the
vacillating bourgeois parties. “Within the Liberal [freethinking]
Party they, the elements interested in universal suffrage, form an impotent
minority, which is forever being fed with promises and then always
duped once again, and whose political energy is completely
paralysed. If, however, the freethinkers and the Centre are really to be
forced to make concessions to democracy owing to the threat of losing
votes, then it is the glass struggle, which weakens the bourgeois parties,
that is the only means of pushing the reluctant bourgeoisie to the Left.”


For the political facts long ago proved that reaction is less hateful
to the freethinkers than Social-Democracy. “We must therefore not
only ruthlessly castigate the sins of all the bourgeois parties, but above
all make it clear that the betrayals of the freethinkers and the Centre on
the question of the franchise are a necessary consequence of the class
character of these parties.”  

In the immediate future the question whether our Cadets are capable of
“fighting” for the democratic demands put forward in their
programme, or whether they are putting them forward merely to betray to the
Octobrists the petty bourgeois and peasants who are following the liberals’
lead, will confront the Russian Social-Democrats again and again, as it
repeatedly did before in the course of the revolution. Therefore some
people in our Party would do well to ponder these arguments of
Vorwärts.  

P. S.

This article was sent to press before we read Rech, issue No. 52
(of March 1), containing an article by Mr. K. D., the Berlin
correspondent of this newspaper, entitled “The Crisis of German
Liberalism”. The writer handles the controversy of
Vorwärts with Südekum in the customary tone and with the
customary methods used by our liberal falsifiers. lie makes no attempt to
give the line of reasoning of the parties concerned or exact quotations. He
simply declares:

“The official Vorwärts promptly throws mud at the
heretic, and in a leading article, extremely unappetising on account of its
offensive and blustering tone, accuses him of ignorance and unpardonable
forgetfulness of party tenets.” We leave it to the reader to judge
whether Südekum himself will

    

find such a defence of him by the Cadets “appetising” or
not. But such is the fate of the revisionists in any country—they are
given generous support and heartfelt “recognition” of their
efforts by the bourgeoisie. An alliance between the Südekum and the
Struve gentry—could anything more “appetising” be thought
of to confirm the correctness of our position?  

 
Notes
 

[1]
See present edition, Vol. 12, pp. 501-02.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 







==========

## An Estimate of Marx by International Liberalism









Lenin: An Estimate of Marx by International Liberalism







V. I.  

      Lenin
An Estimate of Marx by International Liberalism




Published:
Proletary, No. 25, March (25) 12, 1908.

      Published according to the text in Proletary.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      Progress Publishers,

      1972,

      Moscow,

      Volume 13,

      pages 490-494.

      Translated: Bernard Isaacs

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2004).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

• README



 

One of Turgenev’s characters thus adapted a verse of the great German
poet:




Wer den Feind will versteh’n,

   
Muss im Feindes Lande geh’n 



that is, “To know your enemy you must go into the enemy’s
country” to get first-hand knowledge of his customs, manners, ways of
thinking and acting.  
Marxists would do well to cast a glance at the comments made on the
commemoration of the twenty-fifth anniversary of the death of Marx by
influential political organs in various countries, especially the liberal
amid “democratic” bourgeois newspapers, which combine the
possibility of influencing the masses of readers with the right to speak on
behalf of official, titular professorial scholarship.  
We shall begin our review with Russkiye Vedomosti. This is the
most sedate (and dullest), the most scientific (arid farthest removed from
real life) of professorial newspapers. Its short article on the
twenty-fifth anniversary of Karl Marx’s death (No. 51, March 1) is
written in a predominantly dry wooden tone—“objectivity”, as it
is called in the language of professors “ordinary” and
“extraordinary”. The writer of the article tries to confine
himself to facts and trifling facts. As an impartial historian, he is
prepared to give Marx his due—at least as far as the past is
concerned, a past which is already dead and can be spoken of in a lifeless
way. Russkiye Vedomosti admits Marx to be a “remarkable
figure”, a “great man of science”, an “outstanding
leader of the proletariat”, an organiser of the masses. But this
recognition applies

    

to the past: today, says the newspaper, “new paths are really
necessary”, i. e., new paths for the labour movement and socialism
unlike the “old Marxism”. What these new paths are, the paper
does not say in so many words—that is too live a subject for
professors and too “injudicious” a theme for virtuosi in the
art of “tactful silence”. But broad hints are dropped:
“Many of his [Marx’s] constructions have been destroyed by scientific
analysis and the merciless critique of events. Among scientists there are
practically no adherents faithful to his system as a whole; Marx’s
spiritual child—German Social-Democracy—has deviated a good
deal from the revolutionary path which the founders of German socialism had
mapped out.” As you see, the writer leaves very little unsaid in his
desire to rectify Marx in the revisionist way.  

Another influential paper, Rech, the organ of a political
party, which plays first fiddle in the concert of Russian liberalism, gives
a much more lively appraisal of Marx. The tendency is, of course, the same
as in Russkiye Vedomosti, but whereas there we saw a preface to a
fat volume, here we have political slogans that are the immediate guide for
many a speech from the parliamentary rostrum, in dealing with all current
events and topics of the day. The article “Karl Marx and
Russia” (No. 53, March 2) is written by the notorious renegade
Mr. Izgoev, a specimen of those Russian intellectuals, who between the ages
of twenty-five and thirty “try to pose as Marxists”, between
thirty-five and forty play at being liberals, and after that end up as
Black Hundreds.  

Mr. Izgoev deserted the Social-Democrats for the liberals (as he
himself has declared and as that arch-renegade Mr. Struve said of him) just
when the revolution, after its first staggering successes, entered a
difficult period of a long and hard struggle against the growing
counter-revolution. Indeed, Mr. Izgoev is highly typical in this
respect. He is splendid at making it clear who stands to gain by
professorial affectation in appraising Marx, and whose work this
official “scholarship” is doing. “Marx the tactician of
political intrigue,” Izgoev thunders, “was a considerable
hindrance to Marx the great scientist, and caused him to commit many
mistakes.” The chief mistake, of course, was that in addition to the
correct, reasonable “evolutionary Marxism” accepted

    

by the “majority” (the majority of philistines?) there was born
a mischievous, unscientific, fantastic revolutionary Marxism,
“adulterated by home-brewed Narodism”. What our liberal
especially resents is the role of this Marxism in the Russian
revolution. Would you believe it—they go to the length of talking of
a dictatorship of the proletariat to carry out this very same
“bourgeois revolution”, or even of a “dictatorship of the
proletariat and the peasantry—which is absolutely fantastic in the
mouth of Marxists”. “No wonder that revolutionary Marxism in
the form in which it was adopted in Russia by the Bolsheviks of all shades
has completely failed.”... “They are having to think of establishing
an ordinary ‘bourgeois’ [the ironical quotation marks are Mr. Izgoev’s]
constitution.”  

There you have an ideologically ready-made and politically mature Octobrist,
who is quite convinced that it is Marxism and revolutionary tactics that have
failed, and not the Cadet tactics of compromise, betrayal, and treachery!


To proceed. From the Russian we shall pass to the German press, which
operates in a free atmosphere, face to face with a legal socialist party,
and which expresses its views in dozens of daily newspapers. The
Frankfurter Zeitung, one of the wealthiest, most widely read and
most “democratic” bourgeois newspapers in Germany, devotes a
big leading article to the twenty-fifth anniversary of Marx’s death
(No. 76, March 16, New Style, evening edition). The German “democrats
at once take the bull by the horns. “One can understand the
Social-Democratic press having honoured its teacher on this day in numerous
articles,” we are told. “But Marx has been recognised as a
great man even in an influential national liberal paper, although with the
usual reservations. Yes, of course, he was great, but he was a great
corrupter.”  

This newspaper, representing the pick of that brand of Black-Hundred
ideology known as European liberalism, explains that it does not in the
least question Marx’s personal honesty, but that his theories have
caused incalculable harm. By introducing the conception of determinism and
objective law in the sphere of social phenomena, by denying the
significance of morality and the relative conditional nature of our
knowledge, Marx founded an anti-scientific utopia and a

    

real “Church” of his sectarian disciples. But his most harmful
idea is—the class struggle. Herein lies all the evil! Marx
treated seriously the old aphorism about two

  nations,[1]

about the existence of two nations within every civilised nation— a
nation of “exploiters” and a nation of “exploited”
(the newspaper puts these unscientific terms in deadly ironical quotation
marks). Marx forgot the clear, obvious truth that is plain to all healthy
people, namely, that in social life “the aim is not struggle but
agreement”. Marx “tore the nation asunder, for he hammered it
into the heads of his people that there was nothing in common between them
and the rest of the people, that they were deadly enemies”.  


   “What could be more natural,” the newspaper asks,
   “than that Social-Democracy, agreeing as it does with many of the
   bourgeoisie on a number of practical issues, should seek closer alignment
   with them? But that does not happen precisely because of Marxist
   theory. Social-Democracy has condemned itself to isolation. For a time it
   seemed as though a fundamental change was going to take place in this
   respect. It was when the revisionists began their campaign. But it turned
   out to be a mistake, and the difference between the revisionists and
   ourselves consisted, among other things, in that we understood this mistake
   while they did riot. The revisionists believed, and still believe, that it
   is possible somehow to keep to Marx and yet become a different party. Vain
   hopes. Marx has either to be swallowed whole or completely rejected. A
   half-hearted course is of no rise here.”...  


Quite right, gentlemen of the liberal fold! You do some times come out
with the truth by accident.  


   “... So long as Social-Democracy honours Marx it will not be able to
   rid itself of the idea of the class struggle and of all those other things
   that make living with it so difficult.... The scientific world is agreed
   that not one of the politico-economic theories of Marxism has been proved
   true.”...  


Well, well, gentlemen. You have admirably expressed the essence of
bourgeois science, of bourgeois liberalism, and its entire policy. You have
grasped the fact that Marx cannot be swallowed piecemeal. This is something
that the Izgoevs and the Russian liberals have not yet understood. But even
they will, before long.  

And here, in conclusion,is Journal des Débats, the
conservative organ of the bourgeois republic. In its issue of March

    

15, it writes, on the occasion of the anniversary, that the socialists,
those “wild equalitarians”, preach the cult of their great men,
that the chief evil of the teachings of Marx, who

“hated the bourgeosie”, 

is the theory of the struggle of classes. “He preached to
the working classes not temporary conflicts alternating with periods of
truce, but a holy war, a war of extermination, of expropriation, a war for
the promised land of collectivism.., a monstrous utopia."...  

The bourgeois papers write well when stung to the quick. Life becomes a
more cheerful thing when you see this growing ideological unity among the
liberal enemies of the proletariat all over the world, for this unity is
one of the guarantees of the unification of the millions of the
international proletariat, which will win for itself its promised land,
come what may.  
 

Notes
 

[1]
These two words are given by Lenin in English.—Ed.  
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 13

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





