# Volume  3

==========

## Table of contents







Lenin Collected Works: Volume 3








Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 3


 
  
Lenin Collected Works: 

    Volume 3
1896--1900



Publisher's Note




1896--1899



The Development of Capitalism in Russia

Preface to
      the First Edition
Preface to
      the Second Edition


43k



Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes of the Narodnik Economists

The Social Division of Labour
     The increase in the number of industries. —The
    creation of a home market as a result of the social division
    of labour. —The manifestation of this process in
    agriculture. —The views of the Narodnik economists
  
The Growth of the Industrial Population at the Expense of the Agricultural
     The necessary connection between this phenomenon and
    the very nature of commodity and capitalist economy.
  
The Ruin of the Small Producers
     The mistaken view of the
    Narodniks. — The view of
    the author of Capital on this subject.
  
The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility of Realising Surplus-Value
    
    The substance of the theory of Messrs. V. V. and
    N. —on: its erroneous character. —The “foreign
    market” is wrongly dragged into the problem of
    realisation. —The superficial estimation of the
    contradictions of capitalism by the writers mentioned.
  
The Views of Adam Smith on the Production and Circulation of the Aggregate Social Product in Capitalist Society and Marx’s Criticism of These Views
     Adam Smith’s omission of
    constant capital. —The influence of this error on the
    theory of the national revenue
  
Marx’s Theory of Realisation
     The basis premises of
    Marx’s theory. —The realisation of the product
    under simple reproduction. —The main conclusion from
    Marx’s theory of realisation. —The significance of
    productive consumption. —The contradiction between the
    urge towards the unlimited growth of production and the
    limited character of consumption.
  
The Theory of the National Income
    
    Proudhon. —Rodbertus. —Contemporary
    economists. —Marx.
  
Why Does the Capitalist Nation Need a Foreign Market?
    
    The causes of the need for a foreign market. —The foreign
    market and the progressive character of capitalism.
  
Conclusions from Chapter I
     Résumé of the
    propositions examined above. —The essence of the problem
    of the home market.
  


154k



Chapter II. The Differentiation of the Peasantry

Zemstvo Statistics for Novorossia
     Economic groups of the
    peasantry. —Commercial agriculture and the purchase and
    sale of labour-power. —The top group; the concentration
    of land, and of animals and implements the higher
    productivity of labour. —Mr. V. V.’s argument of
    the decline in horse-ownership. —The hiring of farm
    workers and Mr. V. V.’s argument on this
    phenomenon. —The bottom group of the peasantry; the
    leasing of land. —The middle group, its
    instability. —Messrs V. V. and Karyshev on peasant
    rentings. —The attitude of the Narodniks to
    Mr. Postnikov’s researches.
  
Zemstvo Statistics for Samara Gubernia
    
      Data concerning the farms of the different peasant groups in
      Novouzensk Uyezd. —The land held and the land in use by the
      different groups. —Mr. Karyshev on land renting and grain
      prices. —Wage-labour; the creation of a home market by the
      differentiation of the peasantry. —The rural proletariat in
      Samara Gubernia.
  
Zemstvo Statistics for Saratov Gubernia
    
      Data concerning the farms of the different groups. —The
      hiring of farm workers. —“Industries” in Zemstvo
      statistics. —Rentings. —The arguments on land renting
      advanced by Messrs. Karyshev, N.-on, and Maress. —A
      comparison of Kamyshin and other uyezds. —The significance
      of the classification of peasant households.
  
Zemstvo Statistics for Perm Gubernia
    
      Data concerning the farms of the different groups. —The hiring of
      farm workers and day labourers and its significance. —The
      manuring of the soil. —Improved implements. —Commercial
      and industrial establishments.
  
Zemstvo Statistics for Orel Gubernia
    
      Data concerning the farms of the different
      groups. —Incompleteness of the picture of differentiation
      from the data for Orel Gubernia.
  
Zemstvo Statistics for Voronezh Gubernia
    
      Methods of classification in Voronezh abstracts. —Data for
      Zadonsk Uyezd. —Industries.
  
Zemstvo Statistics for Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia
    
      Data concerning groups of farms for three uyezds.
  
Review of Zemstvo Statistics for Other Gubernias
    
      Novgorod Gubernia, Demyansk Uyezd. —Chernigov Gubernia,
      Kozelets Uyezd. —Yenisei Gubernia. —Poltava Gubernia,
      three uyezds. —Kaluga Gubernia. —Tver Gubernia.
  
Summary of the Above Zemstvo Statistics on the Differentiation of the Peasantry
    
      Methods of marking the summary. —Combined table and
      chart. —Examination of the various columns of the
      chart. —Comparison between different localities as to degree
      of differentiation.
  
Summary of Zemstvo Statistics and Army-Horse Census Returns
    
      Zemstvo Statistics for 112 uyezds of 21
      gubernias. —Army-horse census returns for 49 gubernias of
      European Russia. —Significance of these data
  
A Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900
    
      Data for 48 gubernias of European Russia. —Statistical
      exercises of Messrs. Vikhlyayev and Chernenkov.
  
Zemstvo Statistics on Peasant Budgets
    
      Character of the data and methods of treating
      them. —(A). General results of the budgets. —Magnitude
      of expenditures and incomes. —Components of
      expenditures. —Components of incomes. —Cash portions of
      the budgets. —The significance of the taxes. —(B). A
      characterisation of peasant farming. —General data about the
      farms. —Property and implements. —Farm
      expenditure. —Income from agriculture. —An apparent
      exception. —(C). A characterisation of the standard of
      living. —Expenditure on food in kind. —Expenditure on
      food in cash. —Remaining expenditures on personal
      consumption. —Cash expenditure on personal and productive
      consumption. —Mr. N.-on on about the top “stratum” of the
      peasantry. —A comparison between the standard of living or
      rural workers and peasants. —Methods of Mr. Shcherbina.
  
Conclusions from Chapter II.
    
      The significance of commodity economy. —1) Capitalist
      contradictions within the village community. —2)
      “Depeasantising”. —3) Characterisation of this process in
      Capital. —4) The peasant bourgeoisie. —5) The
      rural proletariat. The European type of allotment-holding rural
      worker. —6) The middle peasantry. —7) The formation of a
      home market for capitalism. —8) Increasing differentiation;
      significance of migration. —9) Merchant’s and usurer’s
      capital. The presentation of the problem in theory. The
      connection between these forms of capital and industrial
      capital. —10) Labour-service and its influence on the
      differentiation of the peasantry.
  


418k



Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from Corvée to Capitalist Economy

The Main Features of Corvée Economy
    
      The essence of the serf system of economy and the conditions for
      it.
  
The Combination of the Corvée and the Capitalist Systems of Economy
    
      The remnants of the old system after the Reform. —The
      labour-service and the capitalist systems; their relative
      incidence. —The transition from the labour-service system to
      the capitalist.
  
Description of the Labour-Service System
    
      Types of labour-service.  Rentings in kind and their
      significance. —The payment of labour under
      labour-service. —Personal dependence under
      labour-service. —General estimation of labour-service.
  
The Decline of the Labour-Service System
    
      Two types of labour-service.—The significance of the
      differentiation of the peasantry.—View of
      Mr. Stebut.—Views in various publications.
  
The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem
    
      The idealisation of labour-service.—Mr. Kablukov’s
      argument.
  
The Story of Engelhardt’s Farm
    
      The original condition of the farm and the nature of the gradual
      changes made in it.
  
The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture
    
      Four periods in the development of agricultural machinery
      production.—Incompleteness of official statistics.—Data
      on the employment of various agricultural machines.
  
The Significance of Machinery in Agriculture
    
      The capitalist character of the employment of
      machinery.—Results of the employment of machinery.—The
      inconsistency of the Narodniks.
  
Wage-Labour in Agriculture
    
      "Agricultural outside employments", their significance, their
      scale.—Number of agricultural workers in all European
      Russia.
  
The Significance of Hired Labour in Agriculture
    
      The conditions of agricultural workers.—Specific forms of
      hire.—The conditions of workers of small and big
      employers.—First elements of public control.—The
      appraisal of agricultural migration by the Narodniks.
  


252k



Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture

General Data on Agricultural Production in Post-Reform Russia and on the Types of Commercial Agriculture
    
      The production of cereals and potatoes in 1864-1865, 1870-1879,
      1883-1887, 1885-1894.—Potato sowing and its
      significance.—Areas of commercial
      agriculture.—Mr. Kablukov’s arguments.
  
The Commercial Grain-Farming Area
    
      The shifting of the principal centre of cereal
      production.—The significance of the outer regions as
      colonies.—The capitalist character of agriculture in this
      area.
  
The Commercial Stock-Farming Area. General Data on the Development of Dairy Farming.
    
      The significance of stock farming in the different
      areas.—The calculations of Messrs. Kovalevsky and
      Levitsky.—The development of cheese-making.—The
      incompleteness of official data.—Technical progress.
  
Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in the Area Described
    
      The rationalisation of agriculture.—"Amalgamated dairies"
      and their significance.—The formation of a home
      market.—The migration of agricultural workers to the
      industrial gubernias.—The more even distribution of jobs
      through-out the year.—The small cultivators’ dependence and
      its estimation by Mr. V. V.
  
Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry in the Dairy-Farming Area
    
      The distribution of cows among the peasants.—Details of
      St. Petersburg Uyzed.—"Progressive trends in peasant
      farming".—The influence of this progress on the poor.
  
The Flax-Growing Area
    
      The growth of commercial flax-growing.—Exchange between
      different types of commercial agriculture.—"Extremes" in
      the flax area.—Technical improvements.
  
The Technical Processing of Agricultural Produce
    
    The significance of the factory or technical system of
    farming.

    
 ) Distilling . . .

    
The extent of agricultural distilling.—The development and
the significance of potato distilling.
      
) Beet-Sugar Production . . .

    
The growth of sugar-beet production.—The progress of
capitalist agriculture.
      
) Potato-Starch Production . . .

     Its growth.—Two
processes in the development of this branch of
production.—The starch "industry" in Moscow
Gubernia—and in Vladimir Gubernia.
      
) Vegetable Oil Production . . .

    
The dual processes of its development.—Oil pressing as a cottage
industry.
      
) Tobacco Growing . . .





Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing; Suburban Farming.
    
      The growth of commercial fruit growing and vegetable
      growing.—Peasant vegetable growers in the St. Petersburg,
      Moscow and Yareslavl gubernias.—The hot-house
      industry.—Industrial melon growing.—Suburban farming
      and its characteristics.
  
Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism in Agriculture in Russia
    
      1) On the transformation of agriculture into enterprise.  2) The
      specific features of capitalism in agriculture.  3) The
      formation of a home market for capitalism.  4) The
      progressive historical role of capitalism in Russian
      agriculture.
  
Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in Agriculture. "The Freeing of Winter Time"
    
      The narrow and stereotyped character of this theory.—Its
      omission of highly important aspects of the process.
  
Continuation.—The Village Community.—Marx’s View on Small-Scale Agriculture.—Engels’s Opinion of the Contemporary Agricultural Crisis
    
      The Narodnik’s wrong presentation of the problem of the village
      community.—Their misunderstanding of a passage in
      Capital.—Marx’s estimation of peasant
      agriculture.—His estimation of agricultural capitalism.
      —Mr. N.--on’s inappropriate quotation.
  


327k



Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry

Domestic Industry and Handicrafts
    
      The remants of domestic industry. —The extent of the
      prevalence of handicrafts, their basic features.
  
Small Commodity-Producers in Industry. The Craft Spirit in the Small Industries
    
      The transition from handicrafts to commodity production. The
      fear of competition.
  
The Growth of Small Industries after the Reform. Two Forms of This Process and Its Significance.
    
      Causes of the growth of small industries. —The settlement of
      industrialists in the outer regions. —The growth of small
      industries among the local population. —The shift of
      capital. —The connection between the growth of small
      industries and the differentiation of the peasantry.
  
The Differentiation of the Small Commodity-Producers. Data on House-to-House Censuses of Handicraftsmen in Moscow Gubernia
    
      Presentation of the problem. —The method of processing the
      data. —Combined table and chart. —Conclusions:
      wage-labour, productivity of labour, incomes. —The
      petty-bourgeois structure of handicraft industries.
  
Capitalist Simple Co-operation
    
      Its significance and influence on production. —Artels.
  
Merchant’s Capital in the Small Industries
    
      The conditions that give rise to the buyer-up. —Trades-women in
      the lace industry. —Examples of marketing
      organisation. —Views of the Narodniks.Forms of merchant’s
      capital.
  
"Industry and Agricultural"
    
      Data of the table. —The agriculture of
      wage-workers. —"Land labourers". —Other data concerning
      industry and agriculture. —Length of the working
      period. —Résumé.
  
"The Combination of Industry with Agriculture"
    
      The Narodnik’s theory. —The forms in which industry is
      combined with agriculture and their diverse significance.
  
Some Remarks on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of Our Countryside



216k



Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry

The Rise of Manufacture and Its Main Features
    
      The concept of manufacture, its dual origin and
      significance.
  
Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry

) The Weaving
  Industry

) Other Branches of the
  Textile Industry. The Felt Trade

) The Hat-and-Cap and
  Hemp-and-Rope Trades

) The Wood-Working
  Trades

) The Processing of
  Livestock Produce. The Leather and Fur Trades

) The Remaining
  Livestock Processing Trades

) The Processing of
  Mineral Products

) The Metal Trades. The
  Pavlovo Industries

) Other Metal
      Trades

) The Jewellery,
  Samovar and Accordian Trades



Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and Its Significance
    
      Hand production, apprenticeship. —Division of labour as a
      stage preparatory to large-scale machine industry, its influence
      on the workers.
  
The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of Agriculture from Industry
    
      Mr. Kharizomenov’s opinion. —Non-agricultural
      centres. —The transitional character of
      manufacture. —The raising of the cultural level of the
      population.
  
The Economic Structure of Manufacture
    
      The circumstances of production. —How Mr. Ovsyannikov and
      Kharizomenov describe it.
  
Merchant’s and Industrial Capital in Manufacture.The "Buyer-up" and the "Factory Owner"
    
      The connection between the big and the small
      establishments. —The error of the Narodniks.
  
Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture
    
      Its incidence, its characteristic features, the conditions
      making for its spread, its significance in the theory of the
      surplus-population.
  
What Is "Handicraft" Industry?
    
      Some aggregate statistics on handicraftsmen. —The
      predominance of capitalistically employed workers. —The
      vagueness of the term "handicraft" and the abuse of it.
  


301k



Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry

The Scientific Conception of the Factory and the Significance of "Factory" Statistics

Our Factory Statistics
    
 Their sources. —Publications of the
      60s. —The specific character of the Military Statistical
Abstract. —Mr. Orlov’s Directory. —The
      Collections of the Department of Commerce and
      Manufactures. —The Returns for Russia for 1884-85;
      Mr. Karyshev’s errors. —Data of gubernia statistical
      committees. —The List. —Is the number of
      factories in Russia growing?
  
An Examination of Historical-Statistical Data on the Development of Large-Scale Industry

)
Textile Trades

)
Wood-Working Industries

) Chemical, Livestock
  Product and
  Ceramic Industries

)
Metallurgical
  Industries

)
Food Industries

)
Excise-Paying and Other
  Trades

)
Conclusions



The Development of the Mining Industry
    
      The Urals, their specific features. —The South. —The
      Caucasus. —The big and small mines in the Donets
      Basin. —The significance of the data on the development of
      the mining industry.
  
Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist Enterprises Growing?
    
      Data for the years 1865 and 1890. —Mistaken Method of the
      Narodniks.
  
Steam-Engine Statistics.
    
      Data for the years 1875-1878 and 1892.
  
The Growth of Large Factories
    
      Data for the years 1866, 1879, 1890 and 1894-95. —The
      largest enterprises in factory industry and in the mining
      industry. —The errors of Mr. N-on.
  
The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry
    
      Data on the leading centres of factory industry in the years
      1879 and 1890. —Three types of centres. —The
      classification of the centres. —The growth of rural factory
      centres and its significance.
  
The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries
    
      The growth of the lumber industry; its organisation. —The
      growth of capitalism in the building industry.
  
The Appendage to the Factory

The Complete Separation of Industry from Agriculture
    
      The error of the Narodniks. —Moscow Zemstvo sanitary
      statistics.
  
Three Stages in the Development of Capitalism in Russian Industry
    
      The connection between all the stages. —Specific technical
      features. —The growth of capitalist relationships. —The
      character of the development of industry. —The separation of
      industry from agriculture. —Differences in living
      conditions. —The growth of the home market.
  


437k



Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market

The Growth of Commodity Circulation
    
      The development of the railways, water transport, commerce and
      the banks.
  
The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population

) The Growth of Towns
      
) The Significance of Home Colonisation
      
) The Growth of Factory and of Commercial and Industrial
Townships and Villages
      
) Non-Agricultural Outside Employments

    
Non-agricultural outside employments, their size and growth,
their progressive role, the appraisal of them by Narodnik
writers.
      


The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour
    
      Approximate number of wage-workers. —Capitalist
      surplus-population. —The error of the Narodniks.
  
The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power
    
      The main movements of wage-workers in connection with the size
      of wages. —The formation of a home market. —Mr. N--on’s
      "theory".
  
The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign Market?
    
      Capitalism’s urge for expansion. —The example of the
      Caucasus. —Two aspects of the process of the formation of a
    market.
  
The "Mission" of Capitalism
    
    The increase in the productivity of social labour. —The
    socialisation of labour. —The cause of the difference with
    the Narodniks.
  


188k



Appendices to “The Development of Capitalism in Russia”

Appendix I. 
Combined Table of Statistics on Small Peasant Industries of Moscow Gubernia (to Chapter V)
Appendix II.  

Table of Statistics on the Factory Industry of European Russia (to Chapter VII)
Appendix III.  

The Chief Centres of Factory Industry in European Russia (to Chapter VII)


17k


1900


Uncritical Criticism

80k


 


Volume 3 Transcription/Mark-up:
   
Sally Ryan,

    David Walters, and
    R. Cymbala.

        •
    Converted to "tx2html", Oct. 2004.

  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 


 
 
 







==========

## Publisher's Note







LCW: 3: Publisher's Note by Progress Publishers







Lenin
      Collected Works: Volume 3: Publisher's Note by Progress Publishers


 

Lenin Collected Works: 
Volume 3

Publisher's Note
      by Progress Publishers


    
    The present English edition of V. I. Lenin' s Collected
      Works is a translation of the fourth, supplemented Russian
    edition prepared by the Institute of Marxism Leninism, Central
    Committee of the C.P.S.U.
  

    Necessary amendments have been made to some of the texts and notes
    in accordance with the fifth edition of the Collected Works
    of V. I. Lenin: some further editorial comments have also been
    added.
  







 
Previous

 | 
 Next 

 
Lenin
      Collected Works 
 | 
 Lenin
      Internet Archive 

 




 









==========

## The Development of Capitalism in Russia




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The Development of Capitalism in Russia
The Process of the Formation of a Home Market for Large-Scale
Industry


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 21-608
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






Preface To the First Edition





Preface To the Second Edition





Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes of the Narodnik Economists




  
    Chapter II. The Differentiation of the Peasantry





Chapter III. The LandownersÂ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy





Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture





Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry





Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry





Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry





Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market





Appendices to ÂThe Development of Capitalism in RussiaÂ





 
 

Notes
 
 



   Lenin’s
      book The Development of Capitalism in Russia was the
      result of tremendous research lasting more than three
      years. Lenin began intensive work on his book when in prison,
      soon after his arrest in connection with the case of the
      St. Petersburg “League of Struggle for the Emancipation of the
      Working Class,” and finished it in the village of Shushenskoye
      where he lived in exile. He had, however, been gathering
      material for his book long before he began writing it.

    
      In his first letter from prison, dated January 2, 1896, Lenin
      wrote: “I have a plan that has occupied my mind considerably
      ever since I was arrested, increasingly so as time passes. I
      have long been engaged on an economic problem (that of the
      marketing of the products of manufacturing industry within the
      country), have selected some literature, drawn up a plan for its
      analysis and have even done some writing with a view to having
      my work published in book form, should its dimensions exceed
      those of a magazine article. I should be very unwilling to give
      up on the job, and am now, apparently, faced with the
      alternative of either writing it here or of abandoning it
      altogether.” (See present edition, Vol. 37)

    
      In the same letter, in addition to giving instructions about
      books to be obtained according to a list he had drawn up, Lenin
      unfolded his plan of work:

    
      “The list of books,” he wrote, “is divided into the two parts
      into which my book is divided. A–The general theoretical
      part. This requires fewer books, so that, in any case, I hope to
      write it. although it needs more preparatory work. B–The
      application of the theoretical principles to Russian facts. This
      part requires very many books. The chief difficulty will be: 1)
      Zemstvo publications. Part of them, by the way, I already have,
      but another part (small monographs) may be ordered, and a part
      may be obtained through statisticians I know; 2) Government
      publications–the papers of commissions, reports and minutes of
      congresses, etc. These are important, but they are more
      difficult to obtain. Some of them, even the majority, I think,
      are in the library of the Free Economic Society. (See present
      edition, Vol. 37)
    


      Lenin’s sister, A. I. Ulyanova-Elizarova, relates in her
      reminiscences that while Vladimir Ilyich was working on his book
      in prison “he decided to use the St. Petersburg libraries in
      order to obtain material needed for the work he had planned and
      that he knew he would not be able to get in exile. And so in
      prison he made an intense study of a mass of source material,
      and copied out numerous extracts. I dragged heaps of books to
      him from the Free Economic Society library, from the Academy of
      Sciences and from other scientific book reposititories.”

    
      Lenin also worked on the book while on his way to exile.
      In a letter dated March 15, 1897, he wrote that while on the way
      he had looked over some “books borrowed for a short while,” and
      that he intended to send them back from Krasnoyarsk. During a
      halt at Krasnoyarsk (en route for Shushenskoye village), Lenin
      made a study of books and magazines that he found in the rich
      private library of G. V. Yudin, a merchant, and also in the
      local city library.

    
      While in exile Lenin continued to work hard on The
      Development of Capitalism in Russia. Since he did not
      possess the means to buy large numbers of books, he wrote to his
      relatives asking them to make arrangements to supply him from
      libraries in the capital. “... It would very likely be more
      profitable for me to spend money on postage and have many books
      than to spend much more money on buying a few books.”
      (See present edition, Vol. 37). On Lenin’s instructions, his
      sister, M. I. Ulyanova, copied out numerous extracts from
      various books in the Rumyantsev Library in Moscow. Lenin received
      these extracts at the end of May 1897. From the autumn of the
      same year, he received the material he needed regularly and set
      to work on the new sources, particularly on the numerous
      statistical abstracts. In the spring of 1898, N. K. Krupskaya,
      who had secured a transfer from her place of exile in Ufa to
      Shushenskoye, brought Lenin many books.

    
      During his three years’ work on The Development of
      Capitalism in Russia, Lenin studied and made a critical
      analysis of everything that had been written on Russian
      economics. In this monograph mention is made of, and passages
      are quoted from, over 500 different books, abstracts, research
      papers, reviews and articles. The literature, however, actually
      studied and used by Lenin, but not included among the sources
      mentioned, was much more extensive. But even this list
      gives an idea of the colossal amount of work involved in his
      study of the development of Russian capitalism.

    
      The draft of The Development of Capitalism in Russia
      was completed in August 1898. In a letter dated October 11,
      1898, Lenin wrote: “I have finished drafting my markets, and I
      have begun to give them the finishing touches. The making of a
      fair copy will go on simultaneously, so that I have thought of
      sending it off in parts and of having it printed as it gets
      there in order to avoid delay (I expect to send off the first
      lot in a month’s time at the very latest); if they begin
      printing it in December, it might



just be in time for this
      season.” (See present edition, Vol. 37). Much time was needed to
      give the manuscript the finishing touches and the job was
      completed at the end of January 1899.

    
      Lenin paid careful attention to the remarks of comrades and
      relatives who read The Development of Capitalism in
      Russia while it was still in manuscript. Each chapter was
      copied into a separate little notebook, and, apart from
      Krupskaya, was read and discussed by other Social-Democrats who
      were in exile at that time in the Minusinsk area. “We were the
      ‘first readers,’ so to speak, of The Development of
      Capitalism in Russia,” wrote G. M. Krzhizhanovsky in his
      reminiscences (he lived in exile not far from Shushenskoye
      village). “Whatever was sent to us, we read carefully and
      returned it to Lenin with our comments. He took our comments
      very much into consideration.”

    
The Development of Capitalism in Russia came off the
      press at the end of March, 1899, under the pseudonym of
      “Vladimir Ilyin.” The issue of 2,400 copies was sold out very
      quickly and circulated mainly among the Social-Democratic
      intelligentsia, the student youth, and also through the medium
      of propagandists in workers’ study circles.

    
      The bourgeois press tried to pass over Lenin’s monograph in
      silence, and the first reviews did not appear until the autumn
      of 1899. One of them received a crushing retort from Lenin in
      his article “Uncritical Criticism,” which was printed in the
      magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye (Scientific Review) for
      May-June 1900 (see pp. 609-32 in this volume).

    
      A second edition of The Development of Capitalism in
      Russia appeared in 1908.

    
      Since the establishment of Soviet power The Development of
      Capitalism in Russia has, according to data as of October
      1, 1957, been published 75 times, in a total of 3,372,000 copies
      and in 20 of the languages of the Soviet peoples. In addition it
      has appeared in the English, French, German, Spanish, Chinese,
      Czech, Hungarian, Japanese, Turkish and other foreign languages.

    
      Part of the preparatory work for The Development of
      Capitalism in Russia, which shows the volume of the
      research done by Lenin, and the methods he employed, has been
      published in the Lenin Miscellany XXXIII.

    
      The present volume follows the second, 1908, edition, which was
      published after the text had been corrected and supplemented by
      Lenin. In addition, account has been taken of all the author’s
      remarks concerning the first, 1899, edition.
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Preface to
      the First Edition




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The Development of Capitalism in Russia
The Process of the Formation of a Home Market for Large-Scale Industry






Cover of the first edition of Lenin’s 
The Development of Capitalism in Russia, 1899




PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

      In the work here presented, the author has set himself the aim
      of examining the question of how a home market is being formed
      for Russian capitalism. As we know, he principal exponents of Narodnik
      views (chief among them being Messrs. V. V. and

N.–on[4]),
      and
      it will be our task to criticise these views. We have not
      considered it possible to limit ourselves in this criticism to
      examining the mistakes and misconceptions in our opponents’
      views; in answering the question raised it seemed to us that it
      was not enough to adduce facts showing the formation and growth
      of a home market, for the objection might be raised that such
      facts had been selected arbitrarily and that facts showing the
      contrary had been omitted. It seemed to us that it was necessary
      to examine the whole process of the development of capitalism in
      Russia, to endeavour to depict it in its entirety. It goes
      without saying that such an extensive task would be beyond the
      powers of a single person, were a number of limitations not
      introduced. Firstly, as the title itself shows, we treat the
      problem of the development of capitalism in Russia exclusively
      from the standpoint of the home market, leaving aside the
      problem of the foreign market and data on foreign
      trade. Secondly, we limit ourselves purely to the post-Reform
      period. Thirdly, we deal mainly and almost exclusively with data
      concerning the interior, purely Russian, gubernias. Fourthly, we
      limit ourselves exclusively to the economic aspect of the
      process. But even with all the limitations

 

  indicated the topic
      that remains is an extremely broad one. The author does not
      close his eyes at all to the difficulty, and even the danger, of
      dealing with so broad a topic, but it seemed to him that to
      elucidate the problem of the home market for Russian capitalism
      it was absolutely necessary to show the connection between, and
      interdependence of, the various aspects of the process taking
      place in all spheres of the social economy. We therefore limit
      ourselves to an examination of the main features of the process,
      leaving a more specific study of it to further
      investigations.

    

      The plan of our work is as follows: in Chapter I we shall
      examine, as briefly as possible, the basic theoretical
      propositions of abstract political economy on the subject of the
      home market for capitalism. This will serve as a sort of
      introduction to the rest of the work, the factual part of it,
      and will relieve us of the need to make repeated references to
      theory in our further exposition. In the three following
      chapters we shall endeavour to describe the capitalist evolution
      of agriculture in post-Reform Russia, namely, in Chapter II we
      shall examine Zemstvo statistical data on the differentiation of
      the peasantry; in Chapter III data on the transitional state of
      landlord economy, and on the replacement of the corvée
      system of this economy by the capitalist; and in Chapter IV data
      on the forms in which the formation of commercial and capitalist
      agriculture is proceeding. The next three chapters will be
      devoted to the forms and stages of the development of capitalism
      in our industry: in Chapter V we shall examine the first stages
      of capitalism in industry, namely, in small peasant (known
      as handicraft) industry ; in Chapter VI data on capitalist
      manufacture and on capitalist domestic industry, and in Chapter
      VII data on the development of large-scale machine industry. In
      the last chapter (VIII), we shall make an attempt to indicate
      the connection between the various aspects of the process that
      have been described and to present a general picture of that
      process.

    


      P.S.[5] To our
      extreme regret we have not
      been able to use for this
      work the excellent analysis of “the development of agriculture in
      capitalist society” made by K. Kautsky in his book Die
  Agrarfrage (Stuttgart, Dietz, 1899; I. Abschn.

 

  “Die Entwicklung
      der Landwirtschaft in der kapitalistischen
      Gesellschaft”[1]).

  [2]


      This book (which we received when the greater part of the
      present work had already been set up in type) is, after Vol. III
      of Capital, the most noteworthy contribution to recent
      economic literature.  Kautsky
      investigates the “main tendencies” in the capitalist evolution
      of agriculture; his purpose is to examine the diverse phenomena
      in modern agriculture as “particular manifestations of one
      general process”

(Vorrede,[3]

 VI). It is interesting to note how
      far the main features of this general process in Western Europe
      and in Russia are identical, notwithstanding the tremendous
      peculiarities of the latter, in both the economic and
      non-economic spheres. For example, typical of modern capitalist
      agriculture in general is the progressive division of labour and
      the employment of machinery (Kautsky, IV, b, c), a phenomenon
      also noticeable in post-Reform Russia (see later, Chapter III,
      §§ VII and VIII; Chapter IV, particularly §
      IX). The process of the “proletarisation of the peasantry” (the
      heading of Chapter VIII of Kautsky’s book) is manifested
      everywhere in the spread of wage-labour in every form among the
      small peasants (Kautsky, VIII, b); we see the parallel of this
      in Russia in the formation of a huge class of allotment-holding
      wage-workers (see later, Chapter II). The existence of a small
      peasantry in every capitalist society is due not to the
      technical superiority of small production in agriculture, but to
      the fact that the small peasants reduce the level of their
      requirements below that of the wage-workers and tax their
      energies far more than the latter do (Kautsky, VI, b; “the
      agricultural wage-worker is better off than the small peasant,”
      says Kautsky repeatedly: S. 110, 317, 320); the same thing is
      also to be observed in Russia (see later, Chapter II, § XI,

      C[6]). It
      is natural, therefore, that West-European and Russian
      Marxists should agree in their appraisal of such phenomena as
      “agricultural outside employments,” to use the Russian term, or
      the “agricultural wage-labour of migratory peasants,”

 

as the
      Germans say (Kautsky, S. 192; cf. later, Chapter III, § X);
      or of such a phenomenon as the migration of workers and peasants
      from the villages to the towns and factories (Kautsky, IX,
      especially S. 343; and many other places. Cf. later, Chapter
      VIII, § II); the transplantation of large-scale capitalist
      industry to the rural districts (Kautsky, S. 187. Cf. later,
      VII, § VIII). This is quite apart from the same appraisal
      of the historical significance of agricultural
      capitalism (Kautsky, passim, especially S. 289, 292,
      298. Cf. later, Chapter IV, § IX), from the same
      recognition of the progressive nature of capitalist
      relations in agriculture as compared with pre-capitalist
      relations [Kautsky, S. 382: “The ousting des Gesindes
      (of personally dependent farm labourers, servants) and der
      Instleute (“midway between the farm labourer and the tenant
      cultivator”: the peasant who rents land, making payment by
      labour-service) by day labourers who outside of working hours
      are free men, would mark great social progress.” Cf. later,
      Chapter IV, § IX, 4]. Kautsky categorically declares that
      the adoption by the village community of large-scale modern
      agriculture conducted communally “is out of the question”
      (S. 338); that the agronomists in Western Europe who demand the
      consolidation and development of the village community are not
      socialists at all, but people representing the interests of the
      big landowners, who want to tie down the workers by granting
      them patches of land (S. 334); that in all European countries
      those who represent the landowners’ interests want to tie down
      the agricultural workers by allotting them land and are already
      trying to give legislative effect to the appropriate measures
      (S. 162); that all attempts to help the small peasantry by
      introducing handicraft industry (Hausindustrie)—that worst
      form of capitalist exploitation—“should be most resolutely
      combated” (S. 181). We consider it necessary to emphasise the
      complete unanimity of opinion between the West European and the
      Russian Marxists, in view of the latest attempts of the
      spokesmen of Narodism to draw a sharp distinction between the
      two (see the statement made by Mr. V. Vorontov on February 17,
      1899, at the Society for the Promotion of Russian Industry and
      Trade, Novoye Vremya [New Times ], No. 8255, February
      19,

1899).[7]





 

Notes
 

[1]
The
      Agrarian Question, Part I. “The Development of Agriculture
      in Capitalist Society.”—Ed.

[2] 
      There is a Russian tranlsation.—Lenin

[3] 
 Preface.—Lenin
 



[4]
V.V - pseudonym of V.P. Voronstov.


N.–on - pseudonym of Nikolai
      Danielson. Both were prominent ideologists of liberal Narodism
      in the 1880s and 90s.—Ed.



[5] 
      In February or at the beginning of March 1899, when in exile,
      Lenin received a copy of Die Agrarfrage (The Agrarian
      Question) by Kautsky, then still a Marxist. By then, the greater

 

part of The Development of Capitalism in Russia had
      been set up in type, and so Lenin decided to make reference to
      Kautsky’s work in hte preface. On March 17 (29), 1899, Lenin
      sent a postscript to the preface. “If only it is not late,” he
      wrote, “I would very much like to have it printed... Maybe, even
      if the preface is already set, it will still be possible to add
      the postscript?” The addition to the preface got into the hands
      of the censor and was changed. In a letter dated April 27 (May
      9), 1899, Lenin wrote of this: “Have heard that my P.S. to the
      preface was late, fell into the hands of the preliminary censor
      and ‘suffered,’ I think.”
    



[6] 
 In the
      second edition of The Development of Capitalism in
      Russia the numbering of the sections was changed through
      Lenin’s introduction of several additions. The item to which
      Lenin refers the reader is in Chapter II, § XII, C, p. 162 and
      p. 168.
    



[7] 
 On
      February 17, 1899, in the Society for the Promotion of Russian
      Industry and Trade, a discussion took place on a paper entitled
      “Is It Possible to Reconcile Narodism with Marxism?”
      Representatives of liberal Narodism as well as “Legal Marxists”
      took part in the discussion. V. P. Voronstov (V. V.) said that
      those who represented the “modern trend of Marxism in the West”
      stood closer to Russian Narodism than to the Russian Marxists. A
      brief report of this meeting appeared on February 19 (March 3),
      1899, in the reactionary St. Petersburg paper, Novoye Vremya
      (New Times).
    

 
  


|

PREFACE TO THE SECOND EDITION

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Preface to
      the Second Edition




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: PREFACE TO THE SECOND 
EDITION








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The Development of Capitalism in Russia
The Process of the Formation of a Home Market for Large-Scale 
Industry



PREFACE TO THE SECOND
EDITION[2]





Cover of the second edition
of Lenin’s The Development of Capitalism in Russia,
1908, autographed by the author.



      This book was written in the period preceding the Russian Revolution,
      during the slight lull that set in after the outbreak of the big
      strikes of 1895-1896. At that time the working-class movement
      withdrew, as it were, into itself, spreading in breadth and
      depth and paving the way for the beginning in 1901 of the
      demonstration movement.

    

      The analysis of the social-economic system and, consequently, of
      the class structure of Russia given in this work on the basis of
      an economic investigation and critical analysis of statistics,
      has now been confirmed by the open political action of all
      classes in the course of the revolution. The leading role of the
      proletariat has been fully revealed. It has also been revealed
      that the strength of the proletariat in the process of history
      is immeasurably greater than its share of the total
      population. The economic basis of the one phenomenon and the
      other is demonstrated in the present work.

    

      Further, the revolution is now increasingly revealing the dual
      position and dual role of the peasantry. On the one hand, the
      tremendous survivals of corvée economy and all kinds of
      survivals of serfdom, with the unprecedented impoverishment and
      ruin of the peasant poor, fully explain the deep sources of the
      revolutionary peasant movement, the deep roots of the
      revolutionary character of the peasantry as a mass. On the other
      hand, in the course of the revolution, the character of the
      various political parties, and the numerous
      ideological-political trends reveal the inherently contradictory
      class structure of this mass, its petty-bourgeois character, the
      antagonism between the proprietor and the proletarian trends
      within it. The vacillation of the impoverished small master
      between the counter-revolutionary bourgeoisie and the
      revolutionary proletariat is as inevitable

 

as the phenomenon
      existent in every capitalist society that an insignificant
      minority of small producers wax rich, “get on in the world,”
      turn into bourgeois, while the overwhelming majority are either
      utterly ruined and become wage-workers or paupers, or eternally
      eke out an almost proletarian existence. The economic basis of
      both these trends among the peasantry is demonstrated in the
      present essay.

    

      With this economic basis the revolution in Russia is, of course,
      inevitably a bourgeois revolution. This Marxist proposition is
      absolutely irrefutable. It must never be forgotten. It must
      always be applied to all the economic and political problems of
      the Russian Revolution.

    

      But one must know how to apply it. A concrete analysis of the
      status and the interests of the different classes must serve as
      a means of defining the precise significance of this truth when
      applied to this or that problem. The opposite mode of reasoning
      frequently met with among the Right-wing Social-Democrats headed
      by Plekhanov,
      i.e., the endeavour to look for answers to concrete questions in
      the simple logical development of the general truth about the
      basic character of our revolution, is a vulgarisation of Marxism
      and downright mockery of dialectical materialism. Of such
      people, who from the general truth of the character of this
      revolution deduce, for example, the leading role of the
      “bourgeoisie” in the revolution, or the need for socialists to
      support the liberals, Marx would very likely have repeated the
      words once quoted by him from Heine: “I have sown dragon’s teeth
      and harvested

      fleas.”[3]


      With the present economic basis of the Russian Revolution, two
      main lines of its development and outcome are objectively
      possible:

    

      Either the old landlord economy, bound as it is by thousands of
      threads to serfdom, is retained and turns slowly into purely
      capitalist, “Junker” economy. The basis of the final transition
      from labour-service to capitalism is the internal metamorphosis
      of feudalist landlord economy. The entire agrarian system of the
      state becomes capitalist and for a long time retains feudalist
      features. Or the old landlord economy is broken up by
      revolution, which destroys all the relics of serfdom, and large
      landownership in the first place. The basis of the final
      transition from labour-service to

 

capitalism is the free development of small peasant farming, which has
      received a tremendous impetus as a result of the expropriation
      of the landlords’ estates in the interests of the peasantry. The
      entire agrarian system becomes capitalist, for the more
      completely the vestiges of serfdom are destroyed the more
      rapidly does the differentiation of the peasantry proceed. In
      other words: either—the retention, in the main, of landed
      proprietorship and of the chief supports of the old
      “superstructure”; hence, the predominant role of the
      liberal-monarchist bourgeois and landlord, the rapid transition
      of the well-to-do peasantry to their side, the degradation of
      the peasant masses, not only expropriated on a vast scale but
      enslaved, in addition, by one or other kind of

Cadet[4]–proposed
      land-redemption payments, and downtrodden and dulled by the
      dominance of reaction; the executors of such a bourgeois
      revolution will be politicians of a type approximating to the

Octobrists.[5]
      Or—the destruction of landlordism and of all the chief
      supports of the corresponding old “superstructure”; the
      predominant role of the proletariat and the peasant masses, with
      the neutralising of the unstable or counter-revolutionary
      bourgeoisie; the speediest and freest development of the
      productive forces on a capitalist basis, under the best
      circumstances for the worker and peasant masses at all
      conceivable under commodity production;—hence, the
      establishment of the most favourable conditions for the further
      accomplishment by the working class of its real and fundamental
      task of socialist reorganisation. Of course, infinitely diverse
      combinations of elements of this or that type of capitalist
      evolution are possible, and only hopeless pedants could set
      about solving the peculiar and complex problems arising merely
      by quoting this or that opinion of Marx about a different
      historical epoch.

    

      The essay here presented to the reader is devoted to an analysis
      of the pre-revolutionary economy of Russia. In a revolutionary
      epoch, life in a country proceeds with such speed and
      impetuosity that it is impossible to define the major results of
      economic evolution in the heat of political
      struggle. Messrs. the

Stolypins[6],
      on the one hand, and the liberals on the other (and not only
      Cadets Â la Struve, but all the Cadets in general), are
      working systematically, doggedly and consistently to accomplish
      the revolution

 

according to the first pattern. The coup
      d’état of June 3, 1907, that we have recently witnessed,
      marks a victory for the

      counter-revolution,[7]
      which is striving to
      ensure the complete predominance of the landlords in the
      so-called representative body of the Russian people. But how far
      this “victory” is a lasting one is another matter; the struggle
      for the second outcome of the revolution goes on. Not only the
      proletariat, but also the broad masses of the peasantry are
      striving, more or less resolutely, more or less consistently,
      and more or less consciously, for this outcome. However much the
      counter-revolution tries to strangle the direct mass struggle by
      outright violence, however much the Cadets try to strangle it by
      means of their despicable and hypocritical counter revolutionary
      ideas, that struggle, in spite of all, is breaking out, now here
      and now there, and laying its impress upon the policy of the
      “labour,” Narodnik parties, although the top circles of
      petty-bourgeois politicians are undoubtedly contaminated
      (especially the “Popular
      Socialists” and

Trudoviks[8])
      with the Cadet spirit of treachery,

      Molchalinism[9]
      and smugness
      characteristic of moderate and punctilious philistines or
      bureaucrats.

    

      How this struggle will end, what the final result of the first
      onset of the Russian Revolution will be—it is at present
      impossible to say. Hence, the time has not yet come (moreover,
      the immediate Party duties of a participant in the working-class
      movement leave no leisure) for a thorough revision of this

      essay.[1]

      The second edition cannot overstep the bounds of a characterisation of
      Russian economy before the revolution. The author had
      to confine himself to going over and correcting the text and
      also to making the most essential additions from the
      latest statistical material. These are recent horse-census data,
      harvest statistics, returns of the 1897 census of the population
      of Russia, new data from factory statistics, etc.

    
      The Author

    
      July 1907
    




Cover of the German edition
    (1894) of K. Marx’s Capital, Vol. III, Part 1,
    used by Lenin.

 

Notes
 

[1] 
      Such a revision will possibly require a sequel to the present
      work. In that case the first volume would have to be confined to
      an analysis of Russian economy before the revolution, and the
      second volume devoted to a study of the results and achievements
      of the revolution.—Lenin
 



[2]
[PLACEHOLDER]






[3] 
[PLACEHOLDER]




[4] 
[PLACEHOLDER]






[5] 
[PLACEHOLDER]




[6] 
[PLACEHOLDER]




[7]
June 3, 1907, was the day on which the Second State
      Duma was disbanded and a new law was promulgated dealing with
      the elections to the Third State Duma, that ensured a majority
      for the landlords and capitalists in the Duma. The tsar’s
      government treacherously violated the Manifesto of October 17,
      1905, did away with constitutional rights and had the
      Social-Democratic

 

group in the Second Duma arraigned and
      sentenced to hard labour. The so-called coup d’état of
      June 3 marked a temporary victory of the counter-revolution.
    



[8] 
[PLACEHOLDER]






[9]
Molchalinism–a synonym for sycophancy,
      toadyism. Derived from the name Molchalin, a character in
      Griboyedov’s play Wit Works Woe.


 
  

PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes of the Narodnik Economists




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter I. The Theoretical 
Mistakes of the Narodnik Economists









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT 
of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes of the Narodnik Economists


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 37-69
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. The Social Division of Labour
  37



II. The Growth of the Industrial Population at the Expense of the Agricultural
  40



III. The Ruin of the Small Producers
  41



IV. The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility of Realising Surplus-Value
  43



V. The Views of Adam Smith on the Production and Circulation of the Aggregate Social 
Product in Capitalist Society and Marx’s Criticism of These Views
  47



VI. Marx’s Theory of Realisation
  51



VII. The Theory of the National Income
  58



VIII. Why Does the Capitalist Nation Need a Foreign Market?
  64



IX. Conclusions From Chapter I
  67

 
 
 

Note
 
 



      In the first edition of The Development of Capitalism in Russia
      (1899) this chapter was entitled “References to Theory.”
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Social Division of Labour




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One: I. 
The Social Division of Labour








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists




      The market is a category of commodity economy, which in the course of its
      development is transformed into capitalist economy and only under the
      latter gains complete sway and universal prevalence. Therefore, in order
      to examine basic theoretical propositions concerning the home market we
      must proceed from simple commodity economy and trace its gradual
      transformation into capitalist economy.
    

I. The Social Division of Labour

      The basis of commodity economy is the social division of
      labour. Manufacturing industry separates from the raw materials industry,
      and each of these subdivides into small varieties and subvarieties which
      produce specific products as commodities, and exchange them for the
      products of all the others. Thus, the development of commodity economy
      leads to an increase in the number of separate and independent branches of
      industry; the tendency of this development is to transform into a special
      branch of industry the making not only of each separate product, but even
      of each separate part of a product—and not only the making of a
      product, but even the separate operations of preparing the product for
      consumption. Under natural economy society consisted of a mass of
      homogeneous economic units (patriarchal peasant families, primitive
      village communities, feudal manors), and each such unit engaged in all
      forms of economic activity, from the acquisition of various

 

      kinds of raw material to their final preparation for consumption. Under
      commodity economy heterogeneous economic units come into being, the number
      of separate branches of economy increases, and the number of economic
      units per forming one and the same economic function diminishes. It is
      this progressive growth in the social division of labour that is the chief
      factor in the process of creating a home market for
      capitalism. “...Where the basis is commodity production and its
      absolute form, capitalist production,” says Marx,
      “... products are commodities, or use-values, which have an
      exchange-value that is to be realised, to be converted into money, only in
      so far as other commodities form an equivalent for them, that is, other
      products confront them as commodities and values; thus, in so far as they
      are not produced as immediate means of subsistence for the producers
      themselves, but as commodities, as products which become use-values only
      by their transformation into exchange values (money), by their
      alienation. The market for these commodities develops through the
      social division of labour ; the division of productive labours
      mutually transforms their respective products into commodities, into
      equivalents for each other, making them mutually serve as
      markets” (Das Kapital, III, 2, 177-178. Russ. trans.,

      526.[2] Our italics,
      as in all quotations, unless otherwise stated).

    

      It goes without saying that the above-mentioned separation of the
      manufacturing from the raw materials industry, of manufacture from
      agriculture, transforms agriculture itself into an industry, into a
      commodity-producing branch of economy. The process of specialisation that
      separates from each other the diverse varieties of the manufacture of
      products, creating an ever-growing number of branches of industry, also
      manifests itself in agriculture, creating specialised agricultural
      districts (and systems of

      farming)[1]

      and

 

      giving rise to exchange not only between the products of agriculture and
      industry but also between the various products of agriculture. This
      specialisation of commercial (and capitalist) agriculture
      manifests itself in all capitalist countries, in the international
      division of labour; this is true of post-Reform Russia as well, as we
      shall show in detail below.

    

      Thus, the social division of labour is the basis of the entire process of
      the development of commodity economy and of capitalism. It is quite
      natural, therefore, that our

      Narodnik
      theoreticians, who declare this process to be the result of artificial
      measures, the result of a “deviation from the path,” and so on
      and so forth, have tried to gloss over the fact of the social division of
      labour in Russia or to belittle its significance.
      Mr.  V. V.,
      in his article “Division of Agricultural and Industrial Labour in
      Russia” (Vestnik Yevropy [European Messenger ], 1884,
      No. 7), “denied” “the dominance in Russia of the
      principle of the social division of labour” (p. 347), and declared
      that in this country the social division of labour “has not sprung
      from the depths of the people’s life, but has attempted to thrust
      itself into it from outside” (p. 338). Mr.

      N.–on, in
      his Sketches, argued as follows about the increase in the
      quantity of grain offered for sale: “This phenomenon might imply
      that the grain produced is more evenly distributed over the country, that
      the Archangel fisherman now consumes Samara grain, and that the Samara
      farmer supplements his dinner with Archangel fish. Actually, however,
      nothing of the kind is happening” (Sketches on Our Post-Reform
      Social Economy, St. Petersburg, 1893, p. 37). Without any data and
      contrary to generally known facts, the categorical assertion is bluntly
      made here that there is no social division of labour in Russia! The
      Narodnik theory of the “artificial character” of capitalism in
      Russia could only have been evolved by rejecting, or proclaiming as
      “artificial,” the very foundation of all commodity economy,
      namely, the social division of labour.
    

 

Notes
 

[1] 
      For example, I. A. Stebut in his Principles of Crop Farming
      distinguishes farming systems according to the principal product
      marketed. There are three main farming systems: 1) crop growing (grain
      farming, as Mr. A. Skvortsov calls it); 2) livestock raising (the
      principal product marketed being livestock produce); and 3) industrial
      (technical farming, as Mr. A. Skvortsov calls it); the principal product
      marketed being agricultural produce that undergoes technical
      processing. See A. Skvortsov, The Influence of Steam Transport on
      Agriculture, Warsaw, 1890, p, 68 and foll.
    —Lenin
 


[2] 
[PLACEHOLDER]


 
  


|

II. The Growth of the Industrial Population 
at the Expense of the Agricultural

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Growth of the Industrial Population at the Expense of the Agricultural




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One: II. 
The Growth of the Industrial Population at the Expense of the Agricultural








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists



II. The Growth of the Industrial Population at the Expense of
      the Agricultural
    

      In view of the fact that in the epoch preceding commodity economy,
      manufacturing is combined with the raw materials industry, and the latter
      is headed by agriculture, the development of commodity economy takes the
      shape of the separation from agriculture of one branch of industry after
      another. The population of a country in which commodity economy is poorly
      developed (or not developed at all) is almost exclusively
      agricultural. This, however, must not be understood as meaning that the
      population is engaged solely in agriculture: it only means that the
      population engaged in agriculture, also process the products of
      agriculture, and that exchange and the division of labour are almost
      non-existent. Consequently, the development of commodity economy eo ipso
      means the divorcement of an ever-growing part of the population from
      agriculture, i.e., the growth of the industrial population at the expense
      of the agricultural population. “It is in the nature of
      capitalist production to continually reduce the agricultural population as
      compared with the non-agricultural, because in industry (in the
      strict sense) the increase of constant capital at the expense of variable
      capital goes hand in hand with an absolute increase in variable capital
      despite its relative decrease; on the other hand, in agriculture the
      variable capital required for the exploitation of a certain plot of land
      decreases absolutely; it can thus only increase to the extent that new
      land is taken into cultivation, but this again requires as a prerequisite
      a still greater growth of the non-agricultural population” (Das
      Kapital, III, 2, 177. Russ. trans.,

  p. 526).[2] Thus one cannot conceive of capitalism
      without an increase in the commercial and industrial population at the
      expense of the agricultural population, and everybody knows that this
      phenomenon is revealed in the most clear-cut fashion in all capitalist
      countries. It need hardly be proved that the significance of this
      circumstance as regards the problem of the home market is enormous, for it
      is bound up inseparably both with the evolution of industry and with the
      evolution of agriculture; the formation of industrial centres, their

 

      numerical growth, and the attraction of the population by them cannot but
      exert a most profound influence on the whole rural system, and cannot but
      give rise to a growth of commercial and capitalist agriculture. All the
      more noteworthy is the fact that the exponents of Narodnik economics
      completely ignore this law both in their purely theoretical arguments and
      in their arguments about capitalism in Russia (we shall deal at length
      with the specific manifestations of this law in Russia later on, in
      Chapter VIII). The theories of Messrs. V. V. and N.–on regarding the home
      market for capitalism overlook a mere trifle—the diversion of the
      population from agriculture to industry, and the influence exerted by this
      fact on

agriculture.[1]

 

Notes
 

[1] 
      We have pointed to the identical attitude of the West-European
      romanticists and Russian Narodniks to the problem of the growth
      of industrial population in our article “A Characterisation of
      Economic Romanticism. Sismondi and Our Native
      Sismondists.”—Lenin

 


[2] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Moscow, 1959, Vol. III, p. 622.
    

      Throughout this book, references to Karl Marx’s Das Kapital
are to the following German editions: Vol. 1–2nd edition, 1872;
Vol. 2–1885 edition; and Vol. 3–1894 edition. References to the
“Russian translation” of Capital are to the one by
N. F. Danielson (1896).
    

 
  

I. The Social Division of Labour

|

III. The Ruin of the Small Producers

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Ruin of the Small Producers




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One: 
III. The Ruin of the Small Producers








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists



III. The Ruin of the Small Producers

      So far we have dealt with simple commodity production. Now we pass to
      capitalist production, that is, we presume that instead of simple
      commodity producers we have, on the one hand, the owner of means of
      production and, on the other, the wage-worker, the seller of
      labour-power. The conversion of the small producer into a wage-worker
      presumes that he has lost the means of production—land, tools,
      workshop, etc.—i.e., that he is “impoverished,”
      “ruined.” The view is advanced that this ruin
      “diminishes the purchasing power of the population,”
      “diminishes the home market” for capitalism (Mr. N.–on,
      loc. cit., p. 185. Also pp. 203, 275, 287, 339-340, etc. The same view is
      held by Mr. V. V. in the majority of his writings). We do not deal here
      with the factual data relating to this process in Russia—they will be
      examined in detail in later chapters. At the moment the question is posed
      purely theoretically, i.e., it relates to commodity production in general
      where it is transformed into capitalist production. The writers mentioned
      also pose this question theoretically, i.e., from the mere

 

      fact of the ruin of the small producers they deduce a shrinkage of the
      home market. This view is absolutely incorrect, and its persistent
      survival in our economic literature can only be explained by the romantic
      prejudices of Narodism (see the article referred to in the footnote). It
      is forgotten that the “freeing” of one section of the
      producers from the means of production necessarily presumes the passage of
      the latter into other hands, their conversion into capital; presumes,
      consequently, that the new owners of these means of production produce as
      commodities the products formerly consumed by the producer himself, i.e.,
      expand the home market; that in expanding production the new owners of the
      means of production present a demand to the market for new implements, raw
      materials, means of transport, etc., and also for articles of consumption
      (the enrichment of these new owners naturally presumes an increase in
      their consumption). It is forgotten that it is by no means the well-being
      of the producer that is important for the market but his possession of
      money; the decline in the well-being of the patriarchal peasant, who
      formerly conducted a mainly natural economy, is quite compatible with an
      increase in the amount of money in his possession, for the more such a
      peasant is ruined, the more he is compelled to resort to the sale of his
      labour-power, and the greater is the share of his (albeit scantier) means
      of subsistence that he must acquire in the market. “With the setting
      free (from the land) of a part of the agricultural population, therefore,
      their former means of nourishment were also set free. They were now
      transformed into material elements of variable capital” (capital
      spent on the purchase of labour-power) (Das Kapital, I,
      776). “The expropriation and eviction of a part of the agricultural
      population not only set free for industrial capital the labourers, their
      means of subsistence, and material for labour; it also created the
      home market ”

  (ibid., 778).[1] Thus, from the standpoint of abstract theory, the
      ruin of the small producers in a society of developing commodity economy
      and capitalism means the very opposite to what Messrs. N.–on and
      V. V. want to deduce therefrom; it means the creation and not the
      shrinkage of the home market. If the very same Mr. N.–on, who declares a
      priori that the ruin of the Russian small producers means the

 

  shrinkage of
      the home market, nevertheless cites the just quoted contrary assertions of
      Marx (Sketches, pp. 71 and 114), it only proves the remarkable
      ability of that writer to belabour himself with quotations from
      Capital.
    
 

Notes
 
 


[1] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 745 and
      747.
    

 
  

II. The Growth of the Industrial Population 
at the Expense of the Agricultural

|

IV. The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility 
of Realising Surplus-Value

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility of Realising Surplus-Value




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One:
IV. The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility of Realising Surplus-Value








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists



IV. The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility of Realising
      Surplus-Value

      The next question in the theory of the home market is the following. We
      know that the value of a product in capitalist production resolves into
      three parts: 1) the first part replaces the constant capital, i.e., the
      value that existed previously in the shape of raw and auxiliary materials,
      machines and instruments of production, etc., and that is merely
      reproduced in a certain part of the finished product; 2) the second part
      replaces the variable capital, i.e., covers the maintenance of the worker;
      and, lastly, 3) the third part constitutes the surplus-value, which
      belongs to the capitalist. It is usually granted (we state the question in
      the spirit of Messrs. N.–on and V. V.) that the realisation (i. e., the
      finding of a corresponding equivalent, sale in the market) of the first
      two parts presents no difficulty, because the first part goes into
      production, and the second into consumption by the working class. But how
      is the third part—surplus-value—realised?  It cannot, surely, be
      consumed in its entirety by the capitalists!  So our economists come to
      the conclusion that “the way out of the difficulty” of
      realising surplus-value is “the acquisition of a foreign
      market” (N.–on, Sketches, Part II, § XV in general,
      and p. 205 in particular; V. V., “The Excess in the Market Supply of
      Commodities” in Otechestvenniye Zapiski [Fatherland Notes
      ], 1883, and Essays on Theoretical Economics,
      St. Petersburg, 1895, p. 179 and foll.). The writers mentioned explain the
      need for a capitalist nation to have a foreign market by the suggestion
      that the capitalists cannot realise their products in any other way. The
      home market in Russia, they say, is shrinking because of the ruin of the
      peasantry and because of the impossibility of realising surplus-value
      without a foreign market, while the foreign market’s closed to a
      young country that enters the path of

 

      capitalist development too late—and so, it is declared as proven that
      Russian capitalism has no basis, is still-born, a claim founded on mere a
      priori (and, moreover, theoretically incorrect) assumptions!


      When expressing his views on realisation, Mr. N.–on evidently had in mind
      Marx’s theory on this subject (although he said not a single word
      about Marx in this part of his Sketches), but he absolutely
      failed to understand it and distorted it beyond recognition, as we shall
      see in a moment. This explains the curious fact that his views coincided
      in all essentials with those of Mr. V. V., who cannot possibly be accused
      of “not understanding” theory, for it would be the height of
      injustice to suspect him of even the slightest acquaintance with it. Both
      authors expound their theories as though they are the first to have dealt
      with the subject, and have reached certain solutions “all by
      themselves”; both of them most sublimely ignore the arguments of the
      old economists on the subject, and both repeat old errors that have been
      most thoroughly refuted in Volume II of


Capital.[1]

 Both authors reduce the whole problem of
      the realisation of the product to the realisation of surplus-value,
      evidently imagining that the realisation of constant capital presents no
      difficulties. This naive opinion contains a most profound error, one that
      is the source of all further errors in the Narodnik theory of
      realisation. As a matter of fact, the difficulty of explaining realisation
      is precisely one of explaining the realisation of constant capital. In
      order to be realised, constant capital must be put back again into
      production, and that is directly practicable only in the case of that
      capital whose product consists of means of production. If, however, the
      product which makes good the constant part of capital consists of articles
      of consumption, it cannot be directly put back into production;

 

      what is required is exchange between the department of social
      production that makes means of production and that which makes articles of
      consumption. It is this point that constitutes the whole difficulty of the
      problem, a difficulty unnoticed by our
      economists. Mr. V. V. presents the matter, generally speaking, as if the
      aim of capitalist production is not accumulation but consumption,
      advancing the profound argument that “into the hands of a minority
      flows a mass of material objects in excess of the consuming power of the
      organism” (sic !) “at the given stage of their
      development” (loc. cit., 149) and that “it is not the
      moderation and abstemiousness of the manufacturers which are the cause of
      the superfluity of products, but the limitations and insufficient
      elasticity of the human organism (!!), which fails to increase its
      consuming power at the rate at which surplus-value grows” (ibid.,
      161). Mr. N.–on tries to present the matter as though he does not regard
      consumption as the aim of capitalist production, as though he takes
      account of the role and significance of means of production in regard to
      the problem of realisation; as a matter of fact, however, he has no clear
      idea whatsoever about the process of the circulation and reproduction of
      the aggregate social capital, and has become entangled in a host of
      contradictions. We shall not stop to examine all these contradictions in
      detail (pp. 203-205 of Mr. N.–on’s Sketches ); that would
      be too thankless a task (and one already performed in part by

Mr. Bulgakov[2]

 in his
      book Markets Under Capitalist Production, Moscow, 1897,
      pp. 237-245), and furthermore, to prove the justice of the appraisal given
      here of Mr. N.–on’s arguments, it will suffice to examine his final
      conclusion, namely, that the foreign market is the way out of the
      difficulty of realising surplus-value. This conclusion of
      Mr. N.–on’s (essentially a mere repetition of the one drawn by
      Mr. V. V.) shows in most striking fashion that he did not in any way
      understand either the realisation of the product in capitalist society
      (i.e., the theory of the home market)

      or the role of the foreign market. Indeed, is there even a grain of common
      sense in this dragging of the foreign market into the problem of
      “realisation”? The problem of realisation is how to find for
      each part of the capitalist product, in terms of value (constant capital,
      variable capital and surplus-value) and in its material form (means of
      production, and articles of consumption, specifically necessities and
      luxuries), that other part of the product which replaces it on the
      market. Clearly, foreign trade must here be excluded, for dragging it in
      does not advance the solution of the problem one iota, but merely retracts
      it by extending the problem from one country to several. The very same
      Mr. N.–on who discovered in foreign trade “the way out of the
      difficulty” of realising surplus-value, argues about wages, for
      example, as follows: with the part of the annual product which the direct
      producers, the workers, receive in the shape of wages “only that
      part of the means of subsistence can be drawn from circulation which is
      equal in value to the sum total of wages” (203). How, the question
      arises, does our economist know that the capitalists of a given country
      will produce means of subsistence in just the quantity and of just the
      quality requisite for their realisation by wages? How does he know that in
      this connection the foreign market can be dispensed with?  Obviously, he
      cannot know this, and has simply brushed aside the problem of the foreign
      market, for in discussing the realisation of variable capital the
      important thing is the replacement of one part of the product by another,
      and not at all whether this replacement takes place in one country or in
      two. With respect to surplus-value, however, he departs from this
      necessary premise, and instead of solving the problem, simply evades it by
      talking of the foreign market. The sale of the product in the foreign
      market itself needs explanation, i.e., the finding of an equivalent for
      that part of the product which is being sold, the finding of another part
      of the capitalist product that can replace the first. That is why Marx
      says that in examining the problem of realisation, the foreign market,
      foreign trade “must be entirely discarded,” for “the
      involvement of foreign commerce in analysing the annually reproduced value
      of products can...only confuse without contributing any new element of the
      problem, or of its

 

      solution” (Das Kapital, 11,

469).[3] Messrs. V. V. and N.–on imagined that they were
      giving a profound appraisal of the contradictions of capitalism by
      pointing to the difficulties of realising surplus-value. Actually,
      however, they were giving an extremely superficial appraisal of the
      contradictions of capitalism, for if one speaks of the
      “difficulties” of realisation, of the crises, etc., arising
      therefrom, one must admit that these “difficulties” are not
      only possible but are necessary as regards all parts of the capitalist
      product, and not as regards surplus-value alone. Difficulties of this
      kind, due to disproportion in the distribution of the various branches of
      production, constantly arise, not only in realising surplus-value, but
      also in realising variable and constant capital; in realising not only the
      product consisting of articles of consumption, but also that consisting of
      means of production. Without “difficulties” of this kind and
      crises, there cannot, in general, be any capitalist production, production
      by isolated producers for a world market unknown to them.
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
      Particularly astonishing in this connection is Mr. V V.’s audacity,
      which transcends all bounds of literary decency. After enunciating his
      theory, and betraying his utter unfamiliarity with Volume II of
      Capital, which deals specifically with realisation, he goes on to
      make the quite unfounded statement that “in building up my
      propositions I used” Marx’s theory!! (Essays on
      Theoretical Economics, Essay III. “The Capitalist Law (sic
      !?!) of Production, Distribution and Consumption,” p. 162.)
    —Lenin

[2] 
      It will not be superfluous to remind the contemporary reader that
      Mr. Bulgakov, and also Messrs. Struve and Tugan-Baranovsky whom we shall
      quote rather often later on, tried to be Marxists in 1899. Now they have
      all safely turned from “critics of Marx” into plain bourgeois
      economists. (Note to 2nd

edition.[4])
    —Lenin
 


[4] 
      Here and elsewhere, footnotes indicated as Note to 2nd edition
      are those written by Lenin himself when he prepared the second, 1908
      edition of this work.
    


[3] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 470.
    

 
  

III. The Ruin of the Small Producers

|

V. The Views of Adam Smith on the Production 
and Circulation of the Aggregate Social Product in Capitalist Society and Marx’s 
Criticism of These Views

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Views of Adam Smith on the Production and Circulation of the Aggregate Social Product in Capitalist Society and Marx’s Criticism of These Views




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One:
V. The Views of Adam Smith on the Production and Circulation of the Aggregate 
Social Product in Capitalist Society and Marx's Criticism of These Views








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists



V. The Views of
      Adam
Smith on the Production and Circulation of the Aggregate Social
      Product in Capitalist Society and Marx’s Criticism of These
      Views

      In order properly to understand the theory of realisation we must start
      with Adam Smith, who laid the foundation of the erroneous theory on this
      subject that held undivided sway in political economy until Marx. Adam
      Smith divided the price of a commodity into only two parts: variable
      capital (wages, in his terminology) and surplus-value (he does not combine
      “profit” and “rent,” so that actually he counted
      three parts in

all.)[1]

 Similarly, he divided the sum-total

 

      of commodities, the total annual social product, into the same parts and
      allocated them directly to the “revenue” of the two classes of
      society: the workmen and the capitalists (undertakers and landlords, as
      Smith calls

them).[2]


      On what did he base his omission of the third component of value, constant
      capital? Adam Smith could not fail to observe this part, but he assumed
      that it also is made up of wages and surplus-value. Here is how he argued
      on this subject: “In the price of corn, for example, one part pays
      the rent of the landlord, another pays the wages or maintenance of the
      labourers and labouring cattle employed in producing it, and the third
      pays the profit of the farmer. These three parts seem either immediately
      or ultimately to make up the whole price of corn. A fourth part, it may
      perhaps be thought, is necessary for replacing the stock of the farmer, or
      for compensating the wear and tear of his labouring cattle, and other
      instruments of husbandry. But it must be considered that the price of any
      instrument of husbandry, such as a labouring horse, is itself made up of
      the same three parts” (namely, rent, profit and
      wages). “Though the price of the corn, therefore, may pay the price
      as well as the maintenance of the horse, the whole price still resolves
      itself either immediately or ultimately into the same three parts of rent,
      labour and

profit.”[3]

Marx calls this theory of Smith’s
      “astonishing.” “His proof consists simply in the
      repetition of the same assertion” (II,

S. 366).[6]

Smith sends us
      “from pillar to post” (I. B., 2. Aufl.,

S. 612[4]).[7]

      In saying that the price of farming instruments itself resolves
      into the same three parts, Smith forgets to add: and also into the price
      of the means of production employed in the making of these
      instruments. The erroneous exclusion by Adam Smith (and also by subsequent
      economists) of the constant part of capital from the price of the product
      is due to an erroneous conception of accumulation in capitalist economy,
      i.e., of the expansion of production, the transformation of surplus-value
      into capital. Here too Adam Smith omitted constant capital, assuming that
      the

 

      accumulated part of surplus-value, the part converted into capital, is
      entirely consumed by the productive workers, i.e., goes entirely in wages,
      whereas actually the accumulated part of surplus-value is expended on
      constant capital (instruments of production, raw and auxiliary materials)
      plus wages. Criticising this view of Smith (and also of Ricardo,
      Mill
      and others) in Capital, Volume I (Part VII, “The
      Accumulation of Capital,” Chapter 22, “Conversion of
      Surplus-Value into Capital,” § 2, “Erroneous Conception,
      by Political Economy, of Reproduction on a Progressively Increasing
      Scale”), Marx there states that in Volume II “it will be shown
      that Adam Smith’s dogma, inherited by all his successors, prevented
      political economy from understanding even the most elementary mechanism of
      the process of social reproduction”

(I, 612).[8] Adam Smith committed this error because
      he confused the value of the product with the newly created value: the
      latter does indeed resolve itself into variable capital and surplus-value,
      whereas the former includes constant capital in addition. This error had
      been earlier exposed by Marx in his analysis of value, when he drew a
      distinction between abstract labour, which creates new value, and
      concrete, useful labour, which reproduces the previously existing value in
      the new form of a useful

product.[9]


      An explanation of the process of the reproduction and circulation of the
      total social capital is particularly necessary to settle the problem of
      the national revenue in capitalist society. It is extremely interesting to
      note that, when dealing with the latter problem, Adam Smith could no
      longer cling to his erroneous theory, which excludes constant capital from
      the country’s total product. “The gross revenue of all the
      inhabitants of a great country comprehends the whole annual produce of
      their land and labor; the neat revenue, what remains free to them after
      deducting the expense of maintaining; first, their fixed; and, secondly,
      their circulating capital; or what, without encroaching upon their
      capital, they can place in their stock reserved for immediate consumption,
      or spend upon their subsistence, conveniences, and amusements”
      (A. Smith, Wealth of Nations, Book II. “Of the Nature,
      Accumulation, and Employment of Stock,” Chapter II, Vol. II,
      p. 18. Russ. trans., II, p. 21). Thus, from

 

      the country’s total product Adam Smith excluded capital, asserting
      that it resolves itself into wages, profit and rent, i.e., into (net)
      revenue; but in the gross revenue of society he includes capital,
      separating it from articles of consumption (= net revenue). This is the
      contradiction in which Marx catches Adam Smith: how can there be
      capital in the revenue if there was no capital
      in the product? (Cf. Das Kapital, II,

S. 355.)[10] Without noticing it
      himself, Adam Smith here recognises three component parts in the value of
      the total product: not only variable capital and surplus-value, but also
      constant capital. Further on, Adam Smith comes up against another very
      important difference, one of enormous significance in the theory of
      realisation. “The whole expense of maintaining the fixed
      capital,” he says, “must evidently be excluded from the neat
      revenue of the society. Neither the materials necessary for supporting
      their useful machines and instruments of trade, their profitable
      buildings, etc., nor the produce of the labor necessary for fashioning
      those materials into the proper form, can ever make any part of it.
      The price of that labor may indeed make a part of it; as the workmen so
      employed may place the whole value of their wages in their stock reserved
      for immediate consumption.” But in other kinds of labour, both the
      “price” (of labour) “and the produce” (of labour)
      “go to this stock, the price to that of the workmen, the produce to
      that of other people” (A. Smith, ibid.). Here we find a
      gleam of recognition of the need to distinguish two kinds of labour: one
      that produces articles of consumption which may enter into the “neat
      revenue,” and another which produces “useful machines and
      instruments of trade...buildings, etc.,” i.e., articles that can
      never be used for personal consumption. From this it is only one step to
      the admission that an explanation of realisation absolutely requires that
      two forms of consumption be distinguished: personal and productive (=
      putting back into production). It was the rectification of these two
      mistakes made by Smith (the omission of constant capital from the value of
      the product, and the confusing of personal with productive consumption)
      that enabled Marx to build up his brilliant theory of the realisation of
      the social product in capitalist society.

    

      As for the other economists, those between Adam Smith

 

      and Marx, they all repeated Adam Smith’s

error[5]

 and for that reason did not advance
      one step. Of the confusion that consequently reigns in the theories of
      revenue we shall speak later. In the controversy as to the possibility of
      a general overproduction of commodities that was waged by Ricardo, Say,
      Mill and others, on the one hand, and by Malthus,
      Sismondi, Chalmers, Kirchmann and others, on the other, both sides adhered
      to Smith’s erroneous theory, and consequently, as Mr. S. Bulgakov
      justly remarks, “in view of the false premises and the wrong
      formulation of the problem itself, these controversies could only lead to
      empty and scholastic wordspinning” (loc. cit., p. 21. See an account
      of this wordspinning in Tugan-Baranovsky’s Industrial
      Crises, etc., St. Petersburg, 1894, pp. 377-404).
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
      Adam Smith, An Inquiry Into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations, 4th ed., 1801, Vol. I, p. 75, Book I: “Of the
      Causes of Improvement in the productive Powers of Labor, and of
      the Order according to which its Produce is naturally
      distributed among the different Ranks of the People,” Chapter
      VI, “Of the component Parts of the Price of Commodities,”
      Bibikov’s Russian translation (St. Petersburg, 1866), Vol. I,
      p. 171.—Lenin

[2] 
      Loc cit., I, pg. 78 Russ. trans. I, p. 174.—Lenin

[3] 
      Ibid., Vol I pp. 75-76. Russ. trans, I, p. 171.—Lenin

[4] 
      Vol. I, 2nd Ed., p. 612.—Lenin

[5] 
      For example, Ricardo asserted that “the whole produce of the land
      and labour of every country is divided into three portions: of
      these, one portion is devoted to wages another to profits, and the
      other to rent” (Works, Sieber’s translation,
      St. Petersburg, 1882, p. 221.)—Lenin
 


[6] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 373.
    


[7] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 590.
    


[8] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, Chapter XXIV,
      Section 2.
    


[9] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 199-202.
    


[10] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 363-64.
    

 
  

IV. The Narodnik Theory of the Impossibility 
of Realising Surplus-Value

|

VI. Marx’s Theory of Realisation

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Marx’s Theory of Realisation




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One: 
VI. Marx's Theory of Realisation








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists




      VI. Marx’s Theory of Realisation
    

      It follows automatically from what has been said that the fundamental
      premises on which Marx’s theory is based are the following two
      propositions. The first is that the total product of a capitalist country,
      like the individual product, consists of the following three parts: 1)
      constant capital, 2) variable capital, and 3) surplus-value. To those who
      are familiar with the analysis of the process of production of capital
      given in Vol. I of Marx’s Capital this proposition is
      self-evident. The second proposition is that two major departments of
      capitalist production must be distinguished, namely (Department I), the
      production of means of production—of articles which serve for
      productive consumption, i.e., are to be put back into production, articles
      which are consumed, not by people, but by capital; and (Department II) the
      production of articles of consumption, i.e., of articles used for personal
      consumption. “There is more theoretical meaning in this division
      alone than in all the preceding

 

      controversies over the theory of markets” (Bulgakov, loc. cit.,
      p. 27). The question arises as to why such a division of products
      according to their natural form is now necessary to analyse the
      reproduction of social capital, when the analysis of the production and
      reproduction of individual capital dispensed with such a division and left
      the question of the natural form of the product entirely on one side. On
      what grounds can we introduce the question of the natural form of the
      product into a theoretical investigation of capitalist economy, which is
      based entirely on the exchange-value of the product? The fact is that when
      the production of individual capital was analysed, the question of where
      and how the product would be sold, and of where and how articles of
      consumption would be bought by the workers and means of production by the
      capitalists, was set aside as making no contribution to this analysis and
      as having no relation to it. All that had to be examined then was the
      problem of the value of the separate elements of production and of the
      results of production. Now, however, the question is: where will the
      workers and the capitalists obtain their articles of consumption, where
      will the capitalists obtain their means of production, how will the
      finished product meet all these demands and enable production to expand?
      Here, consequently, we have not only “a replacement of value, but
      also a replacement in material” (Stoffersatz.—Das
      Kapital, II,

  389),[5] 
  and hence it is absolutely essential to
      distinguish between products that play entirely different parts in the
      process of social economy.

    

      Once these basic propositions are taken into account, the problem of the
      realisation of the social product in capitalist society no longer presents
      any difficulty. Let us first assume simple reproduction, i.e., the
      repetition of the process of production on its previous scale, the absence
      of accumulation. Obviously, the variable capital and the surplus-value in
      Department II (which exist in the form of articles of consumption) are
      realised by the personal consumption of the workers and capitalists of
      this department (for simple reproduction presumes that the whole of the
      surplus-value is consumed, and that no portion of it is converted into
      capital). Further, the variable capital and the surplus-value which exist
      in the form of means of production

 

      (Department I) must, in order to be realised, be exchanged for articles of
      consumption for the capitalists and workers engaged in the making of means
      of production. On the other hand, neither can the constant capital
      existing in the form of articles of consumption (Department II) be
      realised except by an exchange for means of production, in order to be put
      back again into production the following year. Thus we get variable
      capital and surplus-value in means of production exchanged for constant
      capital in articles of consumption: the workers and the capitalists (in
      the means of production department) in this way obtain means of
      subsistence, while the capitalists (in the articles of consumption
      department) dispose of their product and obtain constant capital for
      further production. Under simple reproduction, the parts exchanged must be
      equal: the sum of variable capital and surplus-value in means of
      production must be equal to the constant capital in articles of
      consumption. On the other hand, if we assume reproduction on a
      progressively increasing scale, i.e., accumulation, the first magnitude
      must be greater than the second, because there must be available a surplus
      of means of production with which to begin further
      production. Let us revert, however, to simple reproduction. There has been
      left unrealised one more part of the social product, namely, constant
      capital in means of production. This is realised partly by exchange among
      the capitalists of this same department (coal, for example, is exchanged
      for iron, because each of these products serves as a necessary material or
      instrument in the production of the other), and partly by being put
      directly into production (for example, coal extracted in order to be used
      in the same enterprise again for the extraction of coal; grain in
      agriculture, etc.). As for accumulation, its starting-point, as we have
      seen, is a surplus of means of production (taken from the surplus-value of
      the capitalists in this department), a surplus that also calls for the
      conversion into capital of part of the surplus-value in articles of
      consumption. A detailed examination of how this additional production will
      be combined with simple reproduction we consider to be superfluous. It is
      no part of our task to undertake a special examination of the theory of
      realisation, and the foregoing is enough to elucidate the error of the

 

      Narodnik economists and to enable us to draw certain theoretical
      conclusions regarding the home

market.[1]


      On the problem of interest to us, that of the home market, the main
      conclusion from Marx’s theory of realisation is the following:
      capitalist production, and, consequently, the home market, grow not so
      much on account of articles of consumption as on account of means of
      production. In other words, the increase in means of production outstrips
      the increase in articles of consumption. Indeed, we have seen that
      constant capital in articles of consumption (Department II) is exchanged
      for variable capital + surplus-value in means of production (Department
      I). According, however, to the general law of capitalist production,
      constant capital grows faster than variable capital. Hence, constant
      capital in articles of consumption has to increase faster than variable
      capital and surplus-value in articles of consumption, while constant
      capital in means of production has to increase fastest of all,
      outstripping both the increase of variable capital ( + surplus-value) in
      means of production and the increase of constant capital in articles of
      consumption. The department of social production which produces means of
      production has, consequently, to grow faster than that producing articles
      of consumption. For capitalism, therefore, the growth of the home market
      is to a certain extent “independent” of the growth of personal
      consumption, and takes place mostly on account of productive
      consumption. But it would be a mistake to understand this
      “independence” as meaning that productive consumption is
      entirely divorced from personal consumption: the former can and must
      increase

 

      faster than the latter (and there its “independence” ends),
      but it goes without saying that, in the last analysis, productive
      consumption is always bound up with personal consumption. Marx says in
      this connection: “...We have seen (Book II, Part III) that
      continuous circulation takes place between constant capital and constant
      capital...” (Marx has in mind constant capital in means of
      production, which is realised by exchange among capitalists in the same
      department). “It is at first independent of individual consumption
      because it never enters the latter. But this consumption definitely limits
      it nevertheless, since constant capital is never produced for its own sake
      but solely because more of it is needed in spheres of production whose
      products go into individual consumption” (Das Kapital, III,
      1, 289. Russ. trans.,

p. 242). [6]


      This larger consumption of constant capital is nothing but a higher level
      of the development of the productive forces, one expressed in terms of
      exchange-value, because the rapidly developing “means of
      production” consist, in the main, of materials, machines,
      instruments, buildings and all sorts of other accessories for large-scale,
      especially machine, production. It is quite natural, therefore, that
      capitalist production, which develops the productive forces of society and
      creates large-scale production and machine industry, is also distinguished
      by a particular expansion of that department of social wealth which
      consists of means of production....“In this case” (namely, the
      production of means of production), “what distinguishes capitalist
      society from the savage is not, as Senior thinks, the privilege and
      peculiarity of the savage to expend his labour at times in a way that does
      not procure him any products resolvable (exchangeable) into revenue, i.e.,
      into articles of consumption. No, the distinction consists in the
      following:

    

      “a) Capitalist society employs more of its available annual labour
      in the production of means of production (ergo, of constant capital) which
      are not resolvable into revenue in the form of wages or surplus-value, but
      can function only as capital.

    

      “b) When a savage makes bows, arrows, stone hammers, axes, baskets,
      etc., he knows very well that he did not spend the time so employed in the
      production of articles

 

      of consumption, but that he has thus stocked up the means of production he
      needs, and nothing else” (Das Kapital, II,
      436. Russ. trans.,

  333).[7] 
  This “very good knowledge” of
      one’s relation to production has disappeared in capitalist society
      owing to the latter’s inherent fetishism, which presents the social
      relations of men as relations of products—owing to the conversion of
      every product into a commodity produced for an unknown consumer and to be
      realised in an unknown market. And as it is a matter of the utmost
      indifference to the individual entrepreneur what kind of article
      he produces—every product yields a “revenue,”—this
      same superficial, individual point of view was adopted by the
      economist-theoreticians in relation to the whole of society and prevented
      the process of the reproduction of the total social product in capitalist
      economy from being understood.

    

      The development of production (and, consequently, of the home market)
      chiefly on account of means of production seems paradoxical and
      undoubtedly constitutes a contradiction. It is real “production as
      an end in itself”—the expansion of production without a
      corresponding expansion of consumption. But it is a contradiction not of
      doctrine, but of actual life; it is the sort of contradiction that
      corresponds to the very nature of capitalism and to the other
      contradictions of this system of social economy. It is this expansion of
      production without a corresponding expansion of consumption that
      corresponds to the historical mission of capitalism and to its specific
      social structure: the former consists in the development of the productive
      forces of society; the latter rules out the utilisation of these technical
      achievements by the mass of the population. There is an undoubted
      contradiction between the drive towards the unlimited extension of
      production inherent in capitalism, and the limited consumption of the
      masses of the people (limited because of their proletarian status). It is
      this contradiction that Marx records in the propositions so readily quoted
      by the Narodniks and which are supposed to corroborate their views on the
      shrinkage of the home market, the non-progressive character of capitalism,
      etc., etc. Here are some of these propositions: “Contradiction in
      the capitalist mode of production: the labourers as buyers of commodities
      are important for the market. But as sellers of their own

 

      commodity—labour-power—capitalist society tends to keep them
      down to the minimum price” (Das Kapital, II,

303).[8]


      “...The conditions of realisation are limited by the proportional
      relation of the various branches of production and the consumer power of
      society....But the more productiveness develops, the more it finds itself
      at variance with the narrow basis on which the conditions of consumption
      rest” (ibid., III, 1,

  225-226).[9] 
  “The limits within which the preservation
      and self-expansion of the value of capital resting on the expropriation
      and pauperisation of the great mass of producers can alone move—these
      limits come continually into conflict with the methods of production
      employed by capital for its purposes, which drive towards unlimited
      extension of production, towards production as an end in itself, towards
      unconditional development of the social productivity of labour....The
      capitalist mode of production is, for this reason, a historical means of
      developing the material forces of production and creating an appropriate
      world market, and is, at the same time, a continual conflict between this
      its historical task and its own corresponding relations of social
      production.” (III, 1, 232. Russ. trans.,

  p. 194).[10] 
  “The ultimate
      reason for all real crises always remains the poverty and restricted
      consumption of the masses as opposed to the drive of capitalist production
      to develop the productive forces as though only the absolute consuming
      power of society constituted their outer

      limit”[2]
 

      (III, 2, 21. Russ. trans.,

p. 395).[11]
      These propositions all speak of the contradiction we have mentioned,
      namely, the contradiction between the unrestricted drive to expand
      production and limited consumption—and of nothing

      else.[3]

 Nothing
      could be more senseless than to conclude from these passages in
      Capital that Marx did not admit the possibility of surplus-value
      being realised in capitalist society, that he attributed crises to
      under-consumption, and so forth. Marx’s analysis of realisation
      showed that the circulation between constant capital and constant capital
      is definitely limited by personal consumption; but this same analysis
      showed the true character of this

  “limitedness,”[12] 
  it showed that,
      compared with means of production, articles of consumption play a minor
      role in the formation of the home market. And, furthermore, there is
      nothing more absurd than to conclude from the contradictions of capitalism
      that the latter is impossible, non-progressive, and so on—to do that
      is to take refuge from unpleasant, but undoubted realities in the
      transcendental heights of romantic dreams. The contradiction between the
      drive towards the unlimited expansion of production and limited
      consumption is not the only contradiction of capitalism, which cannot
      exist and develop at all without contradictions. The contradictions of
      capitalism testify to its historically transient character, and make clear
      the conditions and causes of its collapse and transformation into a higher
      form; but they by no means rule out either the possibility of capitalism,
      or its progressive character as compared with preceding systems of social

      economy.[4]

 

Notes
 

[1] 
      See Das Kapital, II. Band, III.

Abschn.,[13] 
where a detailed investigation is made
      of accumulation, the division of articles of consumption into necessities
      and luxuries, the circulation of money, the wear and tear of fixed
      capital, etc. Readers who are unable to familiarise themselves with Volume
      II of Capital are recommended to read the exposition of
      Marx’s theory of realisation contained in Mr. S Bulgakov’s
      book quoted above. Mr. Bulgakov’s exposition is more satisfactory
      than that of Mr. M. Tugan-Baranovsky (Industrial Crises,
      pp. 407-438), who in building up his schemes has made some very ill-judged
      departures from Marx and has inadequately explained Marx’s theory;
      it is also more satisfactory than the exposition given by Mr. A. Skvortsov
      (Fundamentals of Political Economy, St. Petersburg, 1898, pp
      281-295), who holds wrong views on the very important questions of profit
      and rent.—Lenin

[2] 
      It is this passage that the famous Ed. Bernstein (famous after the fashion
      of Herostratos) quoted in his Premises of Socialism (Die
      Voraussetzungen, etc., Stuttgart, 1899,

  S. 67).[14] 
  Our opportunist, of course, turning
      away from Marxism towards the old bourgeois economics, hastened to
      announce that this is a contradiction in Marx’s theory of crises,
      that Marx’s view “does not differ very much from
      Rodbertus’s theory of crises.” Actually, however, the only
      “contradiction” here is between Bernstein’s pretentious
      claims, on the one hand, and his senseless eclecticism and refusal to
      delve into the meaning of Marx’s theory, on the other. How far
      Bernstein failed to understand the theory of realisation is evident from
      his truly strange argument that the enormous increase in the aggregate
      surplus product must necessarily imply an increase in the number of
      affluent people (or an improvement in the living standard of the workers),
      for the capitalists themselves, if you please, and their
      “servants” (sic!  Seite 51-52) cannot
      “consume” the entire surplus product!!  (Note to 2nd
      edition.)—Lenin

[3] 
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky is mistaken in thinking that in advancing this
      proposition Marx contradicts his own analysis of realisation (see article
      “Capitalism and the Market” in Mir Bozhy [God’s
      Earth ] 1898, No. 6, p. 123). Marx does not contradict himself at
      all, for the connection between productive consumption and personal
      consumption is also indicated in the analysis of realization.—Lenin

[4] 
      Cf. “A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism. Sismondi and Our
      Native Sismondists.”—Lenin

 


[5] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 394.
    


[13] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 351-523.
    


[6] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 299-300.
    


[7] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 438-39.
    


[8] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 316.
    


[9] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 239-40.
    


[10] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 245.
    


[14] 
      E. Bernstein’s Die Voraussetzungen des Sozialismus und die
Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie (The Premises of Socialism and
the Tasks of Social-Democracy), which revised the principles of
revolutionary Marxism in the spirit of bourgeois reformism, appeared in
1899. Lenin received a copy of it when the first edition of his The
Development of Capitalism in Russia had appeared, so that it was
only in the second edition that he was able to include his remarks on
Bernstein’s opportunist views.
    

      Lenin calls Bernstein “famous after the fashion of
      Herostratos.” Tradition has it that Herostratos, a Greek
      who lived in the 4th century B.C., set fire to the noted temple of Artemis
      in his native town of Ephesus for the sole purpose of becoming known to
      posterity. The name of Herostratos has become an epithet applied to
      individuals who are ready to commit crime for the same of winning fame.
    


[11] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 472-73.
    


[12] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 299.
    

 
  

V. The Views of Adam Smith on 
the Production and Circulation of the Aggregate Social Product in Capitalist Society 
and Marx’s Criticism of These Views

|

VII. The Theory of the National Income

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Theory of the National Income




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One: 
VII. The Theory of the National Income








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists




      VII. The Theory of the National Income
    

      Having outlined the main propositions of Marx’s theory of
      realisation, we still have briefly to point to its enormous importance in
      the theory of national “consumption,”

 

      “distribution,” and “income”. All these problems,
      particularly the last, have hitherto been a veritable stumbling-block for
      economists. The more they have spoken and written about it, the greater
      has been the confusion caused by Adam Smith’s fundamental error. We
      shall cite here some examples of this confusion.

    

      It is interesting to note, for example, that Proudhon repeated essentially
      the same error, except that he formulated the old theory somewhat
      differently. He said:

    

“A (which stands for all property owners, entrepreneurs and
      capitalists) starts an enterprise with 10,000 francs, and with them makes
      advance payment to the workers, who must produce goods in return; after
      A has thus converted his money into commodities he must, at the
      end of the production process, at the end, say, of a year, convert the
      commodities again into money. To whom does he sell his commodities? To the
      workers, of course, for there are only two classes in society—the
      entrepreneurs on the one hand, and the workers on the other. These
      workers, having for the product of their labour received 10,000 francs as
      pay, which covers their essential requirements of life, must now, how
      ever, pay more than 10,000 francs, that is, they must pay for the addition
      that A receives in the shape of the interest and other profits he
      counted on at the beginning of the year. The worker can cover these 10,000
      francs only by borrowing, and, as a consequence, he sinks deeper and
      deeper into debt and poverty. One of two things must necessarily take
      place: either the worker may consume 9, although he produced 10, or he
      pays the entrepreneur only the amount of his wages, in which case the
      entrepreneur himself suffers bankruptcy and disaster, for he does not
      receive interest on capital, which he on his part, however, must
      pay.” (Diehl, Proudhon, II, 200, quoted from the
      compilation “Industry.” Articles from Handwörterbuch
      der

Staatswissenschaften,[1]

 Moscow, 1896, p. 101.)

    

      As the reader sees, this is the same difficulty—how surplus-value is
      to be realised—that Messrs. V. V. and N.–on are fussing
      over. Proudhon only expressed it in a somewhat specific form. And this
      specific character of his formulation

 

      brings our Narodniks still closer to him: they too, like Proudhon,
      consider the “difficulty” to lie in the realisation of
      surplus-value (interest or profit, in Proudhon’s terminology) and do
      not understand that the confusion they have acquired from the old
      economists prevents them from explaining the realisation not only of
      surplus-value, but also of constant capital, i.e., that their
      “difficulty” is in their not understanding the whole process
      of the realisation of the product in capitalist society.

    

      Regarding this “theory” of Proudhon’s,
Marx sarcastically observes:

    

      “Proudhon exposes his inability to grasp this” (namely, the
      realisation of the product in capitalist society) “in the ignorant
      formulation: l’ouvrier ne peut pas racheter son propre produit (the
      labourer cannot buy back his own product), because the interest which is
      added to the prix derevient (cost-price) is contained in the
      product” (Das Kapital, III, 2, 379. Russ. trans., 698, in
      which there are

mistakes).[7]


      And Marx quotes the remark directed against Proudhon by a certain vulgar
      economist named Forcade, who “quite correctly generalises the
      difficulty put forward in so narrow a form by Proudhon.” Forcade
      said that the price of commodities contains not only something over and
      above the wages—the profit—but also the part that replaces
      constant capital. Hence, concludes Forcade in opposition to Proudhon, the
      capitalist is also unable to buy back commodities with his profit (not
      only did Forcade not solve the problem, he did not even understand it).

    

      Neither did Rodbertus make any contribution to the solution of the
      problem. While laying particular stress on the thesis that
      “ground-rent, profit on capital and wages are

income,”[2]

 he proved quite unable
      to arrive at a clear understanding of the concept “income.”
      Stating his view as to what the tasks of political economy would have been
      had it pursued “a correct method” (loc. cit., S. 26), he also
      speaks about the distribution of the national product. “It”
      (i.e.,

 

      the true “science of the national
      economy”—Rodbertus’s italics) “should have shown
      how out of the total national product one part always goes to
      replace the capital consumed in production or worn out, while the
      other, as national income, goes to satisfy the direct
      requirements of society and of its members” (ibid., S. 27). But
      although true science should have shown this, Rodbertus’s
      “science” did nothing of the kind. The reader will see that he
      merely repeated Adam Smith word for word, evidently not even seeing that
      this is only the beginning of the problem. Which workers
      “replace” the national capital? How is their product realised?
      Not a word did ho say about this. Summing up his theory (diese neue
      Theorie, die ich der bisherigen

gegenüberstelle,[3]

S. 32) in the shape of
      separate theses, Rodbertus first speaks of the distribution of the
      national product as follows: “Rent” (by this, as we know,
      Rodbertus meant what is usually termed surplus-value) “and wages
      are, consequently, the parts into which the product resolves itself, in so
      far as it is income” (S. 33). This extremely important reservation
      should have suggested a very vital question to him: he had only just said
      that by income he meant articles which serve “to satisfy direct
      requirements”; hence, there are products that do not serve for
      personal consumption. How are they realised? But Rodbertus sees no
      unclarity here and soon forgets this reservation, speaking outright of the
      “division of the product into three parts ” (wages,
      profit and rent) (S. 49-50 and others). Thus Rodbertus virtually repeated
      Adam Smith’s theory together with his fundamental mistake and
      explained nothing at all regarding the question of income. The promise of
      a new, full and better theory of the distribution of the national

      product[4]

      proved to be just empty talk. As a matter of fact, Rodbertus did not
      advance the theory

 

      of this subject a single step. How confused were his conceptions of
      “income” is shown by his lengthy speculations in his Fourth
      Social Letter to von Kirchmann (Das Kapital, Berlin, 1884) about
      whether money should be included in the national income, and
      whether wages are taken from capital or from income—speculations of
      which Engels said that they “belong to the domain of
      scholasticism” (Vorwort to Vol. II, Capital,

S. XXI).[5]
[8]


      Utter confusion on the problem of the national income reigns supreme among
      economists to this day. For example, in his article on
      “Crises” in Handwörterbuch der
      Staatswissenschaften (the afore-mentioned compilation, p. 81),
      Herkner, speaking of the realisation of the product in capitalist society
      (§ 5, “distribution”), expresses the opinion that the
      speculations of K. H. Rau are “sound,” although he merely
      repeats Adam Smith’s mistake by dividing the whole product of
      society into incomes. R. Meyer, in his article on “income”
      (ibid., p. 283 and foll.), quotes the confused definitions of A. Wagner
      (who also repeats Adam Smith’s error) and frankly admits that
      “it is difficult to distinguish income from capital,” and that
      “the most difficult thing is to distinguish between returns (Ertrag)
      and income (Einkommen).”

    

      We thus see that the economists who have discoursed at length on the
      inadequate attention paid by the classical economists (and Marx) to
      “distribution” and “consumption” have not been
      able to give the slightest explanation of the most fundamental problems of
      “distribution” and “consumption.” That is
      understandable, for one cannot even discuss “consumption”
      unless one understands the process of the reproduction of the total social
      capital and of the replacement of the various component parts of the
      social product. This example once again proved how absurd it is to single
      out “distribution” and “consumption” as though
      they were independent branches of science corresponding to certain
      independent processes and phenomena of economic life. It is not with
      “production” that political economy deals,

 

      but with the social relations of men in production, with the social system
      of production. Once these social relations have been ascertained and
      thoroughly analysed, the place in production of every class, and,
      consequently, the share they get of the national consumption, are
      thereby defined. And the solution of the problem which brought
      classical political economy to a halt, and which has not been advanced a
      hair’s breadth by all sorts of experts on “distribution”
      and “consumption,” is provided by the theory which comes
      directly after those of the classical economists and which completes the
      analysis of the production of capital, individual and social.

    

      The problem of “national income” and of “national
      consumption,” which is absolutely insoluble when examined
      independently, and has engendered nothing but scholastic speculations,
      definitions and classifications, proves to be solved in its entirety when
      the process of the production of the total social capital has been
      analysed. Furthermore, it ceases to exist as a separate problem when the
      relation of national consumption to the national product and the
      realisation of each separate part of this product have been
      ascertained. All that remains is to give names to these separate
      parts.

    

      “In order to avoid unnecessary difficulty, one should distinguish
      gross output (Rohertrag) and net output from gross income and net income.

    

      “The gross output, or gross product, is the total reproduced
      product....

    

      “The gross income is that portion of value and that portion of the
      gross product” (Bruttoprodukts oder Rohprodukts) measured by it
      which remains after deducting that portion of value and that portion of
      the product of total production measured by it which replaces the constant
      capital advanced and consumed in production. The gross income, then, is
      equal to wages (or the portion of the product destined to again become the
      income of the labourer) + profit + rent. The net income, on the other
      hand, is the surplus-value, and thus the surplus-product, which remains
      after deducting wages, and which, in fact, thus represents the
      surplus-value realised by capital and to be divided with the landlord, and
      the surplus-product measured by it.

    

 

      “...Viewing the income of the whole society, national income
      consists of wages plus profit plus rent, thus, of the gross income. But
      even this is an abstraction to the extent that the entire society, on the
      basis of capitalist production, bases itself on the capitalist standpoint
      and thereby considers only the income resolved into profit and rent as net
      income” (III, 2, 375-376. Russ. trans.,

pp. 695-696).[9]


      Thus, the explanation of the process of realisation also made clear the
      question of income and removed the main difficulty that had prevented the
      achievement of clarity on this question, namely: how does “income
      for one become capital for another”, how can the product which
      consists of articles of personal consumption and resolves itself totally
      into wages, profit and rent, also include the constant part of capital,
      which can never be income? The analysis of realisation given in
      Capital, Volume II, Part III, gave a full answer to these
      questions, and in the concluding part of Volume III of Capital,
      which deals with “revenues,” Marx had only to give names to
      the separate parts of the social product and refer the reader to the
      analysis given in

Volume II.[6]

 

Notes
 

[1] 
      Dictionary of Political Sciences.—Lenin

[2] 
      Dr. Rodbertus-Jagetzow, Zur Beleuchtung der sozialen Frage,
      Berlin, 1875, S. 72 u. ff. (On the Elucidation of the Social
Problem, Berlin, p. 72 and foll. –Ed.)—Lenin

[3] 
      –this new theory, which I set against those that have existed
      hitherto.—Lenin

[4] 
      Ibid., S. 32: “...bin ich genötigt, der vorstehenden Skizze
      einer besseren Methode auch noch eine vollständige, solcher
      besseren Methode entsprechende Theorie, wenigstens der
      Verteilung des Nationalprodukts, hinzuzufügen.”
      (Ibid., p. 32: “...I am obliged to add to the present outline of
      a better method, a full theory, corresponding to this better
      method, of at least the distribution of the national
      product.”–Ed.)—Lenin

[5] 
      That is why K. Diehl is absolutely wrong when he says that Rodbertus
      presented “a new theory of the distribution of income.”
      (Handwörterbuch der Staatswissenschaften,
      Art. “Rodbertus,” B. V., S. 448.)—Lenin

[6] 
      See Das Kapital, III, 2, VII. Abschnitt: “Die
      Revenuen,” Chapter 49- “Zur Analyse des
      Produktionsprozesses” (Russ. trans., pp. 688-706). Here Marx also
      points to the circumstances that prevented the earlier economists from
      understanding this process (pp. 379-382. Russ. trans.,

698-700).[10]
    —Lenin
 


[7] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959,
      p. 822. Lenin’s remark on errors in the translation of
      Capital refers to the translation by N.–on
      (Danielson), 1896.
    


[8] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, Preface by
      Frederick Engels, p. 17.
    


[9] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959,
      pp. 818-819. p. 64
    


[10] 
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 821-824.
    

 
  

VI. Marx’s Theory of Realisation

|

VIII. Why Does the Capitalist Nation 
Need a Foreign Market?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Why Does the Capitalist Nation Need a Foreign Market?




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One:
VIII. Why Does the Capitalist Nation Need a Foreign Market?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists




      VIII. Why Does the Capitalist Nation Need a Foreign
      Market?
    

      Regarding the above-stated theory of the realisation of the product in
      capitalist society, the question may arise: Does not this theory
      contradict the proposition that the capitalist nation cannot dispense with
      foreign markets?

    

      It must be remembered that the analysis given of the realisation of the
      product in capitalist society proceeded from the assumption that there is
      no foreign trade: this assumption has already been mentioned above and it
      has been shown to be essential in such an analysis. Obviously,
      imports and exports would only have confused the issue, without in the

 

      least helping to clear up the problem. The mistake made by
      Messrs. V. V. and N.–on is that they bring in the foreign market to
      explain the realisation of surplus-value: while explaining
      absolutely nothing, this reference to the foreign market merely conceals
      their theoretical mistakes; that is one point. Another point is that it
      enables them, with the aid of these mistaken “theories,” to
      avoid the need to explain the fact of the development of a home
      market for Russian

capitalism.[1]

 The “foreign market” merely serves
      them as a pretext for obscuring the development of capitalism (and,
      consequently, of the market) inside the country—a pretext all the
      more convenient in that it also relieves them of the need to examine the
      facts which show that Russian capitalism is winning foreign

markets.[2]


      The need for a capitalist country to have a foreign market is not
      determined at all by the laws of the realisation of the social product
      (and of surplus-value in particular), but, firstly, by the fact that
      capitalism makes its appearance only as a result of widely developed
      commodity circulation, which transcends the limits of the
      state. It is therefore impossible to conceive a capitalist nation without
      foreign trade, nor is there any such nation.

    

      As the reader sees, this reason is of a historical order. And the
      Narodniks could not escape it with a couple of threadbare phrases about
      “the impossibility of the capitalists consuming
      surplus-value.” Had they really wanted to raise the question of the
      foreign market, they would have had to examine the history of the
      development of foreign trade, the history of the development of commodity
      circulation. And having examined this history, they could not have, of
      course, depicted capitalism as a casual deviation from the path.

    

      Secondly, the conformity between the separate parts of social production
      (in terms of value and in their natural form) which was necessarily
      assumed by the theory of the

 

      reproduction of social capital, and which is actually established only as
      the average magnitude of a number of continual fluctuations—this
      conformity is constantly disturbed in capitalist society owing to the
      separate existence of different producers working for an unknown
      market. The various branches of industry, which serve as
      “markets” for one another, do not develop evenly, but outstrip
      one another, and the more developed industry seeks a foreign market. This
      does not mean at all “the impossibility of the capitalist nation
      realising surplus-value,”—the profound conclusion so readily
      drawn by the Narodnik. It merely indicates the lack of proportion in the
      development of the different industries. If the national capital were
      distributed differently, the same quantity of products could be
      realised within the country. But for capital to abandon one sphere of
      industry and pass into another there must be a crisis in that sphere; and
      what can restrain the capitalists threatened by such a crisis from seeking
      a foreign market, from seeking subsidies and bonuses to facilitate
      exports, etc.?

    

      Thirdly, the law of pre-capitalist modes of production is the repetition
      of the process of production on the previous scale, on the previous
      technical basis: such are the corvée economy of the landlords, the
      natural economy of the peasants, the artisan production of the
      industrialists. The law of capitalist production, on the contrary, is
      constant transformation of the modes of production, and the unrestricted
      growth of the scale of production. Under the old modes of production,
      economic units could exist for centuries without undergoing any change
      either in character or in size, and without extending beyond the
      landlord’s manor, the peasant village or the small neighbouring
      market for the rural artisans and small industrialists (the so-called
      handicraftsmen). The capitalist enterprise, on the contrary, inevitably
      out grows the bounds of the village community, the local market, the
      region, and then the state. Since the isolation and seclusion of the
      states have already been broken down by commodity circulation, the natural
      trend of every capitalist industry brings it to the necessity of
      “seeking a foreign market.”

    

      Thus, the necessity of seeking a foreign market by no means proves that
      capitalism is unsound, as the Narodnik

 

      economists like to picture matters. Quite the contrary. This necessity
      demonstrates the progressive historical work of capitalism, which destroys
      the age-old isolation and seclusion of systems of economy (and,
      consequently, the narrowness of intellectual and political life), and
      which links all countries of the world into a single economic whole.

    

      From this we see that the two latter causes of the need for a foreign
      market are again causes of a historical character. In order to understand
      them one must examine each separate industry, its development within the
      country, its transformation into a capitalist industry—in short, one
      must take the facts about the development of capitalism in the
      country; and it is not surprising that the Narodniks take the opportunity
      to evade these facts under cover of worthless (and meaningless) phrases
      about the “impossibility” of both the home and the foreign
      markets.
    
 

Notes
 

[1] 
      Mr. Bulgakov very correctly observes in the above-quoted book: “Till
      now the cotton industry, which supplies the peasant market, has been
      growing steadily, so that the absolute diminution of popular
      consumption. ..” (which Mr. N.–on talks about) “...is
      conceivable only theoretically” (pp, 214-215).
    —Lenin

[2] 
      Volgin, The Substantiation of Narodism in the Works of
Mr. Vorontsov, St. Petersburg, 1896,

pp. 71-76.[3]
    —Lenin
 


[3]
Volgin–pseudonym of G. V. Plekhanov. The work here
      cited is included in Vol. IX of his Works.
    

 
  

VII. The Theory of the National Income

|

IX. Conclusions From Chapter I

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Conclusions from Chapter I




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter One: 
IX. Conclusions From Chapter I








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter I. The Theoretical Mistakes 
of the Narodnik Economists




      IX. Conclusions From Chapter I
    

      Let us now sum up the theoretical propositions examined above, which have
      a direct bearing on the problem of the home market.

    

      1) The basic process of the formation of a home market (i.e., of the
      development of commodity production and of capitalism) is the social
      division of labour. This consists of various forms of processing raw
      materials (and various operations in this processing) separating from
      agriculture one after another and becoming independent branches of
      industry, which exchange their products (now commodities ) for
      the products of agriculture. Thus, agriculture itself becomes industry
      (i.e., produces commodities), and the same process of specialisation takes
      place in it.

    

      2) A direct conclusion from the preceding proposition is the law governing
      all developing commodity economy, and the more so capitalist
      economy—the industrial (i.e., non-agricultural) population grows
      faster than the agricultural and diverts an ever-growing part of the
      population from agriculture to manufacturing industry.

    

      3) The separation of the direct producer from the means of production,
      i.e., his expropriation, signifying the transition

 

      from simple commodity production to capitalist production (and
      constituting the necessary condition for this transition),
      creates the home market. The process of this creation of
      the home market proceeds in two directions: on the one hand, the means
      of production from which the small producer is “freed”
      are converted into capital in the hands of their new owner, serve to
      produce commodities and, consequently, are themselves converted into
      commodities. Thus, even the simple reproduction of these means of
      production now requires that they be purchased (previously, these means of
      production were reproduced in greater part in the natural form and partly
      were made at home), i.e., provides a market for means of production, and
      then the product now produced with the aid of these means of production is
      also converted into a commodity. On the other hand, the means of
      subsistence of the small producer become the material elements of the
      variable capital, i.e., of the sum of money expended by the employer
      (whether a landowner, contractor, lumber-dealer, factory owner, etc.,
      makes no difference) on hiring workers. Thus, these means of subsistence
      are now also converted into commodities, i.e., create a home market for
      articles of consumption.

    

      4) The realisation of the product in capitalist society (and,
      consequently, the realisation of surplus-value) cannot be explained
      without clearing up the point—1) that the social product, like the
      individual product, resolves itself in terms of value into three parts and
      not two (constant capital + variable capital + surplus-value, and not only
      into variable capital + surplus-value, as taught by Adam Smith and the
      entire school of political economy that came after him and before Marx),
      and 2) that in its natural form it must be divided into two big
      departments: means of production (consumed productively) and articles of
      consumption (consumed personally). By establishing these main theoretical
      propositions, Marx fully explained the process of realisation of the
      product in general and of surplus-value in particular in capitalist
      production, and revealed that it is utterly wrong to drag the foreign
      market into the problem of realisation.

    

      5) Marx’s theory of realisation also threw light on the problem of
      national consumption and income.

    


      From what has been said above, it follows automatically that the problem
      of the home market as a separate, self-sufficient problem not depending on
      that of the degree of capitalist development does not exist at all. That
      is why Marx’s theory does not anywhere or ever raise this problem
      separately. The home market appears when commodity economy appears; it is
      created by the development of this commodity economy, and the degree to
      which the social division of labour is ramified determines the level of
      its development; it spreads with the extension of commodity production
      from products to labour-power, and only in proportion as the latter is
      transformed into a commodity does capitalism embrace the entire production
      of the country, developing mainly on account of means of production, which
      occupy an increasingly important place in capitalist society. The
      “home market” for capitalism is created by developing
      capitalism itself, which deepens the social division of labour and
      resolves the direct producers into capitalists and workers. The degree of
      the development of the home market is the degree of development of
      capitalism in the country. To raise the question of the limits of the home
      market separately from that of the degree of the development of capitalism
      (as the Narodnik economists do) is wrong.

    

      That is why the question of how a home market is being formed for Russian
      capitalism reduces itself to the following: How and in what direction are
      the diverse aspects of the Russian national economy developing? What
      constitutes the connection between and interdependence of these diverse
      aspects?

    

      The next chapters will be devoted to an examination of data containing the
      answers to these questions.
    


 
  

VIII. Why Does the Capitalist Nation 
Need a Foreign Market?

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter II. The Differentiation of the Peasantry




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two. The 
Differentiation of the Peasantry









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation of the Peasantry


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 70-188
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. Zemstvo Statistics For Novorossia
  70



II. Zemstvo Statistics For Samara Gubernia
  85



III. Zemstvo Statistics For Saratov Gubernia
  93



IV. Zemstvo Statistics For Perm Gubernia
  106



V. Zemstvo Statistics For Orel Gubernia
  112



VI. Zemstvo Statistics For Voronezh Gubernia
  115



VII. Zemstvo Statistics For Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia
  119



VIII. Review Of Zemstvo Statistics For Other Gubernias
  122



IX. Summary Of The Above Zemstvo Statistics On The Differentiation Of The Peasantry
  127



X. Summary Of Zemstvo Statistics And Army-Horse Census Returns
  141



XI. A Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900
  146



XII. Zemstvo Statistics On Peasant Budgets
  148



XIII. Conclusions From Chapter II
  172

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Novorossia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: I. Zemstvo 
Statistics For Novorossia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation of 
the Peasantry




      We have seen that in capitalist production the basis for the formation of
      a home market is the process of the disintegration of the small
      cultivators into agricultural entrepreneurs and workers. Almost every work
      on the economic position of the Russian peasantry in the post-Reform
      period refers to the so-called “differentiation” of the
      peasantry. It must consequently be our task to study the principal
      features of this phenomenon and to determine its significance.  In the
      following exposition we employ the statistical data of Zemstvo
      house-to-house

censuses.[17]



      I. Zemstvo Statistics For
      Novorossia[18]


      Mr. V. Postnikov, in his book Peasant Farming in South Russia
(Moscow,

1891),[19]
has collected and processed the Zemstvo statistics for the Taurida and
partly the Kherson and the Ekaterinoslav gubernias. This book should be
given first place in the literature on the differentiation of the
peasantry, and we consider it necessary to arrange according to the
system we have adopted the data gathered by Mr. Postnikov, supplementing
them occasionally with data from Zemstvo publications. The Zemstvo
statisticians of Taurida have grouped the peasant households according
to area under crops—a very sound method, one that renders it
possible to form a precise judgement of the economy of each
group due to the predominance in that locality of grain cultivation with
extensive farming. Here

 

      are the general data for the economic groups of the Taurida

      peasantry.[1]




Dessiatines[2]


      The unevenness in the distribution of the area under crops is very
      considerable: 2/5 of the total households (comprising about 3/10 of the
      population, for the size of these families s below the average) possess
      about 1/8 of the total area under crops; they belong to the poor group,
      cultivating little land, who cannot cover their needs with their income
      from farming. Further, there are the middle peasants, also constituting
      about 2/5 of the total households, who cover their average expenditure by
      income from the land (Mr. Postnikov considers that a family requires from
      16 to 18

      dessiatines [Dessiatine = 2.70
      acres. —Ed] under crops to cover its
      average expenditure). Lastly, there are the well-to-do peasants
      (about 1/5 of the households and 3/10 of the population), who
      concentrate in their hands over half the area cultivated, the
      crop area per household clearly indicating the
      “commercial” character of the farming done by this
      group. In order exactly to estimate the extent of this
      commercial agriculture in the various groups,

 

      Mr. Postnikov employs the following method. From the total crop area of
      the farm, he separates the following: the food area (which provides
      sustenance for the family and the farm labourers), the fodder area (which
      provides fodder for the cattle) and the farm-service area (seed-plot, land
      occupied by buildings, etc.), and thus arrives at the size of the
      market or commercial area, the produce of which goes for sale. It
      is shown that in the group with 5 to 10 dess. under crops, only 11.8% of
      the cultivated area yields produce for the market, whereas this percentage
      grows with the increase in the area under crops (by groups) as follows:
      36.5%—52%—61%. Consequently, the well-to-do peasants (the top
      two groups) engage in what is commercial cultivation, and secure a gross
      money income ranging from 574 to 1,500 rubles per annum. This commercial
      cultivation then becomes capitalist farming, for the areas cultivated by
      the well-to-do peasants exceed the family labour norm (i.e., the amount of
      land that a family can cultivate by its own labour), and compel them to
      resort to the hiring of workers: in the three northern uyezds of
      Taurida Gubernia, the author estimates, the well-to-do peasants hire over
      14,000 rural workers. The poor peasants, on the contrary, “provide
      workers” (over 5,000), that is, resort to the sale of their
      labour-power, since the income from cultivating the land amounts, in the 5
      to 10 dess. group, for example, to only about 30 rubles in cash per

      household.[3]

 We
      observe here, consequently, the very process of the creation of a home
      market that is dealt with by the theory of capitalist production—the
      “home market” grows as a result of the conversion into a
      commodity of the product of commercial, entrepreneur farming, on the one
      hand, and of the conversion into a commodity of the labour-power sold by
      the badly-off peasants, on the other.

    
      In order to acquaint ourselves more closely with this phenomenon, let us
      examine the position of each separate group of the peasantry. Let us start
      with the top group. Here are the data for the amount of land it owns and
      uses:
    





      We see, accordingly, that the well-to-do peasants, not withstanding the
      fact that they are best provided with allotment

land,[20] concentrate in their
      hands the bulk of the purchased and the rented land and turn into small
      land owners and capitalist

farmers.[4]

 On the renting of 17 to 44 dess. of land there is
      an annual expenditure, at local prices, of about 70 to 160
      rubles. Obviously we are dealing here with a commercial transaction: the
      land becomes a commodity, “a money-making machine.”

    
      Let us take the data for livestock and implements [Carting: carts, covered and open wagons, etc. Ploughing:
      iron ploughs, scarifiers (cultivators), etc.]:
    




implements[5]




      Thus the well-to-do peasantry are far better supplied with implements than
      the poor and even the middle peasantry. It is sufficient to glance at this
      table to see how totally fictitious are the “average” figures
      which people are so fond of bringing into play when they talk of the
      “peasantry”. The commercial cultivation of the peasant
      bourgeoisie is accompanied here by commercial livestock farming, namely,
      the breeding of coarse-wool sheep. Regarding implements, we shall quote in
      addition figures for improved implements, which we have taken from Zemstvo
      statistical

returns.[6]

Out of the total reaping and mowing machines
      (3,061), 2,841, or 92.8%, belong to the peasant bourgeoisie (1/5 of the
      total households).

    
      It is quite natural that the well-to-do peasantry also employ a
      farming technique much above the average (larger size of farm,
      more plentiful supply of implements, available financial resources, etc.);
      that is to say, the well-to-do peasants “do their sowing faster,
      make better use of favourable weather, sow the seed in more humid
      soil,” and reap their harvest in proper time; they thresh their
      grain as it is carted in from the field, etc. It is also natural that the
      expenditure on the production of agricultural produce diminishes (per unit
      of product) as the size of the farm increases. Mr. Postnikov proves this
      proposition in particular detail, using the following system of
      calculation: he determines the number of people working (including hired
      labourers), the number of draught animals, implements, etc., per 100
      dessiatines of crop area in the various groups of the peasantry. It is
      proved that these numbers diminish as the size of the farm increases. For
      example, those cultivating under 5 dessiatines have per 100 dessiatines of
      allotment land 28 people working, 28 draught animals, 4.7 ploughs and
      scarifiers, and 10 carts, whereas those cultivating over 50 dessiatines
      have 7 people working, 14 draught animals, 3.8 ploughs and scarifiers, and
      4.3 carts. (We omit more detailed data for all groups, referring those
      interested in the details to Mr. Postnikov’s book.)  The
      author’s general

 

      conclusion is: “With the increase in the size of the farm and in the
      area cultivated by the peasant, the expenditure on the maintenance of
      labour-power, human and animal, that prime item of expenditure in
      agriculture, progressively decreases, and, among the groups that cultivate
      large areas, drops to nearly one half per dessiatine under crops of the
      expenditure among the groups with small cultivated areas”
      (op. cit., p. 117). To this law of the greater
      productivity and, hence, of the greater stability of the big peasant farms
      Mr.Postnikov quite rightly attaches great importance, proving it with very
      detailed data not only for Novorossia alone, but also for the central
      gubernias of

Russia.[7]

 The further the penetration of commodity
      production into crop cultivation, and, consequently, the keener the
      competition among the agriculturists, the struggle for land and for
      economic independence, the more vigorously must this law be manifested, a
      law which leads to the ousting of the middle and poor peasants by the
      peasant bourgeoisie. It must, however, be noted that technical progress in
      agriculture expresses itself in different ways, depending on the system of
      agriculture, on the system of field cultivation. Whereas in the case of
      grain growing and extensive cultivation this progress may find expression
      in a mere expansion of the crop area

 

      and reduction of the number of workers, animals, etc., per unit of crop
      area, in the case of livestock or industrial crop farming, with the
      adoption of intensive agriculture, this same progress may find expression,
      for example, in the cultivation of root crops, which require more workers
      per unit of crop area, or in the acquisition of dairy cattle, the
      cultivation of fodder grasses, etc., etc.

    
      The description of the top group of the peasantry must be supplemented by
      indicating the considerable employment of wage-labour. Here are the data
      for the three uyezds of Taurida Gubernia:
    




      Mr. V. V., in the above-mentioned article, argued about this question as
      follows: he took the farms employing workers as a percentage of the total
      number of peasant farms and arrived at the conclusion that “the
      number of peasants resorting to hired labour for the cultivation of the
      land, as compared to the aggregate mass of the people, is quite
      insignificant: 2 to 3, a maximum of 5 peasant farmers out of 100 are all
      that represent peasant capitalism . . . it” (peasant farming in
      Russia employing labourers) “is not a system firmly rooted in
      contemporary economic life, but something fortuitous, such as occurred 100
      and 200 years ago” (Vestnik Yevropy, 1884, No. 7,
      p. 332). What sense is there in comparing the number of farms employing
      workers with the total number of “peasant” farms, when the
      latter figure also includes the plots of farm labourers? Why, by this
      method one could also get rid of capitalism in Russian industry: one would
      only need to take the families engaging in industries who employ
      wage-workers (i.e., the families

 

      of manufacturers, large and small) as a percentage of the total number of
      families engaging in industries in Russia; the result would be a quite
      insignificant” percentage of the “mass of the people.”
      It is far more correct to compare the number of farms employing labourers
      with the number of actually independent farms, i.e., of those living on
      agriculture alone and not resorting to the sale of their labour
      power. Furthermore, Mr. V. V. lost sight of a trifle, namely, that the
      peasant farms employing labourers are among the biggest: the percentage of
      farms employing labourers, “insignificant” when taken
      “in general and on the average,” turns out to be very imposing
      (34-64%) among the well-to-do peasantry, who account for more than half of
      the total production and produce large quantities of grain for sale. One
      can therefore judge how absurd is the opinion that farming based on the
      employment of labourers is “fortuitous,” something that
      occurred 100 to 200 years ago! Thirdly, only by disregarding the real
      specific features of cultivation can one take as the criterion of
      “peasant capitalism” only farm labourers, i.e., regular
      workers, and ignore the day labourers. It is commonly known that the
      hiring of day labourers plays a particularly important role in

      agriculture.[8]

      Let us take the bottom group. It consists of peasants who cultivate no
      land or who cultivate little; they “do not differ much in economic
      status . . . both groups serve as farm labourers for their fellow
      villagers, or engage in outside, mainly agricultural employments”
      (p. 134, op. cit.), i.e., belong to the rural
      proletariat. Let us note, for example, that in Dnieper Uyezd the bottom
      group constitutes 40% of the households, and those having no ploughing
      implements 39% of the total households. In addition to selling their
      labour-power, the rural proletariat obtain an income from leasing their
      allotment land:
    





      In the three uyezds of Taurida Gubernia, the land leased (in 1884-86)
      amounted to 25% of the total peasant arable; this does not include land
      leased, not to peasants, but to middle-class intellectuals. In all, nearly
      1/3 of the population in these three uyezds lease land; the allotments of
      the rural proletariat are rented mainly by the peasant bourgeoisie. Here
      are data in this regard:
    




      “Allotment land is now an object of extensive speculation among the
      South-Russian peasants. Land is used as security for loans on promissory
      notes. . . . Land is leased, or sold, for one or two years and for longer
      periods—8, 9 or 11 years” (p. 139,
      op. cit.). Thus, the peasant bourgeoisie is also a
      representative of merchant’s and usurer’s

capital.[9]

 Here we have a
      striking refutation of the Narodnik prejudice

 

      that the “kulak” and the “usurer” have nothing in
      common with the “enterprising muzhik.” On the contrary, the
      threads both of merchant’s capital (the loaning of money on the
      security of land, the buying-up of various products, etc.) and of
      industrial capital (commercial agriculture with the aid of wage-workers,
      etc,.) merge in the hands of the peasant bourgeoisie. It depends on
      surrounding circumstances, on the greater or lesser degree to which the
      Asiatic way of life is eliminated and culture is widespread in our
      countryside as to which of these forms of capital will develop at the
      expense of the other.

    
      Let us examine, finally, the position of the middle group (cultivating
      from 10 to 25 dess. per household, with an average of 16.4 dess.). Its
      position is a transitional one: its money income from agriculture (191
      rubles) is somewhat lower than the sum annually spent by the average
      Tauridian (200 to 250 rubles). Here draught animals work out at 3.2 head
      per household, whereas for a full team 4 are required.  Hence the position
      of the middle peasant’s farm is an unstable one, and to till his
      land he has to resort to

“yoking.”[10]
[21]

      The cultivation of the land on a “yoking” basis is, it goes
      without saying, less productive (time lost in moving from place to place,
      shortage of horses, etc.), so that in one village, for example,
      Mr. Postnikov was informed that “yokers often scarify no more than
      one dessiatine per day, which is half the normal

rate.”[11]

 If to this we add
      that in the middle group about 116 of the households have no ploughing
      implements, that this group provides more workers than it hires (according
      to Mr. Postnikov’s calculations), its unstable character and its
      transitional position between

 

      the peasant bourgeoisie and the rural proletariat will be clear. We shall
      quote somewhat more detailed data about the ousting of the middle group.
    






Gubernia[12]



      Thus, the distribution of allotment land is the most
      “equalised,” although here, too, the ousting of the bottom
      group by the top ones is marked. But the situation radically changes when
      we pass from this compulsorily-held land to the free,
      i.e., to the purchased and the rented land. The concentration of this land
      is enormous, and as a result, the distribution of the total land in use by
      the peasants is quite unlike the distribution of the allotment land: the
      middle group is pushed into second place (46% of allotment land—41%
      of land in use), the well-to-do group very considerably enlarges its
      holdings (28% of allotment land—46% of land in use), while the poor
      group is being pushed out of the ranks of the cultivators (25% of
      allotment land—12% of land in use).

    
      The table reveals an interesting phenomenon, one that we shall meet again,
      namely, the decline in the role of allotment land in peasant farming. In
      the bottom group this is due to the leasing out of land; in the top group
      to the fact that in the total farming area purchased and rented land is
      overwhelmingly predominant. The remnants of the pre-Reform system (the
      tying of the peasants to the land, and equalised, tax-assessed land
      tenure) are being utterly destroyed by the penetration of capitalism into
      agriculture.

    
      As for land renting in particular, the figures given enable us to clear up
      a very common mistake in the arguments of the Narodnik economists on this
      subject. Take the arguments of Mr. V. V. In the article quoted above he
      bluntly raised the issue of the relation of the renting of land to the
      break-up of the peasantry. “Does the renting of land help to
      differentiate the peasant farms into big and small and to destroy the
      average, typical group?” (Vestnik Yevropy,
      loc. cit., pp. 339-340.)  Mr. V. V. answered this
      question in the negative. Here are his arguments: 1) “The large
      percentage of persons who resort to the renting of land.” Examples:
      38 to 68%; 40 to 70%; 30 to 66%; 50 to 60% respectively in different
      uyezds of different gubernias.—2) The small size of the rented plots
      per household: 3 to 5 dess., according to Tambov

 

      statistical returns.—3) The peasants with small allotments rent more
      land than those with big ones.

    
      To enable the reader clearly to judge the appropriateness of such
      arguments, let alone their soundness, we quote the corresponding figures
      for Dnieper

Uyezd.[13]





      The question arises, of what importance can “average” figures
      be here? Does the fact that those who rent land are
      “many”—56%—really do away with the concentration
      of the rented land in the hands of the rich? Is it not ridiculous to take
      the “average” area of rented land [12 dess. per renting
      household. Very often it is not even per renting household, but per
      existing household that is taken. That is what Mr. Karyshev, for example,
      does in his work “Peasant Rentings of Non-Allotment Land”
      (Dorpat, 1892; Vol. II of Results of Zemstvo Statistical
      Investigations)] by putting together peasants of whom one takes 2
      dessiatines at a fabulous price (15 rubles), evidently out of dire
      need, on ruinous terms, while another takes 48 dessiatines, over
      and above his own adequate amount of land, “buying” the land
      wholesale at the incomparably lower price of 3.55 rubles per
      dessiatine?  No less hollow is the third argument: Mr. V. V. himself took
      care to refute it by admitting that figures relating “to entire
      village communities” (in classifying the peasants according to
      allotment) “do not present a true picture of what is taking place in
      the community itself” (p. 342, op.

      cit.).[14]




      It would be a great mistake to imagine that the concentration of rented
      land in the hands of the peasant bourgeoisie is limited to individual
      renting and does not apply to renting by the village community. Nothing of
      the kind. The rented land is always distributed “according to where
      the money lies,” and the relation between the groups of the
      peasantry does not change in the least where land is rented by the
      community. Hence, the argument of Mr. Karyshev, for example, that the
      relation between community renting and individual renting expresses a
      “conflict between two principles (!?),the communal and the
      individual” (p.159, loc. cit.), that community
      renting “is characterised by the labour principle and the principle
      of even distribution of rented land among the community members”
      (ibid., 230)—this argument belongs entirely to the sphere
      of Narodnik prejudices. Not withstanding the task he set himself of
      summing up the “results of Zemstvo statistical investigation,”
      Mr. Karyshev carefully avoided all the abundant Zemstvo statistical
      material about the concentration of rented land in the hands of small
      groups of well-to-do peasants. Let us quote an example. In the three
      indicated uyezds of Taurida Gubernia, state lands rented by peasant
      communities are distributed among the groups as follows:
    





      A little illustration of the “labour principle” and of the
      “principle of even distribution”!

    
      Such are the Zemstvo statistical data on peasant farming in South
      Russia. No room is left by these data for doubting the complete
      differentiation of the peasantry, the complete domination in the
      countryside of the peasant

bourgeoisie.[15]

 Highly interesting, therefore, is the attitude
      of Messrs. V. V. and N.–on towards these data, the more so that formerly
      both these writers admitted the need of raising the problem of the
      differentiation of the peasantry (Mr. V. V. in the above mentioned article
      of 1884, and Mr. N.–on in Slovo[The Word] in 1880, when
      he remarked on the interesting phenomenon in the village community itself
      that the “unenterprising” muzhiks neglect their land, while
      the “enterprising” ones take the best land for themselves;
      cf. Sketches, p. 71). It should be noted that
      Mr. Postnikov’s work is of a dual character: on the one hand the
      author skillfully gathered and carefully processed extremely valuable
      Zemstvo statistics and managed, in doing so, to escape the “tendency
      to regard the peasant community as something integral and homogeneous, as
      it is still held to be by our urban intelligentsia” (p. 351,
      op. cit.). On the other hand, the author, not being
      guided by theory, failed totally to appraise the data he had processed,
      and regarded them from the extremely narrow point of view of
      “measures,” proceeding to concoct projects

 

      about “agricultural-handicraft-factory communities” and about
      the necessity of “restricting,” “enjoining,”
      “observing,” etc., etc. Well then, our Narodniks did their
      best to ignore the first, the positive part of Mr. Postnikov’s work
      and concentrated their attention on the second part. Both Mr. V. V. and
      Mr. N.–on began with highly serious air to “refute”
      Mr. Postnikov’s absolutely unserious “projects”
      (Mr. V. V. in Russkaya Mysl[Russian Thought ], 1894,
      No. 2; Mr. N.–on in his Sketches, p. 233, footnote), accusing
      him of the evil intention of introducing capitalism into Russia, and
      carefully avoiding the data which revealed the prevalence of capitalist
      relations in the countryside of South Russia

today.[16]

 

Notes
 

[1]
      The following data relate mostly to the three northern mainland uyezds of
      Taurida Gubernia, namely the Berdyansk, Melitopol and Dnieper, or to the
      latter one alone.—Lenin

[2]
Dessiatine=2.70 acres.–Ed.

[3]
      Mr. Postnikov rightly observes that in reality the differences between the
      groups as to size of money income from the land are much more
      considerable, for the computations assume 1) equal yield, and 2) equal
      price for grain sold, actually, however, the well-to-do peasants secure
      better yields and sell their grain to greater
      advantage.—Lenin

[4]
      We would point out that the relatively considerable amount of purchased
      land held by those who cultivate no land is due to the fact that this
      group includes shopkeepers, owners of industrial establishments, and so
      forth. The mixing of such “peasants” with real cultivators is
      a common defect of Zemstvo statistics. We shall refer again to this defect
      later on.—Lenin

[5]
      Carting: carts, covered and open waggons, etc. Ploughing: iron ploughs,
      scarifiers (cultivators), etc.—Lenin

[6]
Statistical Returns for Melitopol Uyezd, Simferopol, 1885
      (Statistical Returns for Taurida Gubernia,

Vol. I),[22]—Statistical
      Returns for Dnieper Uyezd, Vol. II, Simferopol, 1886.—Lenin

[7]
      “Zemstvo statistics prove incontrovertibly that the larger the scale
      of the peasant farm, the smaller the number of implements, workers, and
      draught animals employed on a given tillage area”
      (op. cit., p. 162).

    
      It is interesting to note how this law is reflected in Mr. V, V.’s
      arguments. In the above-quoted article (Vestnik Yevropy, 1884,
      No. 7) he makes the following comparison: In the central black-earth belt
      there are 5-7-8 dess. of arable per peasant horse, whereas
      “according to the rules of three-field crop rotation” there
      should be 7-10 dess. (Batalin’s
      Calendar). “Consequently, the decline in horse-ownership by
      part of the population of this area of Russia must to a certain extent be
      regarded as the restoration of the normal proportion between the number of
      draught animals and the area to be cultivated” (p. 346 in the
      article mentioned). Thus the ruin of the peasantry leads to progress in
      agriculture. Had Mr V. V. paid attention not only to the agronomic
      but also to the social-economic aspect of this process he could have seen
      that this is the progress of capitalist agriculture, for “the
      restoration of the normal proportion” between draught animals and
      arable is achieved either by landlords who acquire their own implements,
      or by big peasant crop growers, i.e., by the peasant bourgeoisie.—Lenin

[8]
      England is the classic land of agricultural capitalism. And in that
      country 40.8% of the farmers employ no hired labour; 68.1% employ not more
      than 2 workers; 82% employ not more than 4 workers (Yanson,
      Comparative Statistics, Vol. II pp. 22-23; quoted from Kablukov,
      The Workers in Agriculture, p. i6). But he would be a fine
      economist, indeed, who forgot the mass of agricultural proletarians, both
      migratory and also resident (i.e., such as get “employments”
      in their own villages), who hire themselves out by the day.—Lenin

[9]
      And itself resorts to the “very numerous” village banks and
      loan-and-savings societies, which render “substantial
      assistance” to “prosperous peasants.” “The
      economically weak peasants cannot find guarantors and do not get
      loans” (p. 368, op cit.).—Lenin

[10]
      In Melitopol Uyezd, out of 13,789 households in this group only 4,218 till
      their land with their own animals animals; 9,201 “yoke.” In
      Dnieper Uyezd, out of 8,234 households, 4,029 till the land with their own
      animals, and 3,835 “yoke.” See zemstvo statistical returns for
      Melitopol Uyezd (p. B. 195) and for Dnieper Uyezd (p. B. 123).—Lenin

[11]
      In the above-mentioned article Mr. V. V. argues a great deal about yoking
      being the “principle of co-operation,” etc. It is really so
      simple to hush up the fact that the peasantry are breaking up into sharply
      distinct groups, that yoking is the co-operation of tottering farms which
      are being ousted by the peasant bourgeoisie, and then to talk in general
      about the “principle of co-operation”—probably
      co-operation between the rural proletariat and the rural bourgeoisie!—Lenin

[12]
      Data taken from the Zemstvo Statistical Returns. They cover the whole
      uyezd, including settlements not embraced by

volosts.[23] The figures in the
      column “Total land used by group” have been calculated by
      myself, by adding together the allotment, rented and purchased land, and
      subtracting the leased land.—Lenin

[13]
The data for the Melitopol and
      Berdyansk uyezds are analogous.—Lenin

[14]
      Mr. Postnikov cites an interesting example of a similar mistake

 

made by
      Zemstvo statisticians. Noting the fact of commercial farming by the
      well-to-do peasants and their demand for land, he points out that
      “the Zemstvo statisticians, evidently regarding such manifestations
      in peasant life as something illegitimate, try to belittle their
      importance” and to prove that the renting of land is determined not
      by the competition of rich peasants but by the peasants’ need for
      land. To prove this, Mr. Werner, the compiler of Taurida Gubernia
      Handbook (1889), classified the peasants of the entire Taurida
      Gubernia according to size of allotment, taking the group of peasants with
      1 or 2 people working and 2 or 3 draught animals. It turned out that,
      within the bounds of this group, as the size of the allotment increases
      the number of renting households and the amount of rented land
      decrease. Obviously, such a method of calculation proves nothing at all,
      since only peasants with an equal number of draught animals are taken, and
      it is the extreme groups that are omitted. It is quite natural that where
      the number of draught animals is equal the amount of cultivated land must
      also be equal, and consequently, the smaller the allotment, the larger the
      amount of rented land. The question is how the rented land is distributed
      among households with unequal numbers of draught animals, implements, 
  etc.—Lenin

[15]
      It is usually said that the data for Novorossia do not permit the drawing
      of general conclusions, because of the specific features of that
      locality. We do not deny that the differentiation of the agricultural
      peasantry is more marked here than in the rest of Russia; but it will be
      seen from what follows that the specific nature of Novorossia is by no
      means so great as is sometimes imagined.—Lenin

[16]
      “It is interesting,” wrote Mr. N.–on, that Mr. Postnikov
      “has projects for 60-dessiatine peasant farms.” But
      “since agriculture has fallen into the hands of capitalists,”
      productivity of labour may grow still more “tomorrow,”
      “and it will be necessary (!) to convert the 60-dessiatine into 200-
      or 300-dessiatine farms.” You see how simple it is: because
      the petty bourgeoisie of today in our countryside will be threatened
      tomorrow by the big bourgeoisie, therefore Mr. N.–on refuses to
      recognise either today’s petty or tomorrow’s big bourgeoisie!—Lenin
 



[17]
Zemstvo house-to-house censuses were investigations of peasant
      farms undertaken by statistical agencies of the Zemstvos or rural
      government bodies. These censuses, which were conducted mainly for
      taxation purposes, became very common in the 1880s. The household censuses
      provided a wealth of factual material which was published in statistical
      abstracts covering the different gubernias and their uyezds or
      subdivisions. The Zemstvo statisticians, however, many of whom were
      Narodniks, were very often biased in the way they processed the
      statistical data and classified them incorrectly, thereby robbing them of
      much of their value. “Here is the weakest spot in our Zemstvo
      statistics, splendid as they are for the care and detail with which they
      are compiled,” wrote Lenin. (See present edition, Vol. 20.)
      Phenomena of the economic type were hidden under piles of figures

 

in the
      Zemstvo returns and reviews, while the essential differences between, and
      features of, various peasant groups that took shape as capitalism
      developed were lost in the columns of average figures.


Lenin made a
      comprehensive analysis of Zemstvo statistical data, and carefully studied
      and processed them. He made calculations of his own, drew up tables and
      statistical summaries, gave a Marxist analysis of the peasant-farm data
      secured, and grouped them scientifically. Lenin used the wealth of Zemstvo
      statistical material to expose the artificiality of Narodnik schemes and
      to draw a true picture of Russia’s economic development. He made
      extensive use of Zemstvo statistical material in his writings and
      especially in The Development of Capitalism in Russia.
    



[18]
Novorossia—the name given to the Southern steppe area of
      European Russia.—Lenin




[19]
      V. Y. Postnikov’s Peasant Farming in South Russia is
examined in detail by Lenin in one of his first works, New Economic
Trends in Peasant Life. (See present edition, Vol. 1.)
    



[20]
Allotment land—land left for the use of the peasants after
      the abolition of serfdom in Russia in 1861. Held by the peasant community,
      it was periodically redistributed among the peasants.—Lenin




[22]
      The full title of this source is Statistical Returns for Taurida
      Gubernia. Statistical Tables Concerning Economic Conditions in the
      Villages of Melitopol Uyezd. Appendix to Vol. I, Simferopol, 1885.
    



[21]
Yoking (supryaga)—cultivation of the land with
      draught animals belonging to different peasants yoked together in a team.
    



[23]
Volost–the lowest administrative territorial unit of the uyezd
      in pre-revolutionary Russia.
    

 
  


|

II. Zemstvo Statistics For Samara Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Samara Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: II. 
Zemstvo Statistics For Samara Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      II. Zemstvo Statistics For Samara Gubernia
    

      From the country’s southern outer area let us pass to the eastern
      region, to Samara Gubernia. Let us take Novouzensk Uyezd, the last one
      investigated; in the statistical report for this uyezd we find the most
      detailed classification of the peasants according to economic

      status.[1]

 Here are
      the general data on the groups of the peasantry (the data that follow
      cover 28,276 allotment-holding households, numbering 164,146 persons of
      both sexes, i.e., only the Russian population of the uyezd, without
      Germans or farmsteaders—householders who farm both on community land
      and on separate non-community farmsteads. The inclusion

 

      of the Germans and the farmsteaders would considerably heighten the
      picture of differentiation).
    




      The concentration of agricultural production turns out to be very
      considerable: the “community”

      capitalists (1/14 

      of the total households, namely, households with 10 and more draught
      animals) possess 36.5% of the area under crops—as much as do 75.3 %,
      the poor and middle peasantry put together! Here, too, as always, the
      “average” figure (15.9 dess. under crops per household) is
      absolutely fictitious and creates the illusion of universal
      prosperity. Let us examine other data on the economy of the various
      groups.
    





      Thus, in the bottom group there are very few independent peasant farmers;
      the poor peasants have no improved implements at all, while the middle
      peasantry have them in insignificant numbers. The concentration of animals
      is still greater than the concentration of area under crops; the well
      to-do peasants evidently combine capitalist livestock raising with their
      large-scale capitalist cropping. At the opposite pole we have
      “peasants” who ought to be classed as allotment-holding farm
      labourers and day labourers, for their main source of livelihood is the
      sale of their labour-power (as we shall see in a moment), and the
      landowners sometimes give one or two animals to their labourers to tie
      them down to their farms and to reduce wages.

    
      It goes without saying that the peasant groups differ not only as to the
      size of their farms, but also in their methods of farming: firstly, in the
      top group a very large proportion of the peasant farmers (40 to 60%) are
      supplied with improved implements (mainly iron ploughs, and also horse and
      steam threshers, winnowing machines, reapers, etc.). In the hands of 24.7%
      of the households, the top group, are concentrated 82.9% of the total
      improved implements; 38.2% of the households, the middle group, possess
      17% of the improved implements; 37.1%, the poor, possess 0.1% (7
      implements out of

5,724).[2]

 Secondly, the peasants with few horses are
      compelled by necessity to carry on “a different system of farming, a
      system of economic activity” entirely different from that of the
      peasants with many horses, as the compiler of Returns for Novouzensk Uyezd
      says (pp. 44-46). The well-to-do peasants “let their land rest
      . . . plough in the autumn

 

      . . . plough it again in the spring and sow after harrowing . . . roll the
      ploughed land when the soil has aired . . . plough twice for rye,”
      whereas the badly-off peasants “do not let their land rest but sow
      Russian wheat year after year . . . for wheat they plough in the spring
      once . . . for rye they provide neither fallow nor ploughed land, but
      merely break the surface before sowing . . . for wheat they plough in the
      late spring, and as a result the corn often does not come up . . . for rye
      they plough once, or merely break the surface and not at the proper time
      . . . they plough the same plot of land unwisely year after year, without
      allowing it to rest.” “And so on and so forth without
      end,” the compiler concludes this list. “The facts enumerated
      concerning the radical difference between the farming systems of the
      better- and the badly-off peasants result in grain of poor quality and bad
      harvests for the latter and comparatively better harvests for the
      former” (ibid.).

    
      But how could such a big bourgeoisie arise under the agricultural
      community system? The answer is supplied by the figures for land possessed
      and in use according to groups. The peasants in the section taken by us
      (76 households) have a total of 57,128 dess. of purchased land and 304,514
      dess. of rented land, of which 177,789 dess. are non-allotment land rented
      by 5,602 households; 47,494 dess. of the allotment land rented from other
      village communities are held by 3,129 households, and 79,231 dess. of the
      allotment land rented in their own village communities are held by 7,092
      households. The distribution of this enormous area of land, constituting
      more than 2/3 of the peasants’ total area under crops, is as follows
      (see Table on p. 89).
    





      We see here an enormous concentration of purchased and rented land. More
      than 9/10 of the total purchased land is in the hands of 1.8% of the
      households, the very richest. Of all the rented land, 69.7% is
      concentrated in the hands of peasant capitalists, and 86.6% is in the
      hands of the top group of the peasantry. A comparison of the figures on
      the renting and the leasing-out of allotment land clearly reveals the
      passage of the land into the hands of the peasant bourgeoisie. Here, too,
      the conversion of the land into a commodity leads to the cheapening of the
      wholesale purchase price of land (and, consequently, to profiteering in
      land). If we determine the price of one dessiatine of rented non-allotment
      land



 

      we get the following figures, counting from the bottom group to the top:
      3.94; 3.20; 2.90; 2.75; 2.57; 2.08; 1.78 rubles. To show what mistakes the
      Narodniks fall into by thus ignoring the concentration of rented land, let
      us quote by way of example the arguments of Mr. Karyshev in the well-known
      symposium The Influence of Harvests and Grain Prices on Certain
      Aspects of the Russian National Economy (St. Petersburg, 1897). When
      grain prices fall, with an improvement of the harvest, and renting prices
      rise, the entrepreneur renters, concludes Mr. Karyshev, have to reduce
      demand and hence the renting prices had been raised by the representatives
      of consumers’ economy (I, 288). The conclusion is absolutely
      arbitrary: it is quite possible that the peasant bourgeoisie raise renting
      prices in spite of a drop in grain prices, for an improvement in the
      harvest may compensate for the drop in prices. It is quite possible that
      the well-to-do peasants raise renting prices even when there is no such
      compensation, reducing the cost of production of grain by introducing
      machinery. We know that the employment of machines in agriculture is
      growing and that these machines are concentrated in the hands of the
      peasant bourgeoisie. Instead of studying the differentiation of the
      peasantry, Mr. Karyshev introduces arbitrary and incorrect premises about
      an average peasantry. That is why all the conclusions and deductions
      similarly arrived at by him in the publication quoted are of no value
      whatever.

    
      Having ascertained that diverse elements exist among the peasantry, we can
      now easily get clarity on the question of the home market. If the
      well-to-do peasants control about 2/3 of the total agricultural
      production, it is obvious that they must account for an incomparably
      larger share of the grain on sale. They produce grain for sale, whereas
      the badly-off peasants have to buy additional grain and sell their
      labour-power. Here are the

      data:[3]







      We suggest that the reader compare the arguments of our Narodniks with
      these data regarding the process of the formation of the home
      market. . . . “If the muzhik is prosperous, the factory flourishes,
      and vice versa” (V. V., Progressive Trends,
      p. 9). Mr. V. V. is evidently not in the least interested in the social
      form of the wealth which the “factory” needs and which is
      created only by the conversion of the product and the means of production,
      on the one hand, and of labour-power, on the other, into a
      commodity. Mr. N.–on, when speaking of the sale of grain, consoles
      himself with the thought that this grain is produced by the “muzhik
      farmer” (Sketches, p. 24), that by transporting this grain
      “the railways live at the expense of the muzhik”
      (p. 16). Really, are not these “community-member” capitalists
      “muzhiks”?  “Some day we shall have occasion to point
      out,” wrote Mr. N.–on in 1880, and reprinted it in 1893,
      “that in the localities where communal land tenure prevails,
      agriculture based on capitalist principles is almost completely absent
      (sic!!) and that it is possible only where communal ties have
      either been entirely broken or are breaking down”
      (p. 59). Mr. N.–on has never had this “occasion,” nor could
      he have had, for the facts point precisely to the development of
      capitalist agriculture among “community

      members”[4]

and

 

      to the complete adaptation of the notorious “communal ties” to
      the farms of big crop growers that employ labourers.

    
      The relationship between the peasant groups proves to be absolutely
      analogous in Nikolayevsk Uyezd (cited statistical returns, p. 826 and
      foll.; we leave out those living away from home and the landless). For
      example, 7.4%, the rich households (having 10 and more draught animals),
      comprising 13.7% of the population, concentrate in their hands 27.6% of
      the total livestock and 42.6% of the rented land, whereas 29%, the poor
      households (horseless and one-horse), comprising 19.7% of the population,
      have only 7.2% of the livestock and 3% of the rented land. Unfortunately,
      the tables for Nikolayevsk Uyezd, we repeat, are too scanty. To finish
      with Samara Gubernia, let us quote the following highly instructive
      description of the position of the peasantry from the Combined
      Returns for Samara Gubernia.

    
      “...The natural increase in the population, augmented by the
      Immigration of land-poor peasants from the western gubernias, in
      connection with the appearance in the sphere of agricultural production of
      money-grubbing speculators in land, has with every passing year
      complicated the forms of the renting of land, raised its worth and
      converted the land into a commodity which has so quickly and immensely
      enriched some and ruined many others. To illustrate the latter point, let
      us indicate the area cultivated by some of the southern merchant- and
      peasant-owned farms, where the tillage of 3,000 to 6,000 dessiatines is no
      rarity, while some practise the cultivation of 8-10-15 thousand
      dessiatines of land, renting several tens of thousands of state-owned
      land.

    
      “The existence and the growth of the agricultural (rural)
      proletariat in Samara Gubernia are to a considerable extent the product of
      recent times, with their increasing production of grain for sale, rise in
      renting prices, ploughing up of virgin and pasture land, clearing of
      forests, and so forth. The landless households throughout the gubernia
      number 21,624 in all, whereas the non-farming ones number 33,772 (of those
      households that have allotments), while the horseless and one-horse
      households together number 110,60 families, with a total of 600,000
      persons of both sexes, counting five and a fraction persons per family. We
      take the liberty of counting these, too, as proletarians, although legally
      they

 

      have a share of communal land; actually, these are day labourers,
      ploughmen, shepherds, reapers and similar workers on big farms who
      cultivate 1/2 to 1 dessiatine of their own allotments so as to feed their
      families who remain at home” (pp. 57-58).

    
      Thus, the investigators regard as proletarians not only the horseless
      peasants, but also those who have one horse. We note this important
      conclusion, which fully coincides with that of Mr. Postnikov (and with the
      data in the classified tables) and points to the real social-economic
      significance of the bottom group of the peasantry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Statistical Returns for Samara Gubernia, Vol. VII,
      Nolvousensk Uyezd, Samara, 1890. An analogous classification is
      also given for Nikolayevsk Uyezd (Vol. VI, Samara, 1889), but the data are
      much less detailed. The Combined Returns for Samara Gubernia
      (Vol. VIII, Pt. 1, Samara, 1892) contains only a classification according
      to size of allotment, the unsatisfactory nature of which we shall deal
      with later on.—Lenin

[2]
      It is interesting to note that from these very data
      Mr. V. V. (Progressive Trends in Peasant Farming, St. Petersburg,
      1892, p. 225) concluded that there was a movement by the “peasant
      masses” to replace obsolete implements by improved ones
      (p. 254). The method by which this absolutely false conclusion was reached
      is very simple: Mr. V. V. took the total figures from the Zemstvo returns,
      without troubling to look at the tables showing how the implements were
      distributed! The progress of the capitalist farmers (community members),
      who employ machines to cheapen the cost of producing commodity grain, is
      transformed by a stroke of the pen into the progress of the “peasant
      masses.” And Mr. V.V. did not hesitate to write “Although the
      machines are acquired by the well-to-do peasants; they are used by all
      (sic!!) the peasants” (221). Comment is superfluous.—Lenin

[3]
      We identify with the sale of labour-power what the statisticians call
      “agricultural industries” (local and away from the
      village). That by these “industries is meant employment as
      regular and day labourers is clear from the table of
      industries (Combined Returns for Samara Gubernia, Vol. VIII): of
      14,063 males engaged in “agricultural industries,” 13,297 are
      farm labourers and day labourers (including shepherds and ploughmen).—Lenin

[4]
      Novouzensk Uyezd, which we have taken as an illustration, reveals a
      particular “tenacity of the village community” (to use the
      terminology of Messrs. V. V. & Co.): from the table in the
      Combined Returns (p. 26) we find that in this uyezd 60% of the
      communities have redivided the land, whereas in the other uyezds only 11
      to 23% have done so (for the gubernia 13.8% of the communities).—Lenin
 

 
  

I. Zemstvo Statistics For Novorossia

|

III. Zemstvo Statistics For Saratov Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Saratov Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: III. Zemstvo 
Statistics For Saratov Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      III. Zemstvo Statistics For Saratov Gubernia
    

      We now pass to the central black-earth belt, to Saratov Gubernia. We take
      Kamyshin Uyezd, the only one for which a fairly complete classification of
      the peasants according to draught animals held is

available.[1]


      Here are the data for the whole uyezd (40,157 households, 263,135 persons
      of both sexes. Area under crops, 435,945 dessiatines, i.e., 10.8
      dessiatines per “average” household):
    






      Thus, here again we see the concentration of land under crops in the hands
      of the big crop growers: the well-to-do peasantry, constituting only a
      fifth of the households (and about a third of the

population),[2]

 hold more than half
      the total area under crops (53.3%), the size of this area clearly
      indicating the commercial character of the farming: an aver age of 27.6
      dess. per household. The well-to-do peasantry have also a considerable
      number of animals per household: 14.6 head (in terms of cattle, i.e.,
      counting 10 head of small domestic animals for one of cattle), and of the
      total number of peasants’ cattle in the uyezd, nearly 3/5 (56%) is
      concentrated in the hands of the peasant bourgeoisie. At the opposite pole
      in the countryside, we find the opposite state of affairs; the complete
      dispossession of the bottom group, the rural proletariat, who in our
      example comprise a little less than 1/2 of the households (nearly 1/3 of
      the population), but who have only 1/8 of the total area under crops, and
      even less (11.8%) of the total number of animals. These are mainly
      allotment-holding farm labourers, day labourers and industrial workers.

    
      Side by side with the concentration of crop areas and with the enhancement
      of the commercial character of agriculture there takes place its
      transformation into capitalist agriculture. We see the already familiar
      phenomenon: the sale of

 

      labour-power in the bottom groups and its purchase in the top ones.
    





      Here an important explanation is needed. P. N. Skvortsov has quite rightly
      noted in one of his articles that Zemstvo statistics attach far too
      “wide” a meaning to the term “industry” (or
      “employments”). In fact, all sorts of occupations
      engaged in by the peasants outside their allotments are assigned to the
      category of “industries”; factory owners and workers, owners
      of flour mills and of melon fields, day labourers, regular farm labourers;
      buyers-up, traders and unskilled labourers; lumber-dealers and lumbermen;
      building contractors and building workers; members of the liberal
      professions, clerks, beggars, etc., all these are
      “industrialists”! This barbarous misuse of words is a survival
      of the traditional—and we have the right even to say:
      official—view that the “allotment” is the
      “real,” “natural” occupation of the muzhik, while
      all other occupations are assigned indiscriminately to
      “outside” industries. Under serfdom this use of the word had

      its raison d’ etre, 

      but now it is a glaring
      anachronism. Such terminology is retained partly because it harmonises
      wonderfully with the fiction about an “average” peasantry and
      rules right out the possibility of studying the differentiation
      of the peasantry (particularly in those places where peasant
      “outside” occupations are numerous and varied.  Let us remind
      the reader that Kamyshin Uyezd is a noted centre of the sarpinka

      industry[11]).

      The

processing[3]

      of

 

      household returns on peasant farming will be unsatisfactory so long as
      peasant “industries” are not classified according to their
      economic types, so long as among the “industrialists”
      employers are not separated from wage-workers. This is
      the minimum number of economic types without discriminating between which
      economic statistics cannot be regarded as satisfactory. A more detailed
      classification is, of course, desirable; for example; proprietors
      employing wage-workers—proprietors not employing
      wage-workers—traders, buyers-up, shopkeepers, etc., artisans,
      meaning industrialists who work for customers, etc.

    
      Coming back to our table, let us observe that after all we had some right
      to consider “industries” as being the sale of labour-power,
      for it is usually wage-workers who predominate among peasant
      “industrialists.” If it were possible to single the
      wage-workers out of the latter, we would, of course, obtain an
      incomparably smaller percentage of “industrialists” in the top
      groups.

    
      As to the data regarding wage-workers, we must note here the absolutely
      mistaken character of Mr. Kharizomenov’s opinion that the
      “short-term hire[of workers] for reaping, mowing and day labouring,
      which is too widespread a phenomenon, cannot serve as a characteristic
      criterion of the strength or weakness of a farm” (p. 46 of
      “Introduction” to the Combined Returns). Theoretical
      considerations, the example of Western Europe, and the facts of Russia
      (dealt with below) compel us, on the contrary, to regard the hiring of day
      labourers as a very characteristic feature of the rural bourgeoisie.

    
      Lastly, as regards rented land, the data show, here too, the same
      concentration of it in the hands of the peasant bourgeoisie. Let us note
      that the combined tables of the Saratov statisticians do not show the
      number of peasants who rent land and lease it out, but only the total land
      rented and leased

      out[4];

we have, therefore,
      to determine the amount of land rented and leased per
      existing, and not per renting household.
    






      Thus we see, here too, that the wealthier the peasants the more
      they rent land, despite the fact that they are better provided
      with allotment land. Here too we see that the well-to-do are ousting the
      middle peasantry, and that the role of allotment land in peasant farming
      tends to diminish at both poles of the countryside.

    
      Let us examine in greater detail these data on land renting. With them are
      connected the very interesting and important investigations and arguments
      of Mr. Karyshev (quoted Results) and Mr. N.–on’s
      “corrections” to them.

    
      Mr. Karyshev devotes a special chapter (III) to “the dependence of
      land renting on the prosperity of the lessees.” The general
      conclusion he arrives at is that, “other things being
      equal, the struggle for rentable land tends to go in favour of the
      better-off” (p. 156). “The relatively more prosperous
      households . . . push the less prosperous ones into the background”
      (p. 154). We see, consequently, that the conclusion drawn from a general
      review of Zemstvo statistical data is the same as that to which we are led
      by the data we are studying. Moreover, a study of the dependence of the
      amount of rented land on the size of the allotment led Mr. Karyshev to the
      conclusion that classification according to allotment “obscures the
      meaning of the phenomenon that interests us” (p. 139): “land
      renting . . . is more resorted to by a) the categories that are
      worse provided with land, but by b) the groups within
      them that are better provided. Evidently, we have here two
      diametrically opposed influences, the confusion of which

 

      prevents the understanding of either” (ibid.). This
      conclusion follows naturally if we consistently adhere to the viewpoint
      that distinguishes the peasant groups according to economic
      strength; we have seen everywhere in our data that the well-to-do
      peasants grab rentable land, despite the fact that they are better
      provided with allotment land. It is clear that the degree of prosperity of
      the household is the determining factor in the renting of land,
      and that this factor merely undergoes a change but does not cease to be
      determining, with the change in the conditions of land allotment and
      renting. But, although Mr. Karyshev investigated the influence of
      “prosperity,” he did not adhere consistently to the viewpoint
      mentioned, and therefore characterised the phenomenon
      inaccurately, speaking of the direct connection between the
      degree to which the lessee is supplied with land and the renting of
      land. This is one point. Another point is that the one-sidedness of
      Mr. Karyshev’s investigation prevented him from appraising the full
      significance of the way rentable land is grabbed by the rich peasants. In
      his study of “non-allotment renting”, he limits himself to
      summarising the Zemstvo statistics on land renting, without taking account
      of the lessees’ own farms. Naturally, with such a method of study, a
      more formal one, the problem of the relation between land renting and the
      “prosperity,” of the commercial character of land renting
      could not be solved. Mr. Karyshev, for example, was in possession of the
      same data on Kamyshin Uyezd as we are, but he limited himself to
      reproducing absolute figures only of land renting (see Appendix No. 8,
      p. XXXVI) and to calculating the average amount of rented land per
      allotment holding household (text, p. 143). The concentration of land
      renting in the hands of the well-to-do peasants, its industrial character,
      its connection with land leasing by the bottom group of the peasantry,
      were all overlooked. Thus, Mr. Karyshev could not but see that the Zemstvo
      statistics refute the Narodnik notion of land renting and show that the
      poor are ousted by the well-to-do peasants; but he gave an inaccurate
      description of this phenomenon, did not study it from all sides and came
      into conflict with the data, repeating the old song about the
      “labour principle,” etc. But even the mere statement of the
      fact of economic discord and conflict among the peasantry seemed heresy to
      the Narodniks, and they proceeded

 

      to “correct” Mr. Karyshev in their own way. Here is how
      Mr. N.–on does it, “using,” as he says (p. 153, note),
      Mr. N. Kablukov’s arguments against Mr. Karyshev. In § IX of his
      Sketches, Mr. N.–on discusses land renting and the various forms
      it assumes. “When a peasant,” he says, “has sufficient
      land to enable him to obtain his livelihood by tilling his own, he does
      not rent any land” (152). Thus, Mr. N.–on flatly denies the
      existence of entrepreneur activity in peasant land renting and the
      grabbing of rentable land by rich peasants engaged in commercial crop
      growing. His proof?  Absolutely none: the theory of “people’s
      production” is not proved, but laid down as law. In answer to
      Mr. Karyshev, Mr. N.–on quotes a table from the Zemstvo abstract for
      Khvalynsk Uyezd showing that “the number of draught animals being
      equal, the smaller the allotment the more must this deficiency be
      compensated by renting”

(153),[5]

 and again, “if the peasants are placed in
      absolutely identical conditions as regards the possession of animals, and
      if they have sufficient workers in their households, then the smaller the
      allotment they have, the more the land they rent” (154). The reader
      will see that such “conclusions” are merely a quibble at
      Mr. Karyshev’s inaccurate formulation, that Mr. N.–on’s empty
      trifles simply obscure the issue of the connection between land renting
      and prosperity. Is it not self-evident that where an equal number of
      draught animals is possessed, the less land a household has, the more it
      rents?  That goes without saying, for it is the very prosperity whose
      differences are under discussion that is taken as
      equal. Mr. N.–on’s assertion that peasants with sufficient land do
      not rent land is not in any way proved by this, and his tables merely show
      that he does not understand the figures he quotes: by comparing the
      peasants as to amount of allotment land held, he brings out the more
      strikingly the role of “prosperity” and the grabbing of
      rentable land in connection with the leasing of land by the poor (leasing
      it to these same well-to-do peasants, of

course.)[6]

 Let the reader recall the data we have
      quoted on

 

      the distribution of rented land in Kamyshin Uyezd; imagine that we have
      singled out the peasants with “an equal number of draught
      animals” and, dividing them into categories according to allotment
      and into subdivisions according to the number of persons working, we
      declare that the less land a peasant has, the more he rents, etc. Does
      such a method result in the disappearance of the group of well-to-do
      peasants? Yet Mr. N.–on, with his empty phrases, has succeeded in
      bringing about its disappearance and has been enabled to repeat the old
      prejudices of Narodism.

    
      Mr. N.–on’s absolutely useless method of computing the land rented
      by peasants per household according to groups with 0, 1, 2, etc., persons
      working is repeated by Mr. L. Maress in the book The Influence of
      Harvests and Grain Prices, etc. (I, 34). Here is a little example of
      the “averages” boldly employed by Mr. Maress (as by the other
      contributors to this book, written from a biased Narodnik point of
      view). In Melitopol Uyezd, he argues, the amount of rented land per
      renting household is 1.6 dess. in households having no working males, 4.4
      dess. in households having one working male, 8.3 in households having two,
      and 14.0 in households having three (p. 34). And the conclusion is that
      there is an “approximately equal per-capita distribution of rented
      land”!! Mr. Maress did not think it necessary to examine the
      actual distribution of rented land according to groups of
      households of different economic strength, although he was in a position
      to learn this both from Mr. V. Postnikov’s book and from the Zemstvo
      abstracts. The “average” figure of 4.4 dess. of rented land
      per renting household in the group of households having one working male
      was obtained by adding together such figures as 4
      dess. in the group of households cultivating 5 to 10 dess. and with 2
      to 3 draught animals, and 38 dess. in the group of households
      cultivating over 50 dess. of land and with 4 and more draught
      animals. (See Returns for Melitopol Uyezd, p. D.10-11.) It is not
      surprising that by adding together the rich and the poor and
      dividing the total by the number of items added, one can obtain
      “equal distribution” wherever desired!

    
      Actually, however, in Melitopol Uyezd 21% of the households, the rich ones
      (those with 25 dess. and more under crops), comprising 29.5% of the
      peasant population, account—despite the fact that they are best
      provided with

 

      allotment and purchased land—for 66.3% of the total rented arable
      (Returns for Melitopol Uyezd, p. B. 190-194). On the other hand, 40% of
      the households, the poor ones (those with up to 10 dess. under crops),
      comprising 30.1 % of the peasant population, account—despite the
      fact that they are worst provided with allotment and purchased
      land—for 5.6% of the total rented arable. As can be seen, this
      closely resembles “equal per-capita distribution”!

    
      Mr. Maress bases all his calculations of peasant land-renting on the
      “assumption” that “the renting households are mainly in
      the two groups worst provided” (provided with allotment
      land); that “among the renting population there is equal per
      capita (sic!)  distribution of rented land”; and that
      “the renting of land enables the peasants to pass from the groups
      worst provided to those best provided” (34-35). We have already
      shown that all these “assumptions” of Mr. Maress directly
      contradict the facts. Actually, the very contrary is the case, as
      Mr. Maress could not but have noted, had he—in dealing with
      inequalities in economic life (p. 35)—taken the data for the
      classification of households according to economic indices (instead of
      according to allotment tenure), and not limited himself to the
      unfounded “assumption” of Narodnik prejudices.

    
      Let us now compare Kamyshin Uyezd with other uyezds in Saratov
      Gubernia. The ratios between the peasant groups are everywhere the same,
      as is shown by the following data for the four uyezds (Volsk, Kuznetsk,
      Balashov and Serdobsk) in which, as we have said, the middle and the
      well-to-do peasants are combined:
    






      Hence, we see everywhere the ousting of the poor by the prosperous
      peasants. But in Kamyshin Uyezd the well-to-do peasantry are more numerous
      and richer than in the other uyezds. Thus, in five uyezds of the gubernia
      (including the Kamyshin Uyezd) the households are distributed according to
      draught animals held as follows: with no draught animals—25.3%; with
      1 animal—25.5%; with 2—20%; with 3—10.8%; and with 4 and
      more—18.4%, whereas in Kamyshin Uyezd, as we have seen, the
      well-to-do group is larger, and the badly-off group somewhat
      smaller. Further, if we combine the middle and well-to-do peasantry, i.e.,
      if we take the households with 2 draught animals and more, we get the
      following data for the respective uyezds:
    





      This means that in Kamyshin Uyezd the prosperous peasants are richer. This
      uyezd is one of those with the greatest abundance of land: 7.1 dess. of
      allotment land per registered
  person,[12] 
  male, as against 5.4 dess. for the
      gubernia. Hence, the land-abundance of the “peasantry” merely
      means the greater numbers and greater wealth of the peasant bourgeoisie.

    
      In concluding this review of the data for Saratov Gubernia, we consider it
      necessary to deal with the classification of the peasant households. As
      the reader has probably observed, we reject a

limine[7]

any classification
      according to allotment and exclusively employ classification according to
      economic strength (draught animals, area under crops). The reasons for
      adopting this system must be given. Classification according

 

      to allotment is far more widespread in our Zemstvo statistics, and in its
      defence the two following, at first sight very convincing, arguments are
      usually

advanced.[8]

      It is said, firstly, that to study the life of the agricultural peasants
      it is natural and necessary to classify them according to land. This
      argument ignores a fundamental feature of Russian life, namely, the unfree
      character of allotment-land tenure, in that by force of law it bears an
      equalitarian character, and that the purchase and sale of allotment land
      is hindered in the extreme. The whole process of the differentiation of
      the agricultural peasantry is one of real life evading these legal
      bounds. In classifying the peasants according to allotment, we lump
      together the poor peasant who leases out land and the rich peasant who
      rents or buys land; the poor peasant who abandons the land and the rich
      peasant who “gathers” land; the poor peasant who runs his most
      wretched farm with an insignificant number of animals and the rich peasant
      who owns many animals, fertilises his soil, introduces improvements.,
      etc., etc. In other words, we lump together the rural proletarian and the
      members of the rural bourgeoisie. The “averages” thus obtained
      obscure the differentiation, and are therefore purely

      fictitious.[9]

 The
      combined tables of the Saratov

 

      statisticians described above enable us to demonstrate clearly the
      uselessness of classification according to allotment. Take, for example,
      the category of non-allotment peasants in Kamyshin Uyezd (see Combined
      Returns, p. 450 and foll., the Returns for Kamyshin Uyezd, Vol. XI,
      p. 174 and foll.). The compiler of the Combined Returns, in
      describing this category, says that the area under crops is “very
      negligible” (“Introduction”, p. 45), i.e., he assigns it
      to the category of the poor. Let us take the tables. The
      “average” area under crops in this category is 2.9 dess. per
      household. But see how this “average” was reached: by adding
      together the big crop growers (18 dess. per household in the group with 5
      and more draught animals; the households in this group constitute about
      1/8 of the whole category, but they possess about half of this
      category’s area under crops) and the poor, the horseless peasants,
      with 0.2 dess. per household! Take the households employing farm
      labourers. There are very few of them in this category—77 in all, or
      2.5%. But of these 77 there are 60 in the top group, in which the area
      cultivated is 18 dess. per household; and in this group the households
      employing farm labourers constitute 24.5%. Clearly, we obscure the
      differentiation of the peasantry, depict the propertyless peasants in a
      better light than they actually are (by adding the rich to them and
      striking averages), while, on the contrary, we depict the well-to-do
      peasants as being of lesser strength, because the category of peasants
      with large allotments includes, in addition to the majority, the well-off,
      also the badly-off (it is a known fact that even the large-allotment
      village communities always include indigent peasants). We are now clear,
      too, as to the incorrectness of the second argument in defence of
      classification according to allotment. It is argued that by such
      classification the indices of economic strength (number of animals, area
      under crops, etc.)  always show a regular increase according to the
      increase in the size of the allotment. That is an undoubted fact, for the
      allotment is one of the major factors of well-being. Where, consequently,
      the peasants are large-allotment holders there are always more members of
      the peasant bourgeoisie and, as a result, the “average”
      allotment figures for the whole category are raised. All this, however,
      gives no grounds whatever for

 

      inferring that a method combining the rural bourgeoisie with the rural
      proletariat is correct.

    
      We conclude: in systematising peasant household statistics one should not
      limit oneself to classification according to allotment. Economic
      statistics must necessarily take the scale and type of farm as
      the basis of classification. The indices for distinguishing these types
      should be taken in conformity with local conditions and forms of
      agriculture, while in dealing with extensive grain farming, one can limit
      oneself to classifying according to area under crops (or to the number of
      draught animals); under other conditions one must take account of the area
      under industrial crops, the technical processing of agricultural produce,
      the cultivation of root crops or of fodder grasses, dairy farming,
      vegetable growing, etc. When the peasantry combine agricultural and
      industrial occupations on a large scale, a combination of the two systems
      of classification is necessary, i.e., of classification according to the
      scale and type of agriculture, and of classification according to the
      scale and type of “industries.” The methods of summarising
      peasant household returns are not such a narrowly specific and second-rate
      problem as one might imagine at first sight. On the contrary, it will be
      no exaggeration to say that at the present time it is the basic problem of
      Zemstvo statistics. The completeness of household returns and the
      technique of collecting

them[10]

 have reached a high degree of perfection, but
      owing to unsatisfactory summarising, a vast amount of most valuable
      information is simply lost, and the investigator has at his disposal
      merely “average” figures (for village communities, volosts,
      categories of peasants, size of allotment, etc.). But these
      “averages,” as we have seen already, and shall see later, are
      often absolutely fictitious.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      For the other four uyezds of this gubernia the classification according to
      draught animals held merges the middle and well-to-do peasantry. See
      Combined Statistical Returns for Saratov Gubernia, Part 1,
      Saratov, 1888. B. Combined Tables for Saratov Gubernia

 

according to
      categories of peasants—The Saratov statisticians compiled their
      combined tables as follows: all the householders are divided into six
      categories according to size of allotment, each category is
      divided into six groups according to the number of draught
      animals, and each group is divided into four subdivisions
      according to the number of working males in the family. Summarised data
      are given only for the categories, so that we have to calculate
      those for the groups ourselves. We shall deal with the
      significance of this table later on.—Lenin

[2]
      Let us note that when classifying households according to economic
      strength, or to size of farm, we always get larger families among
      the well-to-do strata of the peasantry. This phenomenon points to the
      connection between the peasant bourgeoisie and large families, which
      receive a larger number of allotments; partly it shows the opposite: it
      indicates the lesser desire of the well-to-do peasantry to divide up the
      land. One should not, however, exaggerate the significance of large
      families among the well-to-do peasants, who, as our figures show, resort
      in the greatest measure to the employment of hired labour. The
      “family co-operation” of which our Narodniks are so fond of
      talking is thus the basis of capitalist co-operation.—Lenin

[3]
We say “processing”
      because the data on peasant industries collected in the house-to-house
      censuses are very comprehensive and detailed.—Lenin

[4]
The total amount of arable leased out in
      the uyezd is 61,639 dess., i.e., about  1/6 , of the aggregate
      allotment arable (377,305 dess.).—Lenin

[5]
      An exactly similar table is given by the statisticians for Kamyshin
      Uyezd. Statistical Returns for Saratov Gubernia, Vol. XI Kamyshin
      Uyezd, p. 249 and foll. We can just as well, therefore make use of the
      data for the uyezd we have taken.—Lenin

[6]
      That the data quoted by Mr. N.–on refute his conclusions has already been
      pointed to by Mr. P. Struve in his Critical Remarks.—Lenin

[7]
At once.—Ed.


[8]
      See, for example, the introductions to the Combined Returns for
Saratov Gubernia, to the Combined Returns for Samara Gubernia,
and to Evaluation Returns for four uyezds of Voronezh Gubernia,
and other Zemstvo statistical publications.—Lenin

[9]
      We take this rare opportunity of expressing our agreement with Mr. V. V.,
      who in his magazine articles of 1885 and subsequent years welcomed
      “the new type of Zemstvo statistical publications,” namely,
      the combined tables, which make it possible to classify household data not
      only according to allotment, but also according to economic
      strength. “The statistical data,” wrote Mr. V. V. at that
      time, “must be adapted to the groups themselves and not to such
      a conglomeration of the most diverse economic groups of peasants as the
      village or the village community” (V. V., “A New Type of
      Local Statistical Publication,” pp. 189 and 190 in Severny
      Vestnik [Northern Herald], 1885, No. 3. Quoted in the
      “Introduction” to the Combined Returns for Saratov
      Gubernia, p. 36). To our extreme regret in none of his later works has
      Mr. V. V. made any effort to glance at the data on the various groups of
      the peasantry, and, as we have seen, he has even ignored the factual part
      of the book by Mr. V. Postnikov, who was probably the first to attempt the
      arrangement of the data according to the various groups of the peasantry
      and not according to “conglomerations of the most diverse
      groups”. Why is this?—Lenin

[10]
      About the technique of Zemstvo censuses see, in addition to the
      above-mentioned publications., the article by Mr. Fortunatov in Vol. I of
      Results of Zemstvo Statistical Investigation. Specimens of
      household registration cards are reproduced in the
      “Introduction” to the Combined Returns for Samara
      Gubernia and to the Combined Returns for Saratov Gubernia,
      in the Statistical Returns for Orel Gubernia (Vol. II, Yelets
      Uyezd) and in Material for the Statistical Survey of Perm
      Gubernia, Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, Vol. IV. The Perm registration
      card is particularly comprehensive.—Lenin
 



[11]
Sarpinka—a thin striped or check cotton cloth; originally
      made in Sarepta.
    



[12]
      The registered males were those members of the male population of
      feudal Russia subject to the poll-tax (the peasantry and urban middle
      class were chiefly affected) and to this end were recorded in special
      censuses (so-called “registrations”). Such
      “registrations” took place in Russia from 1718 onwards; the
      tenth and last ”registration was made in 1857-1859.” In a
      number of districts redistribution of the land within the village
      communities took place on the basis of those recorded in the
      “registration” lists.
    

 
  

II. Zemstvo Statistics For Samara Gubernia

|

IV. Zemstvo Statistics For Perm Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Perm Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: IV. Zemstvo 
Statistics For Perm Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      IV. Zemstvo Statistics For Perm Gubernia
    

      In our review of Zemstvo statistics let us now turn to a gubernia where
      conditions are totally different: Perm Gubernia. Let us take Krasnoufimsk
      Uyezd, for which we have a household classification made according to
      scale of

farming.[1]

      Here are the general data regarding the agricultural part of the uyezd
      (23,574 households, 129,439 persons of both sexes).
    





      Hence, here too, notwithstanding the considerably smaller areas under
      crops, we find the same ratios between the groups, the same concentration
      of crop areas and animals in the hands of a small group of well-to-do
      peasants. The ratio between the land held and the land in actual economic
      use is the same as in the gubernias with which we are already

      familiar.[2]







      The same grabbing of rentable land by the well-to-do peasants, those
      already best provided; the same transfer of allotment land (by leasing)
      from the poor to the affluent peasantry; the same diminution of the role
      of allotment land, proceeding in two different directions, at both poles
      of the countryside. To enable the reader to get a more concrete picture of
      these processes, we give the data on land renting in greater detail:
    





      In the top groups of peasants (who, as we know, concentrate in their hands
      most of the rented land), land renting is consequently of an obviously
      industrial, entrepreneur character, despite the widespread view to the
      contrary of the Narodnik economists.

    


      Let us pass to the data on hired labour, which are particularly valuable
      as regards this uyezd owing to their completeness (specifically, data have
      been added on the hiring of day labourers):
    





      We see here a clear refutation of the view of the Saratov statisticians
      that the hiring of day labourers is not a characteristic index of a
      farm’s strength or weakness. On the contrary, it is a supremely
      characteristic index of the peasant bourgeoisie. In all forms of hiring by
      the day we observe that the percentage of peasants who hire labourers
      increases together with the increase in economic strength, despite the
      fact that the most affluent peasants are best provided with workers in
      their families. Here, too, family co-operation is the basis of capitalist
      co-operation. Further, we see that the number of farms hiring day
      labourers is 2 1/2 times (average for the uyezd) the number
      hiring seasonal workers—we take the hiring of day labourers for
      reaping; unfortunately, the statisticians did not give the total number of
      farms hiring day labourers, although this information was available. In
      the three top groups, of 7,679 households 2,190 employ farm labourers,
      while 4,017 households, i.e., the majority of the peasants in the
      well-to-do group, hire day labourers for reaping. Of course, the hiring of
      day labourers is by no means specific to Perm Gubernia, and if we have
      seen above that in the well-to-do

 

      peasant groups from 2 to 6 and 9 tenths of the total number of proprietors
      employ farm labourers, the direct conclusion is the following. The
      majority of the well-to-do peasant households employ hired labour
      in one form or another. The formation of a body of regular farm
      labourers and day labourers is an essential condition for the existence of
      the well-to-do peasantry. Lastly, it is extremely interesting to note
      that the ratio between the number of farms hiring day labourers and the
      number employing regular farm labourers diminishes from the bottom
      peasant groups to the top. In the bottom groups the number of farms
      hiring day labourers always exceeds, many times over, the number employing
      regular farm labourers. In the top groups, on the contrary, the number of
      farms employing regular farm labourers is sometimes even larger than the
      number hiring day labourers. This fact clearly points to the formation in
      the top groups of the peasantry of farms employing labourers, farms based
      on the regular employment of wage-labour; wage-labour is more evenly
      distributed over the seasons of the year, and it becomes possible to
      dispense with the more costly and more troublesome hiring of day
      labourers. Let us quote, incidentally, the returns on hired labour for
      Elabuga Uyezd, Vyatka Gubernia (the well-to-do peasants are here merged
      with the middle peasants).
    





      Assuming that every day labourer works one month (28 days), the number of
      day labourers will be three times the number of seasonal workers. Let us
      note in passing that in Vyatka Gubernia, too, we find the already familiar
      ratios

 

      between the groups as regards both the hiring of workers and the renting
      and leasing of land.

    
      Very interesting are the household data on the use of manure, cited by the
      Perm statisticians. Here is the result of an analysis of these data:
    





      Thus, here too, we see a profound difference in the systems and methods of
      farming employed by the poor and the affluent peasants. And this
      difference must exist everywhere, since the well-to-do peasants everywhere
      concentrate in their hands the greater part of the peasant-owned animals,
      and have more opportunities for expending-their labour on farm
      improvements. Therefore, if we learn, for example, that the post-Reform
      “peasantry” have at one and the same time created a group of
      horseless and cattleless households and “raised agricultural
      efficiency” by adopting the practice of manuring the soil (described
      in detail by Mr. V. V. in his Progressive Trends in Peasant
      Farming, pp. 123-160 and foll.), this quite clearly shows us that the
      “progressive trends” simply indicate the progress of the rural
      bourgeoisie. This is seen even more distinctly in the distribution of
      improved agricultural implements, data regarding which are also available
      in the Perm statistics. These data, however, have been collected not for
      the whole of the agricultural part of the uyezd, but only for its 3rd, 5th
      and 4th districts, comprising 15,076 households out of 23,574. The
      following improved implements are registered: winnowers 1,049,
      seed-sorters 225, threshers 354, totalling 1,628. They are distributed
      among the groups as follows:
    






      One more illustration of Mr. V. V.’s “Narodnik” thesis
      that improved implements are used by “all” peasants!

    
      The data on “industries” enable us this time to single out two
      main types of “industries,” indicating 1) the transformation
      of the peasantry into a rural bourgeoisie (ownership of commercial and
      industrial establishment), and 2) the transformation of the peasantry into
      a rural proletariat (sale of labour-power, the so-called
      “agricultural industries”}. The following table shows the
      distribution by groups of these diametrically opposite types of

      “industrialists”[3]:

    





      A comparison of these data with those showing the distribution of the area
      under crops and the hiring of workers once again shows that the
      differentiation of the peasantry creates a home market for capitalism.

    


      We see also how profoundly the facts are distorted when the most varied
      types of occupations are lumped together under the heading of
      “industries” or “employments,” when the
      “combination of agriculture with industries” is depicted (as,
      for example, by Messrs. V. V. and N.–on) as something uniform, identical
      in nature and precluding capitalism.

    
      Let us point in conclusion to the similarity of the data for Ekaterinburg
      Uyezd. If from the 59,709 households in the uyezd we subtract the landless
      (14,601 households), those having only meadow land (15,679 households),
      and those neglecting their allotments entirely (1,612 households), we get
      for the remaining 27,817 households the following data; the 20,000
      households that cultivate no land or cultivate little (up to 5 dess.) have
      an aggregate area under crops of 41,000 dess. out of 124,000 dess., i.e.,
      less than 1/3 . On the other hand, 2,859 well-to-do households (with over
      10 dess. under crops) have 49,751 dess. under crops, and 53,000 dess. of
      rented land out of a total of 67,000 dess. (including 47,000 dess. out of
      55,000 dess. of rented peasant land). The distribution of the two opposite
      types of “industries” and also of the households employing
      farm labourers in Ekaterinburg Uyezd is shown to be quite similar to the
      distribution of these indices of differentiation for Krasnoufimsk Uyezd.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Material for the Statistical Survey of Perm Gubernia,
Krasnoufimsk Uyezd, Vol. III: Tables, Kazan, 1894. For purposes
of comparison we shall quote later the main data for Ekaterinburg Uyezd,
for which the same classification is given. Statistical Returns for
Ekaterinburg Uyezd, Perm Gubernia. Published by the
Zemstvo of Ekaterinburg Uyezd, Ekaterinburg, 1891.—Lenin

[2]
      The total allotment-land held by these peasants (all groups) is 410,428
      dess., i.e., an “average” of 17.5 dess. per household. Then
      the peasants rent 53,882 dess. of arable and 597,180 dess. of meadow land,
      making a total of 651,062 dess. (households renting arable—8,903,
      and renting meadow land—9,167) and they lease out allotment
      land—arable—50,548 dess. (8,553 peasants) and meadow
      land—7,186 dess (2,180 peasants), making a total of 57,734 dess.—Lenin

[3]
      “Agricultural industries” are also singled out only for the
      last three districts. The commercial and industrial establishments total
      692, namely 132 water-mills, 16 oil-mills, 97 pitch and tar works, 283
      “smithies, etc” and 164 “shops, taverns, etc.”—Lenin
 

 
  

III. Zemstvo Statistics For Saratov Gubernia

|

V. Zemstvo Statistics For Orel Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Orel Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: V. Zemstvo 
Statistics For Orel Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation of 
the Peasantry




      V. Zemstvo Statistics For Orel Gubernia
    

      We have at our disposal two volumes of statistics, for the Yelets and
      Trubchevsk uyezds of this gubernia, which classify the peasant households
      according to the number of draught horses

owned.[1]

      Combining the two uyezds, we give the following joint data by groups.
    






      From this we see that the general relations between the groups are the
      same as those we have seen earlier (the concentration of purchased and
      rented land in the hands of the well to-do, the transfer of the land to
      them from the poor peasants, etc.). Quite similar, too, are the relations
      between the groups as regards hired labour, “industries,” and
      “progressive trends” in farming.
    





      And so, in Orel Gubernia also we see the differentiation of the peasantry
      into two directly opposite types: on the one hand, into a rural
      proletariat (abandonment of land and sale of labour-power), and, on the
      other, into a peasant bourgeoisie (purchase of land, renting on a
      considerable scale,

 

      especially of allotment land, improved methods of farming, hiring of
      regular farm labourers and day labourers, here omitted, and the combining
      of commercial and industrial enterprises with agriculture. The scale of
      farming by the peasants here, however, is generally much smaller than in
      the above-quoted cases; there are far fewer big crop growers, and the
      differentiation of the peasantry, to judge by these two uyezds, therefore
      seems weaker. We say “seems” on the following grounds:
      firstly, though we observe here that the “peasantry” turn more
      rapidly into a rural proletariat and produce hardly perceptible groups of
      rural bourgeois, we have, on the other hand, already seen examples of the
      reverse, where this latter pole of the countryside becomes particularly
      perceptible. Secondly, here the differentiation of the
      agricultural peasantry (we confine ourselves in this chapter to
      the agricultural peasantry) is obscured by the “industries,”
      the development of which is particularly extensive (40% of the
      families). And the “industrialists” here too include, besides
      a majority of wage-workers, a minority of merchants, buyers-up,
      entrepreneurs, proprietors, etc. Thirdly, here the differentiation of the
      peasantry is obscured because of the absence of data regarding the aspects
      of local agriculture that are most closely connected with the
      market. Commercial, market cultivation is not developed here to expand the
      crop areas to produce grain for sale but for the production of hemp. The
      largest number of commercial operations are bound up with this crop but
      the data of the tables given in the volume do not single out this
      particular aspect of agriculture among the various
      groups. “Hemp growing is the main source of the peasants’
      income” (that is, money income. Returns for Trubchevsk
      Uyezd, p. 5 of descriptions of villages, and many others), “the
      peasants devote their attention mainly to the cultivation of
      hemp. . . . All the manure . . . is used on the hemp fields”
      (ibid., 87), everywhere loans are contracted “on security
      of hemp,” and debts are paid with hemp (ibid.,
      passim). For the manuring of their hemp fields the well-to-do
      peasants buy manure from the poor (Returns for Orel Uyezd,
      Vol. VIII, Orel, 1895, pp. 91-105), hemp fields are leased out and rented
      in home and outside village communities (ibid., 260), and the
      processing of the hemp is done by part of the “industrial
      establishments” of whose concentration we have

 

      spoken. It is clear how incomplete is that picture of differentiation
      which gives no information about the main commercial product of local

      agriculture.[2]

 

Notes
 

[1]
Statistical Returns for Orel Gubernia, Vol. II, Moscow,
      1887. Yelets Uyezd, and Vol. III, Orel, 1887. Trubchevsk Uyezd. For the
      latter uyezd the data do not include those for the suburban village
      communities. We take joint data for the renting of land, combining the
      allotment and non-allotment rented land. We have determined the amount of
      leased land approximately, from the number of households leasing out the
      whole of their allotments. The figures obtained constitute the basis for
      determining the amount of land in use by each group (allotment + purchased
      land + rented land - land leased out).—Lenin

[2]
      The compiler of the returns for Orel Uyezd states (Table No.57) that the
      well-to-do peasants obtain nearly twice as much manure per head
      of cattle as do the poor (391 poods per head where there are 7.4 animals
      per household, as against 208 poods per head where there are 2.8 animals
      per household. And this conclusion was reached by classifying according to
      allotment, which obscures the real depth of differentiation). This is due
      to the fact that the poor are compelled to use straw and dung as fuel, to
      sell it, etc. Consequently, only the peasant bourgeoisie secure the
      “normal” quantity of manure (400 poods) per head of cattle. In
      this connection, too, Mr. V. V. might argue (as he does about the decline
      in horse possession) about “the restoration of the normal
      proportion” between the number of animals and the quantity of
      manure.—Lenin
 

 
  

IV. Zemstvo Statistics For Perm Gubernia

|

VI. Zemstvo Statistics For Voronezh Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Voronezh Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: VI. Zemstvo 
Statistics For Voronezh Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      VI. Zemstvo Statistics For Voronezh Gubernia
    

      The returns for Voronezh Gubernia are distinguished for their
      exceptionally complete information and abundance of classifications. In
      addition to the usual classification according to allotment, we have for
      several uyezds a classification according to draught animals, to persons
      working (working strength of family), to industries (not engaged in
      industries; engaged in industries: a—agricultural, b—mixed and
      c—commercial and industrial), to farm labourers (farms with members
      employed as farm labourers;—with no farm labourers and with no
      members employed as such;—households employing farm labourers). The
      last classification is given for the largest number of uyezds, and at
      first glance one might think that it is the most suitable for studying the
      differentiation of the peasantry. Actually, however, this is not the case:
      the group of farms providing farm labourers does not by any means embrace
      the whole of the rural proletariat, for it does not include farms
      providing day labourers, unskilled labourers, factory workers,
      builders’ labourers, navvies, domestic servants, etc. Farm labourers
      constitute only a part of the wage-workers provided by the
      “peasantry.” The group of farms that employ farm labourers is
      also very incomplete, for it does not include farms that hire day
      labourers. The neutral group (which neither provides nor employs farm
      labourers) lumps together in each uyezd tens of thousands of

 

      families, combining thousands of peasants who own no horses with thousands
      who own many, peasants who rent land and peasants who lease land,
      cultivators and non-cultivators, thousands of wage-workers and a minority
      of employers, etc. General “averages” for the entire neutral
      group are obtained, for example, by adding together landless households or
      those possessing 3 to 4 dess. per household (of allotment and purchased
      land in all) and households possessing 25, 50 and more dessiatines of
      allotment land and purchasing additionally tens and hundreds of
      dessiatines of land (Returns for Bobrov Uyezd, p. 336, Col. No. 148; for
      Novokhopersk Uyezd, p. 222)—by adding together households with 0.8
      to 2.7 animals per family and those with 12 to 21 animals
      (ibid.). Naturally, one cannot depict the differentiation of the
      peasantry with the aid of such “averages,” and so we have to
      take the classification according to draught animals as the one most
      closely approximating classification according to scale of farming. We
      have at our disposal four volumes of returns with this classification (for
      Zemlyansk, Zadonsk, Nizhnedevitsk and Korotoyak uyezds), and from these we
      must choose Zadonsk Uyezd, because no separate returns are given for the
      others on the purchase and leasing of land according to groups. Below we
      shall give combined data for all these four uyezds and the reader will see
      that the conclusions they yield are the same. Here are general data for
      the groups in Zadonsk Uyezd (15,704 households, 106,288 persons of both
      sexes, 135,656 dess. of allotment land, 2,882 dess. of purchased land,
      24,046 dess. of rented, and 6,482 dess. of land leased out).
    






      The relations between the groups are similar here to those in the
      gubernias and uyezds already mentioned (concentration of purchased and of
      rented land, the transfer of allotment land from the poor peasants, who
      lease out land, to the renting and affluent peasants, etc.); but here the
      significance of the affluent peasants is very much smaller. The extremely
      negligible scale of peasant farming even raises the question, and
      naturally so, of whether the local peasants do not belong to the
      “industrialists” rather than to the tillers of the soil. Here
      are data on the “industries,” first of all on their
      distribution according to groups:
    





      The distribution of improved implements and of the two opposite types of
      “industries” (the sale of labour-power and commercial and
      industrial enterprise) is the same as in the data examined above. The
      enormous percentage of households engaging in “industries,”
      the preponderance of grain-purchasing over grain-selling farms, the
      preponderance of money income from “industries” over money
      income from

  agriculture[1]—all
      this gives us grounds for regarding this
      uyezd as “industrial” rather than agricultural. Let us,
      however,

 

      see what sort of industries these are. The Evaluation Returns on
      Peasant Landownership in Zemlyansk, Zadonsk, Korotoyak
      and Nizhnedevitsk Uyezds (Voronezh,1889) contains a list of all the
      trades of the “industrialists,” working locally and away from
      home (222 trades in all), classified in groups according to allotment, and
      indicating the size of earnings in each trade. This list shows that the
      overwhelming majority of the peasant “industries” consist
      of work for hire. Of 24,134 “industrialists” in Zadonsk
      Uyezd, 14,135 are farm labourers, carters, shepherds and unskilled
      labourers, 1,813 are builders’ labourers, 298 are town, factory and
      other workers, 446 are engaged in private service, 301 are beggars,
      etc. In other words, the overwhelming majority of the
      “industrialists” are members of the rural proletariat,
      allotment-holding wage-workers, who sell their labour-power to
      rural and industrial

employers.[2]

Thus, if we take the ratio between the different
      groups of the peasantry in a given gubernia or a given uyezd, we find
      everywhere the typical features of differentiation, both in the
      land-abundant steppe gubernias with their relatively huge peasant crop
      areas, and in the most land-poor localities with their miniature peasant
      “farms”; despite the most profound

 

      difference in agrarian and agricultural conditions, the ratio between the
      top group of the peasantry and the bottom is everywhere the same. If,
      however, we compare the different localities, in some we see with
      particular clarity the formation of rural entrepreneurs from among the
      peasants and in others we see the formation of a rural proletariat. It
      goes without saying that in Russia, as in every other capitalist country,
      the latter aspect of the process of differentiation embraces an
      incomparably larger number of small cultivators (and very likely a larger
      number of localities) than the former.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      In the numerically small top group of the peasantry we see the opposite:
      the preponderance of grain sales over purchase, the receipt of money
      income mainly from the land, and a high percentage of peasants employing
      farm labourers, possessing improved implements, and owning commercial and
      industrial establishments. All the typical features of the peasant
      bourgeoisie are clearly visible here too (despite its small numbers); they
      are visible in the shape of the growth of commercial and capitalist
      agriculture.—Lenin

[2]
      To supplement what has been said above about the term
      “industries” as used in Zemstvo statistics, let us quote more
      detailed data on peasant industries in this locality. The Zemstvo
      statisticians have divided them into six categories: 1) Agricultural
      industries (59,277 persons out of a total of 92,889
      “industrialists” in the 4 uyezds). The overwhelming majority
      are wage-workers, but among them we also find proprietors (melon growers,
      vegetable growers, bee-keepers, perhaps some coachmen, etc.). 2) Artisans
      and handicraftsmen (20,784 persons) Among the genuine artisans (= those
      who work on orders for customers) are included very many
      wage-workers, particularly building workers, etc. Of the latter we have
      counted over 8,000 (the figure probably includes some proprietors: bakers,
      etc.). 3) Servants—1,737 persons. 4) Merchants and
      master-industrialists—7,104 persons. As we have said, it is
      particularly necessary to single out this category from the general mass
      of “industrialists.” 5) Liberal professions—2,881
      persons, including 1,090 beggars; in addition to these there are tramps,
      gendarmes, prostitutes, policemen, etc. 6) Town, factory and other
      workers—1,106 persons, local industrialists—71,112, migratory
      industrialists—21,777, males—85,255, females—7,634. The
      earnings are the most varied: for example, in Zadonsk Uyezd 8,580
      unskilled labourers earn 234,677 rubles, while 647 merchants and
      master-industrialists earn 71,799 rubles. One can imagine the confusion
      that results when all these most diverse “industries” are
      lumped together—but that is what is usually done by our Zemstvo
      statisticians and our Narodniks.—Lenin
 

 
  

V. Zemstvo Statistics For Orel Gubernia

|

VII. Zemstvo Statistics For Nizhni-Novgorod 
Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics for Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: VII. Zemstvo 
Statistics For Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      VII. Zemstvo Statistics For Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia
    

      For three uyezds of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia—the Knyaginin, Makaryev
      and Vasil uyezds—the Zemstvo house-to-house census returns have been
      reduced to one table, which divides the peasant farms (only
      allotment-holding and only of peasants living in their own villages) into
      five groups according to draught animals held (Material for the
      Evaluation of the Lands of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia. Economic
      Section. Vols. IV, IX and XII, Nizhni-Novgorod, 1888, 1889, 1890).

    
      Combining these three uyezds, we get the following data on the groups of
      households (in the three uyezds mentioned the data cover 52,260 households
      and 294,798 persons of both sexes. Allotment land—433,593 dess.,
      purchased—51,960 dess., rented—86,007 dess., counting all
      kinds of rented land, allotment and non-allotment, arable and meadow land;
      land leased out—19,274 dess.):
    






      Here too, consequently, we see that the well-to-do peasants, despite their
      better provision with allotment land (the percentage of allotment land in
      the top groups is larger than the percentage these groups constitute in
      the population), concentrate in their hands the purchased land (the
      well-to-do households, 9.6% of the total, have 46.2% of the purchased
      land, whereas the poor peasants, 2/3 of the households, have less than a
      quarter), as well as concentrate the rented land, and “gather”
      the allotment land leased by the poor. As a result of all this the
      actual distribution of the land in use by the
      “peasantry” is quite unlike the distribution of the allotment
      land. The horseless peasants have actually less land at their disposal
      than the allotment guaranteed them by law. The one-horse and two-horse
      peasants increase their holdings by only 10 to 30% (from 8.1 dess. to 9.4
      dess., and from 10.5 dess. to 13.8 dess.), whereas the well to-do peasants
      increase their holdings one and a half times to double. While the
      differences in the allotment land of the groups are negligible, the
      differences in the actual scale of cultivation are enormous, as
      can be seen from the above quoted data on animals and from the following
      data on area under crops:
    






tablishments[1]




      When assessed by the area under crops the differences between the groups
      are seen to be even greater than when assessed by the amount of land
      actually held and in use, to say nothing of the differences in the size of
      the

allotments.[2]

      This shows again and again the utter uselessness of classification by
      allotment holding, the “equality” of which has now become a
      legal fiction. The other columns of the table show how the
      “combination of agriculture with industry” is taking place
      among the peasantry: the well-to-do peasants combine commercial and
      capitalist agriculture (the high percentage of households employing farm
      labourers) with commercial and industrial undertakings, whereas the poor
      combine the sale of their labour-power (“outside employments”}
      with crop growing on an insignificant scale, that is, are converted into
      allotment-holding farm labourers and day labourers. Let us observe that
      the absence of a proportionate diminution in the percentage of the
      households with outside employments is explained by the extreme variety of
      these “employments” and “industries” of the
      Nizhni-Novgorod peasantry: besides agricultural workers, unskilled
      labourers, building and shipbuilding workers, etc., the industrialists
      here include a relatively very large number of
      “handicraftsmen,” owners of industrial workshops, merchants,
      buyers-up, etc. Obviously, the lumping together of
      “industrialists” of such diverse types distorts the data on
      “households with outside

earnings.”[3]

      On the question of the differences in cultivation by the various groups of
      peasants, let us observe that in the Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia,
      “manuring the land . . . is one of the chief conditions determining
      the degree of productivity” of the ploughlands (p. 79 of the Returns
      for Knyaginin Uyezd). The

 

      average rye yield grows in proportion to the increase in the amount of
      manure used: with 300 to 500 cart-loads of manure per 100 dess. of
      allotment land, the rye crop amounts to 47.1

meras[4]

 per dess.; with 1,500
      cart-loads and more, to 62.7 meras (ibid., p. 84). Clearly,
      therefore, the difference between the groups in the scale of their
      agricultural production should be still greater than the difference in
      area under crops, and the Nizhni-Novgorod statisticians made a big mistake
      in studying the produce of the peasant fields in general, and not of the
      fields of the poor and the well-to-do peasantry separately.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      For Knyaginin Uyezd only.—Lenin

[2]
      If we take the size of the allotment of the horseless peasants (per
      household) as l00, the allotments of the higher groups will be expressed
      by the figures: 159, 206, 259, 321. The corresponding figures for land
      actually held by each group will be as follows: 100, 214, 314, 477, 786;
      and for area under crops the figures for the groups will be: 100, 231,
      378, 568, 873.—Lenin

[3]
      On the “industries” of the Nizhni-Novgorod peasantry, see
      Mr. Plotnikov’s Handicraft Industries of Nizhni-Novgorod
      Gubernia (Nizhni-Novgorod, 1894), tables at the end of the book, also
      Zemstvo statistical returns, particularly for the Gorbatov and Semyonov
      uyezds.—Lenin

[4] 1 mera = 204 pounds—Ed.

 

 
  

VI. Zemstvo Statistics For Voronezh Gubernia

|

VIII. Review Of Zemstvo Statistics For 
Other Gubernias

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Review of Zemstvo Statistics for Other Gubernias




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: VIII. Review 
Of Zemstvo Statistics For Other Gubernias








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      VIII. Review Of Zemstvo Statistics For Other Gubernias
    

      As the reader will have observed, in studying the process of the
      differentiation of the peasantry we use exclusively Zemstvo house-to-house
      census statistics, if they cover more or less extensive areas, if they
      give sufficiently detailed information on the most important indices of
      differentiation, and if (which is particularly important) they have been
      processed in such a way as to make it possible to single out the various
      groups of peasants according to their economic strength. The data given
      above, relating to seven gubernias, exhaust the Zemstvo statistical
      material that answers these conditions and that we have been able to
      use. For the sake of completeness, let us now point briefly to the
      remaining, less complete, data of a similar kind (i.e., based on
      house-to-house censuses).

    
      For Demyansk Uyezd of Novgorod Gubernia we have a table on peasant farms
      grouped according to the number of horses (Material for Evaluating the
      Farmlands of Novgorod Gubernia, Demyansk Uyezd, Novgorod,
      1888). There is no information here on land renting and leasing (in
      dessiatines), but the data given reveal the complete similarity of the
      relations between the well-to-do and the indigent peasants in this
      gubernia, as compared with the other gubernias. Here too, for example, as
      we proceed from the bottom group to the top (from the horseless households
      to those with 3 and more horses), there is an increase in the percentage
      of farms with purchased and

 

      rented land, despite the fact that those with many horses have an amount
      of allotment land above the average. Households with 3 or more horses,
      10.7% of the total number of households and 16.1 % of the population,
      possess 18.3% of all allotment land, 43.4% of the purchased land, 26.2% of
      the rented land (to judge from the area under rye and oats on rented
      land), and 29.4% of the total “industrial buildings.” On the
      other hand 51.3 %, the horseless and one-horse households, constituting
      40.1% of the population, have only 33.2% of the allotment land, 13.8% of
      the purchased land, 20.8% of the rented land (in the sense indicated
      above), and 28.8% of the “industrial buildings.” In other
      words, here too the well-to-do peasants “gather” the land and
      combine commercial and industrial “trades” with agriculture,
      while the poor abandon the land and turn into wage-workers (the percentage
      of “persons engaged in industries” diminishes as we pass from
      the bottom group to the top—from 26.6 % among the horseless peasants
      to 7.8% among those having 3 and more horses). The incompleteness of these
      data compels us to omit them from the following summary of the material on
      the differentiation of the peasantry.

    
      For the same reason we omit the data on part of Kozelets Uyezd,
      Chernigov Gubernia (Material for Evaluating Farmlands,
      Compiled by the Chernigov Statistical Department of the Gubernia
      Zemstvo Board, Vol. V, Chernigov, 1882; the data on the number of
      draught animals are classified for 8,717 households of the black-earth
      district of the uyezd). The relationships between the groups are the same
      here too: 36.8% of the households, with no draught animals and
      constituting 28.8% of the population, have 21% of their own and allotment
      land and 7% of the rented land, but account for 63% of the total land let
      out on lease by these 8,717 households. On the other hand, 14.3% of the
      households, with 4 and more draught animals and constituting 17.3 % of the
      population, have 33.4% of their own and allotment land and 32.1% of the
      rented land, and account for only 7% of the land let out on
      lease. Unfortunately, the other households (owning 1 to 3 draught animals)
      are not subdivided into smaller groups.

    
      In Material for an Investigation of the Land-Usage and Domestic Life
of the Rural Population of Irkutsk and Yenisei

Gubernias there is a very interesting table (classification
      according to number of draught horses) of peasant and settler farms in
      four regions of Yenisei Gubernia (Vol. III, Irkutsk,1893, p.730 and
      foll.). It is very interesting to observe that the relationship between
      the well-to-do Siberian and the settler (and in this relationship the most
      ardent Narodnik would hardly dare to seek the famous community principle!)
      is essentially the same as that between our well-to-do village community
      members and their horseless and one-horse “brethren.” By
      combining the settlers and the peasant old-timers (such a combination is
      necessary because the former serve as labour-power for the latter), we get
      the familiar features of the top and bottom groups. Of the households,
      39.4%,the bottom groups (those with no horses, and with 1 or 2),
      constituting 24% of the population, have only 6.2% of the total arable and
      7.1% of the total animals, whereas 36.4% of the households, those with 5
      and more horses, constituting 51.2% of the population, have 73% of the
      arable and 74.5% of the total cattle. The latter groups (5 to 9,10 and
      more horses), cultivating 15 to 36 dess. per household, resort extensively
      to wage-labour (30 to 70 % of the farms employ wage-workers), whereas the
      bottom three groups, cultivating 0—0.2—3—5 dess. per
      household provide workers (20—35—59% of the
      farms). The data on the renting and leasing out of land are the only
      exception we have met to the rule (of the concentration of rented land in
      the hands of the well-to-do), and this is the sort of exception that
      proves the rule. The point is that in Siberia there are none of the
      conditions that created this rule, there is no compulsory and
      “equalitarian” allotment of land, there is no established
      private property in land. The well-to-do peasant neither purchases nor
      rents land, but appropriates it (at least that has been the case till
      now); the leasing out and the renting of land are rather of the character
      of neighbourly exchange, and that is why the group data on the renting and
      the leasing of land display no

      consistency.[1]




      For three uyezds of Poltava Gubernia we can determine approximately the
      way the area under crops is distributed (knowing the number of farms with
      different areas under crops—indicated in the statistical reports as
      “from—to” so many dessiatines—and multiplying the
      number of households in each division by the average area under crops
      within the limits indicated). We get the following data for 76,032
      households (villagers, excluding non-peasants) with 362,298 dess. under
      crops: 31,001 households (40.8%) cultivate no land or only up to 3
      dess. per household, to a total of 36,040 dess. under crops (9.9%); 19,017
      households (25%) cultivate over 6 dess. per household and have 209,195
      dess. under crops (57.8%). (See Economic Statistical Returns for
      Poltava Gubernia, Konstantinograd, Khorol and Piryatin

uyezds.)[5] The
      distribution of area under crops is very much the same as what we
      have seen in the case of Taurida Gubernia, despite the basically smaller
      areas under crops. Naturally, such an uneven distribution is possible only
      where the purchased and rented land is concentrated in the hands of a
      minority. We have no complete data on this, since the statistics do not
      classify households according to economic strength and must therefore
      confine ourselves to the following data on Konstantinograd Uyezd. In the
      chapter of farming by the rural social-estates (Chapter II, § 5,
      “Agriculture”} the compiler of the abstract states: “In
      general, if rented plots are divided into three categories: area per
      lessee of 1) up to 10 dess., 2) from 10 to 30 dess. and 3) over 30 dess.,
      the data for each will be as

follows:[2]







      For Kaluga Gubernia we have only the following very fragmentary and
      incomplete data on grain-sowing by 8,626 households (about 1/20 of the
      total number of peasant households in the

gubernia[3]).

    





      That is to say, 21.6% of the households, constituting 30.6% of the
      population, possess 36.6% of the draught horses, 45.1% of the area under
      crops and 43.1% of the gross income from crops. Clearly, these figures
      also point to the concentration of purchased and rented land in the hands
      of the well-to-do peasantry.

    
      For Tver Gubernia, despite the wealth of information in the statistical
      returns the house-to-house censuses have been very inadequately processed;
      there is no classification of households according to economic
      strength. This defect is used by Mr. Vikhlyayev in the Statistical
      Returns for Tver Gubernia (Vol. XIII, Part 2, Peasant
      Farming, Tver, 1897) to deny “differentiation” among the
      peasantry, to detect a drive towards “greater equality,” and
      to sing hymns in praise of “people’s production”
      (p. 312) and “natural economy.” Mr. Vikhlyayev enters into the
      most hazardous and unfounded

 

      arguments on stratification,” not only without citing any precise
      data on the peasant groups, but without even having made clear for himself
      the elementary truth that differentiation is taking place within the
      village community, and that therefore to talk about
      “stratification” and to classify exclusively
      according to village communities or to volosts is simply

ridiculous.[4]

 

Notes
 

[1]
      “The locally collected material giving facts on the leasing and
      renting of farmland was considered to be unworthy of especial treatment,
      because the phenomenon exists only in a rudimentary form isolated cases of
      leasing out and renting occur now and again, but are of an utterly
      fortuitous character and exercise no influence yet on the economic life of
      Yenisei Gubernia” (Material, Vol. IV, Part 1,
      p. V,

 

Introduction). Of 424,624 dess. of soft arable land belonging to the
      peasant old-timers of Yenisei Gubernia, 417,086 dess. are
      “appropriated family”

land.[6] Renting (2,686 dess.) nearly equals leasing 2,639
      dess.) and represents not even one per cent of the total land
      appropriated.—Lenin

[2]
Abstract,
      p. 142.—Lenin

[3]
Statistical Survey of Kaluga Gubernia for 1896,
      Kaluga, 1897, p. 43 and foll., 83, 113 of appendices.—Lenin

[4]
      As a curiosity, let us quote one sample, Mr. Vikhlyayev’s
      “general conclusion” reads: “The purchase of land by the
      peasants of Tver Gubernia tends to equalise the size of holdings”
      (p. 11). Proof?—If we take the groups of village
      communities according to size of allotment, we shall find that the
      small-allotment communities have a larger percentage of
      households with purchased land. Mr. Vikhlyayev does not even suspect that
      it is the well-to-do members of the small allotment communities
      who buy land! Of course, there is no need to examine such
      “conclusions” of an out-and-out Narodnik, the more so that
      Mr. Vikhlyayev’s boldness has embarrassed even the economists in his
      own camp. Mr. Karyshev, in Russkoye Bogatstvo[Russian
      Wealth] (1898, No. 8), although expressing his profound sympathy with
      the way Mr Vikhlyayev “orientates himself well among the problems
      with which the economy of the country is faced at the present time,”
      is yet compelled to admit that Mr. Vikhlyayev is too great an
      “optimist,” that his conclusions about the drive towards
      equality are “not very convincing,” that his data “tell
      us nothing,” and that his conclusions “are groundless.”—Lenin
 



[6]
Appropriated family land–land in Siberia appropriated mainly by
      rich peasants, who did what they pleased with it, making gifts of it,
      selling it, or handing it down in the family.
    



[5]
      For the notes containing preliminary calculations made by Lenin in the
      margins of these publications, see Lenin Miscellany XXXIII,
      pp. 144-150.
    

 
  

VII. Zemstvo Statistics For Nizhni-Novgorod 
Gubernia

|

IX. Summary Of The Above Zemstvo Statistics 
On The Differentiation Of The Peasantry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Summary of the Above Zemstvo Statistics on the Differentiation of the Peasantry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: IX. Summary 
Of The Above Zemstvo Statistics On The Differentiation Of The Peasantry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      IX. Summary Of The Above Zemstvo Statistics On The
      Differentiation Of The Peasantry
    

      In order to compare and combine the above-quoted data on the
      differentiation of the peasantry, we obviously cannot take absolute
      figures and put them into groups: for that we should require complete data
      for the whole group of districts and identical methods of
      classification. We can only compare and juxtapose the relation of the
      top to the bottom groups (as regards possession of land, animals,
      implements, etc.). The relationship expressed, for example, in the fact
      that 10% of the households have 30% of the area under crops, does away
      with the difference in the absolute figures and is therefore suitable for
      comparison with every similar relationship in any locality. But to make
      such a comparison we must single out in the other locality 10% of the
      households, too, neither more nor less. But the sizes of the groups in the
      different uyezds and gubernias are not equal. And

 

      so, we have to split up these groups so as to take in each
      locality an equal percentage of households. Let us agree to take
      20% of the households for the well-to-do peasants and 50% for the poor,
      i.e., let us form out of the top groups one of 20% of the households, and
      out of the bottom groups one of 50%. Let us illustrate this method by an
      example. Suppose we have five groups of the following proportions, from
      the bottom to the top: 30%, 25%, 20%, 15% and 10% of the households (S =
      100%). To form a bottom group, we take the first group and 4/5 of the
      second group (30 + (25x4) / 5 = 50%), and to form a top group
      we take the last group and 2/3 of the penultimate group (10 + (15x2) /
      3 = 20%), the percentages for area under crops, animals,
      implements, etc., being determined, of course, in the same way. That is to
      say, if the percentages for area under crops corresponding to the
      above-stated percentages of the households are as follows: 15%, 20%, 20%,
      21% and 24% (S = 100%), then our top group, 20% of the households, will
      account for (24 + (21x2) / 3 = 38%) of the area under crops,
      while our bottom group, 50% of the households, will account for (15 +
      (20x4) / 5 = 31%) of the area under crops. Obviously, in
      splitting up the groups in this manner, we do not change by one iota the
      actual relationship between the bottom and top strata of the

      peasantry.[1]

 This
      splitting up is necessary, firstly, because in this way, instead of
      4—5—6—7 different groups, we get three large groups with
      clearly defined

indices[2];

secondly, because only in this way are data on
      the differentiation of the peasantry in the most varied localities under
      the most varied conditions comparable.
    






      To judge the interrelation between the groups we take the following data,
      the most important on the question of differentiation: 1) number of
      households; 2) number of persons of both sexes of the peasant population;
      3) amount of allotment land; 4) purchased land; 5) rented land; 6) land
      leased out; 7) total land owned or in use by the group (allotment +
      purchased + rented - land leased out); 8) area under crops; 9) number of
      draught animals; 10) total number of animals; 11) number of households
      employing farm labourers; 12) number of households with
      employments (singling out as far as possible those forms of
      “employment” among which work for hire, sale of labour-power
      predominates); 13) commercial and industrial establishments and 14)
      improved agricultural implements. The items given in italics
      (“leasing of land” and “employments”} are of
      negative significance, since they indicate the decline of the
      farm, the ruin of the peasant and his conversion into a worker. All the
      other data are of positive significance, since they indicate the
      expansion of the farm and the conversion of the peasant into a rural
      entrepreneur.

    
      On all these points we compute for each group of farms the percentages of
      the total for the uyezd or for several uyezds of one gubernia, and then
      ascertain (by the method we have described) what percentage of the land,
      area under crops, animals, etc., falls to the 20% of the households of the
      top groups and to the 50% of the households of the bottom

groups.[3]

      We give a table drawn up in this manner covering the data for 21 uyezds in
      7 gubernias, with a total of 558,570 peasant farms and a population of
      3,523,418 persons of both sexes.
    














Notes to tables A and B


      1. For Taurida Gubernia the returns for land leased out concern only two
      uyezds: Berdyansk and Dnieper.

    
      2. For the same gubernia the category of improved implements includes
      mowers and reapers.

    
      3. For the two uyezds of Samara Gubernia instead of the percentage of land
      leased out the percentage of allotment-leasing non-farming households has
      been taken.

    
      4. For Orel Gubernia the amount of land leased out (and consequently of
      the total land in use) has been determined approximately. The same applies
      to the four uyezds of Voronezh Gubernia.

    
      5. For Orel Gubernia the returns for improved implements exist for only
      Yelets Uyezd.

    
      6. For Voronezh Gubernia, instead of the number of households with
      employments we have taken (for three uyezds: Zadonsk, Korotoyak and
      Nizhnedevitsk) the number of households providing farm labourers.

    
      7. For Voronezh Gubernia returns for improved implements exist for only
      two uyezds: Zemlyansk and Zadonsk.

    
      8. For Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, instead of households engaged in
      “industries” in general, we have taken the households engaging
      in outside employments.

    
      9. For some of the uyezds, instead of the number of commercial and
      industrial establishments, we have had to take the number of households
      with commercial and industrial establishments.

    
      10. Where the statistical returns give several columns of
      “employments” we have tried to single out those
      “employments” which most exactly indicate work for hire, the
      sale of labour-power.

    
      11. All rented land, as far as possible, has been taken—allotment
      and non-allotment, arable and meadow land.

    
      12. We would remind the reader that for Novouzensk Uyezd farm-stead
      peasants and Germans are excluded, for Krasnoufimsk Uyezd only the
      agricultural part of the uyezd has been taken for Ekaterinburg Uyezd
      landless peasants and those possessing a share in meadow land alone are
      excluded, for Trubchevsk Uyezd suburban village communities are excluded,
      for Knyaginin Uyezd the industrial village of Bolshoye Murashkino is
      excluded, etc. These exclusions are partly ours, and are partly due to the
      nature of the material. Obviously, therefore, the differentiation of the
      peasantry must actually be more pronounced than appears in our table and
      chart.
    

      To illustrate this combined table and to show clearly the complete
      similarity, of the relationship of the top to the bottom peasant groups in
      the most varied localities, we have drawn the following chart on which are
      plotted the percentages in the table. To the right of the column
      indicating the percentages of total households, runs a curve showing the
      positive indices of economic strength (enlargement of

 

      holding, increase in the number of animals, etc.), while to the left runs
      a curve showing the negative indices of economic strength (leasing out of
      land, sale of labour-power; these columns are shaded). The distance from
      the top horizontal line of the chart to each continuous curve shows the
      share of the well-to-do groups in the sum-total of peasant farming, while
      the distance from the bottom horizontal line to each broken curve shows
      the share of the poor groups in that sum total. Lastly, to give a clear
      picture of the general character of the combined data, we have plotted an
      “average” curve (arrived at by calculating arithmetical
      averages from the percentages indicated in the chart. To distinguish it
      from the others, this “average” curve is in red). This
      “average” curve indicates, so to speak, the typical
      differentiation of the Russian peasantry today.

    
      Now, in order to sum up the data on differentiation given above (§§
      I-VII), let us examine this chart column by column.

    
      The first column to the right of the one indicating the percentages of
      households shows the proportion of the population belonging to the top and
      the bottom groups. We see that everywhere the size of the families of the
      well-to-do peasantry is above the average and that of the poor below the
      average. We have already spoken of the significance of this fact. Let us
      add that it would be wrong to take as the unit for all comparisons the
      individual (as the Narodniks are fond of doing) and not the household, the
      family. While the expenditure of the well-to-do family grows because of
      the larger size of the family, the mass of expenditure, on the other hand,
      in the large-family household diminishes (on buildings, domestic effects,
      household needs, etc., etc.  The economic advantages of large families are
      particularly stressed by Engelhardt in his Letters From the

      Countryside,[8]
      and by Trirogov in his book, The Village Community and the Poll
      Tax, St. Petersburg, 1882). Therefore, to take the individual as the
      unit for comparisons, and to take no account of this diminution, means
      artificially and falsely to identify the condition of the
      “individual” in the large and in the small
      families. Incidentally, the chart clearly shows that the well-to-do group
      of peasants concentrate in their hands a far larger share of agricultural
      production than would follow from a calculation per head of population.
    


      The next column refers to allotment land. In its distribution we see the
      greatest degree of equality, as should be the case by virtue of the legal
      status of allotment land. But even here the process of the poor being
      ousted by the well-to-do peasants is beginning: everywhere we
      find that the top groups hold a somewhat larger share of the allotment
      land than the share they represent in the population, while the bottom
      groups hold a somewhat smaller one. The “village community”
      tends to serve the interests of the peasant bourgeoisie. Compared,
      however, with the actual land tenure the inequality in the
      distribution of allotment land is still quite insignificant. The
      distribution of allotment land does not (as is clearly evident from the
      chart) give any idea of the actual distribution of land and farm

      property.[4]

      Then comes the column for purchased land. In all cases this land is
      concentrated in the hands of the well-to-do: one fifth of the households
      have about 6 or 7 tenths of all peasant owned purchased land, whereas the
      poor peasants, constituting half the households, account for a maximum of
      15%! One can judge, therefore, the significance of the
      “Narodnik” fuss about enabling the “peasantry” to
      buy as much land as possible and as cheaply as possible.

    
      The next column is that for rented land. Here too we see everywhere the
      concentration of the land in the hands of the well-to-do (one-fifth of the
      households account for 5 to 8 tenths of the total rented land) who,
      moreover, rent land at cheaper rates, as we have seen above. This grabbing
      of rentable land by the peasant bourgeoisie clearly demonstrates that
      “peasant renting” carries an industrial character
      (the purchase of land for the purpose of selling the

product.)[5]

 In saying this,
      however, we do not at all deny

 

      the fact of land renting being due to want. On the contrary, the chart
      shows the entirely different character of renting by the poor,
      who cling to the land (half the households account for 1 to 2 tenths of
      the total rented land). There are peasants and peasants.

    
      The contradictory significance of land renting in “peasant
      farming” stands out particularly vividly when we compare the column
      on land renting with that on the leasing out of land (first
      column to the left, i.e., among the negative indices). Here we
      see the very opposite: the principal lessors of land are the bottom groups
      (half the households account for 7 to 8 tenths of the land leased), who
      strive to get rid of their allotments, which pass (despite legal
      prohibitions and restrictions) into the hands of employer farmers. Thus,
      when we are told that the “peasantry” rent land and that the
      “peasantry” lease out their land, we know that the first
      applies mainly to the peasant bourgeoisie and the second to the peasant
      proletariat.

    
      The relation of purchased, rented and leased land to the allotment
      determines also the actual land held by the groups (5th column to
      the right). In all cases we see that the actual distribution of the total
      land at the disposal of the peasants has nothing in common with the
      “equality” of the allotments. Of the households 20% account
      for 35% to 50% of the total land, while 50% account for 20% to 30%. In the
      distribution of area under crops (next column) the ousting of the
      bottom group by the top stands out in still greater relief, probably
      because the poor peasantry are

 

      often unable to make economic use of their land and abandon it. Both
      columns (total land held and area under crops) show that the purchase and
      the renting of land lead to a diminution of the share of the
      bottom groups in the general system of economy, i.e., to their being
      ousted by the well-to-do minority. The latter now play a dominant role in
      the peasant economy, concentrating in their hands almost as much of the
      area under crops as do all the rest of the peasants put together.

    
      The next two columns show the distribution of draught and other animals
      among the peasantry. The percentages of animals differ very slightly from
      those of area under crops; nor could it be otherwise, for the number of
      draught animals (and also of other animals) determines the area under
      crops, and in its turn is determined by it.

    
      The next column shows the share of the various groups of the peasantry in
      the total number of commercial and industrial establishments. One-fifth of
      the households (the well-to-do group) concentrate in their hands about
      half of these establishments, while half the households, the poor, account
      for about

1/5,[6]

      that is to say, the “industries” that express the conversion
      of the peasantry into a bourgeoisie are concentrated mainly in the hands
      of the most affluent cultivators. The well-to-do peasants, consequently,
      invest capital in agriculture (purchase and renting of land, hire of
      workers, improvement of implements, etc.), industrial establishments,
      commerce, and usury: merchant’s and entrepreneur capital are closely
      connected, and surrounding conditions determine which of these forms of
      capital becomes predominant.

    
      The data on households with “employments” (the first column to
      the left, among the negative indices) also characterise the
      “industries,” which are, however, of opposite significance,
      and mark the conversion of the peasant into a proletarian. These
      “industries” are concentrated in the hands of the poor (they
      constitute 50% of the households and account

 

      for 60% to 90% of the total households with employments), whereas the part
      played in them by the well-to-do groups is insignificant (it must not be
      forgotten that we have not been able to draw an exact line of demarcation
      between masters and workers in this category of
      “industrialists” either). One has only to compare the data on
      “employments” with the data on “commercial and
      industrial establishments” to see how utterly opposite are these two
      types of “industries,” and to realise what incredible
      confusion is created by the customary lumping together of these types.

    
Households employing farm labourers are in all cases concentrated
      in the group of well-to-do peasants (20% of the households account for 5
      to 7 tenths of the total number of farms employing labourers), who
      (despite their having larger families) cannot exist without a class of
      agricultural labourers to “supplement” them. Here we have a
      striking confirmation of the proposition expressed above: that to compare
      the number of farms employing labourers with the total number of peasant
      “farms” (including the “farms” of the agricultural
      labourers) is absurd. It is much more correct to compare the
      number of farms employing labourers with one-fifth of the peasant
      households, for the well-to-do minority account for about 3/5 , or even
      2/3 , of the total of such farms. The entrepreneur hiring of labourers
      from among the peasantry far exceeds hiring from necessity, that is,
      because of a shortage of workers in the family: the poor and
      small-family peasants, constituting 50% of the households,
      account for only about 1/10 of the total number of farms employing
      labourers (here too, incidentally, shopkeepers, industrialists, etc., who
      do not hire workers on account of necessity, are included among the poor).

    
      The last column, showing the distribution of improved implements, we could
      have headed “progressive trends in peasant farming,” following
      the example of Mr. V. V. The “fairest” distribution of these
      implements is that in Novouzensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, where the
      well-to-do households, constituting one-fifth of the total, have only 73
      out of 100 implements, whereas the poor, constituting half the households,
      have as many as three out of a hundred.
    


      Let us now compare the degree of peasant differentiation in the different
      localities. In the chart two types of localities stand out very clear]y in
      this regard: in Taurida, Samara, Saratov and Perm gubernias the
      differentiation of the agricultural peasantry is markedly more intense
      than in Orel, Voronezh and Nizhni-Novgorod gubernias. The curves of the
      first four gubernias in the run below the red average line, while those of
      the last three gubernias run above the average, i.e., show a smaller
      concentration of farming in the hands of the well-to-do minority. The
      localities of the first type are the most land-abundant and strictly
      agricultural (in Perm Gubernia the agricultural parts of the uyezds have
      been singled out), with extensive farming. With farming of this character
      the differentiation of the agricultural peasantry is easily noted and
      therefore clearly visible. Conversely, in the localities of the second
      type we see, on the one hand, a development of commercial agriculture such
      as is not noted in our data; for example, the sowing of hemp in Orel
      Gubernia. On the other hand, we see the tremendous significance of
      “industries,” both in the sense of work for hire (Zadonsk
      Uyezd, Voronezh Gubernia) and in the sense of non-agricultural occupations
      (Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia). The significance of both these circumstances
      for the question of the differentiation of the agricultural peasantry is
      enormous. Of the former (the different forms of commercial agriculture and
      agricultural progress in the different localities) we have already
      spoken. The significance of the latter (the role of the
      “industries”} is no less obvious. If in a given locality the
      bulk of the peasants are allotment-holding farm labourers, day labourers
      or wage-workers in industries, the differentiation of the agricultural
      peasantry will, of course, be marked very

feebly.[7]

 But to get a proper idea of the matter,
      these typical representatives of the rural proletariat must be compared
      with typical representatives of the peasant bourgeoisie. The
      allotment-holding Voronezh day labourer who goes

 

      south in search of odd jobs must be compared with the Taurida peasant who
      cultivates huge tracts of land. The Kaluga, Nizhni-Novgorod and Yaroslavl
      carpenter must be compared with the Yaroslavl or Moscow vegetable grower
      or peasant who keeps cows to sell the milk, etc. Similarly, if the bulk of
      the peasants in a locality are engaged in the manufacturing industries,
      their allotments providing them with only a small part of their means of
      livelihood, the data on the differentiation of the agricultural peasantry
      must be supplemented with data on the differentiation of those who engage
      in industries. In Chapter 5 we shall deal with this latter question; at
      the moment we are concerned only with the differentiation of the typically
      agricultural peasantry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      This method involves a slight error, as a consequence of which the
      differentiation appears to be less than it really is. Namely: to the top
      group are added average, and not the top members of the next group; to the
      bottom group are added average, and not the bottom members of the next
      group. Clearly the error becomes greater as the groups become larger and
      the number of groups smaller.—Lenin

[2]
      In the next section we shall see that the proportions of the groups we
      have taken come very close to those of the groups of the Russian peasantry
      as a whole, divided according to the number of horses per household.—Lenin

[3]
      We beg the reader not to forget that now we are dealing not with absolute
      figures, but with relationships between the top and the bottom strata of
      the peasantry. Therefore, for example, we now take the number of
      households employing farm labourers (or with “employments”} as
      percentages, not of the number of households in the given group, but of
      the total number of households employing farm labourers (or with
      “employments”} in the uyezd. In other words, what we now
      ascertain is not the extent to which each group employs wage-labour (or
      resorts to the sale of labour-power) but merely the relationships between
      the top and bottom groups as to the employment of wage-labour (or to
      participation in “employments,” in the sale of labour-power).—Lenin

[4]
      A single glance at the chart is sufficient to see how useless is
      classification according to allotment for a study of the differentiation
      of the peasantry.—Lenin

[5]
      Very curious in Mr. Karyshev’s book on the subject of rentings is
      the Conclusion (Chapter VI). After all his assertions about the absence of
      an industrial character in peasant renting, assertions devoid of
      foundation and contradicting Zemstvo statistics, Mr. Karyshev advances a
      “theory of rent” (borrowed from W. Roscher, etc ), in other
      words, serves up with a scientific sauce the desiderata of West-European
      capitalist farmers: “long leases” (“what is needed is
      . . . ‘ efficient’ use of the land by . . . the
      peasant,” p. 371) and moderate

 

rents that leave the tenant enough to
      cover wages, interest and the repayment of invested capital, and
      employer’s profit (373). And Mr. Karyshev is not in the least
      disturbed by the fact that this sort of theory” appears side by side
      with the usual Narodnik recipe: “avert” (398). In order to
      “avert” capitalist farming Mr. Karyshev advances the
      “theory” of capitalist farming! This sort of
      “conclusion” naturally crowned the basic contradiction in the
      book by Mr. Karyshev who, on the one hand, shares all the Narodnik
      prejudices and wholeheartedly sympathises with such classical
      theoreticians of the petty bourgeoisie as Sismondi (see Karyshev,
      Perpetual Hereditary Land Hire on the European Continent, Moscow,
      1885), but on the other hand, cannot avoid the admission that land renting
      gives an “impetus” (p. 396) to the differentiation of the
      peasantry, that the “better-off strata” oust the poorer, and
      that the development of agrarian relations leads precisely to agricultural
      wage-labour (p. 397)—Lenin

[6]
      Even this figure (about 1/5 of all the establishments) is, of course, an
      exaggeration, for the category of non-sowing and horseless and one-horse
      peasants lumps agricultural labourers, unskilled labourers, etc., together
      with non-cultivators (shopkeepers, artisans, etc.).—Lenin

[7]
      It is quite possible that in the central black-earth gubernias, like Orel,
      Voronezh and others, the differentiation of the peasantry is indeed much
      feebler, because of land-poverty, heavy taxation and the wide prevalence
      of the labour-service system: all these are circumstances retarding
      differentiation.—Lenin
 



[8]
      See A. N. Engelhardt, From the Countryside. 11
      Letters. 1872-1882, St. Petersburg, 1885. In 1937 this book was
      republished by the Publishing House for Social and Economic Literature,
      Moscow.
    

 
  

VIII. Review Of Zemstvo Statistics For 
Other Gubernias

|

X. Summary Of Zemstvo Statistics And Army-Horse 
Census Returns

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Summary of Zemstvo Statistics and Army-Horse Census Returns




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: X. Summary 
Of Zemstvo Statistics And Army-Horse Census Returns








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation of 
the Peasantry




      X. Summary Of Zemstvo Statistics And Army-Horse Census

      Returns[5]


      We have shown that the relation of the top to the bottom group of the
      peasantry bears the very features that characterise the relation of the
      rural bourgeoisie to the rural proletariat; that these relationships are
      remarkably similar in the most varied localities with the most varied
      conditions; that even their numerical expression (i.e., percentages of the
      groups in the total area under crops, number of animals, etc.) fluctuates
      within limits that, comparatively speaking, are very small. The question
      naturally arises: how far can these data on the relationships between the
      groups in the different localities be utilised for forming an idea of the
      groups into which the entire Russian peasantry is divided? In other words,
      what returns can enable us to judge the composition of, and the
      interrelation between, the top and the bottom groups of the entire Russian
      peasantry?

    
      There are very few of these returns, for no agricultural censuses are
      taken in Russia that register all the crop raising farms in the
      country. The only material by which we can judge into which economic
      groups our peasantry is divided is the combined Zemstvo statistics and the
      army horse census. returns showing the distribution of draught animals (or
      horses) among the peasant households. Meagre

 

      as this material is, one can nevertheless draw from it conclusions
      (certainly very general, approximate, aggregate) that are not without
      interest, particularly since the ratio of peasants with many horses to
      those with few has already been analysed and found to be remarkably
      similar in the most varied localities.

    
      According to the data in Mr. Blagoveshchensky’s Combined Zemstvo
      House-to-House Census Economic Returns (Vol. I, Peasant
      Farming, Moscow,

1893),[6] the Zemstvo censuses covered 123 uyezds in 22
      gubernias, having 2,983,733 peasant households and a population of
      17,996,317 persons of both sexes. But the data on the distribution of
      households according to draught animals are not everywhere of the same
      kind. Thus, in three gubernias we have to omit

11 uyezds[1]

where the households are classified not in
      four, but in only three groups. For the remaining 112 uyezds in 21
      gubernias we get the following combined figures covering nearly 2 1/2
      million households with a population of 15 million:
    





asessed[2]



      These data cover slightly less than one-fourth of the total peasant
      households in European Russia (the Combined Statistical Material on
      the Economic Position of the Rural Population in European Russia,
      published by the Chancellery

 

      of the Committee of Ministers, St. Petersburg, 1894, considers that in the
      50 gubernias of European Russia there are 11,223,962 households in the
      volosts, including 10,589,967 peasant households). For the whole of Russia
      we have data on the distribution of horses among the peasants in
      Statistics of the Russian Empire. XX. Army-Horse Census of
      1888 (St. Petersburg, 1891), and Statistics of the Russian
      Empire. XXXI. Army-Horse Census of 1891 (St. Petersburg,
      1894). The first publication contains an analysis of the data collected in
      1888 for 41 gubernias (including the 10 gubernias in the Kingdom of
      Poland), and the second for 18 gubernias in European Russia, plus the
      Caucasus, the Kalmyk Steppe and the Don Military Region.

    
      Singling out 49 gubernias in European Russia (the returns for Don Region
      are not complete) and combining the data for 1888 and 1891, we get the
      following picture of the distribution of the total number of horses
      belonging to the peasants in village communities.
    





      Thus, all over Russia the distribution of draught horses among the
      peasantry is very close to the “average” degree of
      differentiation we have depicted in our chart. Actually, the
      disintegration is even somewhat deeper: in the hands of 22 per cent of the
      households (2.2 million out of 10.2 million) are concentrated 9 1/2
      million horses out of 17 million, i.e., 56.3% of the total number. A vast
      mass of 2.8 million households has none at all, while 2.9 million

 

      one-horse households have only 17.2% of the total number of

horses.[3]






      Taking as our basis the above-established regularities in the relationship
      between the groups, we can now ascertain the real significance of these
      data. If a fifth of the households possesses a half of the total number of
      horses, one may unerringly conclude that no less (and probably more) than
      half the total peasant agricultural production is in their hands. Such a
      concentration of production is possible only where this well-to-do
      peasantry concentrates in its hands the major part of the purchased lands
      and of peasant-rented land, both non-allotment and allotment. It is this
      well-to-do minority who mainly do the buying and renting of land, despite
      the fact that in all probability they are best supplied with allotment
      land. While the “average” Russian peasant in the very best of
      times barely makes ends meet (and it is doubtful whether he does), the
      well-to-do minority, whose circumstances are considerably above the
      average, not only cover all their expenditure by independent farming, but
      also obtain a surplus. And this means that they are commodity producers,
      that they grow agricultural produce for sale. More, they turn into a rural
      bourgeoisie, combining with relatively large-scale crop farms commercial
      and industrial enterprises,—we have seen that it is precisely
      “industries” of this kind that are most typical of the Russian
      “enterprising” muzhik. Despite the fact that their families
      are the largest, that they have the largest number of family workers
      (these features have always been characteristic of the well-to-do
      peasantry, and the 1/5 of the households should account for a large share
      of the

 

      population, approximately 3/10 ), the well-to-do minority employ permanent
      farm labourers and day labourers on the biggest scale. Of the total number
      of Russian peasant farms that resort to the hiring of labourers, a
      considerable majority should be those of this well-to-do minority. We are
      justified in drawing this conclusion both on the basis of the preceding
      analysis and from a comparison between the proportion of the population
      represented by this group and the share it has of the total number of
      draught animals, and hence of the cultivated area, of farming in
      general. Lastly, only this well-to-do minority can take a steady part in
      the “progressive trends in peasant

farming.”[7] Such should be the
      relation between this minority and the rest of the peasantry; but it goes
      without saying that this relation assumes different forms and manifests
      itself in other ways depending on differences in agrarian conditions,
      systems of farming and forms of commercial

agriculture.[4]

 The main trends of
      peasant differentiation are one thing; the forms it assumes, depending on
      the different local conditions, are another.

    
      The position of the horseless and one-horse peasants is the very
      opposite. We have seen above that the Zemstvo statisticians put even the
      latter (to say nothing of the former) in the category of the rural
      proletariat. Thus, we hardly exaggerate in our approximate calculation,
      which places in the category of the rural proletariat all the horseless
      and up to 3/4 of the one-horse peasants (about half the total
      households). These peasants, who are worst provided with allotment land,
      often lease out their allotments because of lack of implements, seed,
      etc. Of the total peasant-rented and purchased land theirs are but
      miserable scraps. Their farms will never yield enough for subsistence, and
      their main source of livelihood is “industries” or
      “employments,” i.e., the sale of their labour-power. These are
      a class of wage-workers with allotments, permanent farm labourers, day
      labourers, unskilled labourers, building workers, etc., etc.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
5 uyezds in Saratov Gubernia, 5 in Samara Gubernia, and 1
      in Bessarabia Gubernia.—Lenin

[2]
      To horses are added oxen, calculated at a pair for one horse.—Lenin

[3]
      The way the distribution of horses among the peasantry has been changing
      latterly can be judged from the following data of the army horse census of
      1893-1894 (Statistics of the Russian Empire, XXXVII). In 38
      gubernias of European Russia there were in 1893-1894: 8,288,987 peasant
      households; of these, horseless were 2,641,754, or 31.9%;
      one-horse—31.4%; 2-horse—20.2%; 3-horse—8.7%; 4-horse
      and over—7.8%. The horses owned by the peasants numbered 11,560,358
      of which 22.5% belonged to the one-horse peasants, 28.9% to the 2-horse;
      18.8% to the 3-horse and 29.8% to those with many horses. Thus, 16.5% of
      the peasants, the well-to-do, owned 48.6% of the total number of horses.—Lenin

[4]
      It is quite possible, for example, that in dairy-farming districts it
      would be much more correct to classify according to the number of cows
      held and not according to the number of horses. Where market gardening
      prevails, neither index can be satisfactory, etc.—Lenin
 



[5]
Army-horse censuses—a register of the number of horses fit
      for army service in case of mobilisation, was, as a rule, taken in tsarist
      Russia every six years. The first census was taken in 1876 in 33 gubernias
      in the west of Russia. The second census was taken in 1882 and covered the
      whole of European Russia, the results being published in 1884 under the
      title Horse Census of 1882. In 1888 a census was taken in 41
      gubernias, and in 1891 in the remaining 18 gubernias and in the
      Caucasus. The examination of the data gathered was undertaken by the
      Central Statistical Committee, which published them in the abstracts:
      Statistics of the Russian Empire. XX. Army-Horse
      Census of 1888 (St. Petersburg, 1891) and Statistics of the
      Russian Empire. XXXI. Army-Horse Census of 1891
      (St. Petersburg 1894). The next census was taken in the years 1893-1894
      and covered 38 gubernias of European Russia, the results being published
      under the title Statistics of the Russian
      Empire. XXXVII. Army-Horse Census of 1893 and 1894
      (St. Petersburg, 1896). Data of the army-horse census for the years
      1899-1901, covering 43 gubernias of European Russia, one Caucasian
      gubernia and the Kalmyk steppe of the Astrakhan Gubernia made up Vol. LV
      of the Statistics of the Russian Empire (St. Petersburg,
      1902).


The army-horse censuses were investigations that covered all the
      peasant farms. In his book, Lenin utilised the census material when
      examining the process of the differentiation of the peasantry.
    



[6]
      Lenin made a detailed analysis of the material contained in
      Blagoveshchensky’s compilation in a special notebook and in the
      remarks he wrote in the margins. These have been published in Lenin
      Miscellany XXXIII, pp. 89-99.
    



[7]
      Lenin refers here to the title of the previously mentioned essay by the
      Liberal Narodnik, Vorontsov (V. V.), that appeared in 1892.
    

 
  

IX. Summary Of The Above Zemstvo Statistics 
On The Differentiation Of The Peasantry

|

XI. A Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses 
of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## A Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: XI. A 
Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      XI. A Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900
    

      The army-horse censuses of 1896 and 1899-1900 enable us now to compare the
      latest data with those quoted above.

    
      By combining the 5 southern gubernias (1896) with 43 of the rest
      (1899-1900), we get the following data for 48 gubernias of European
      Russia:
    





      For 1888-1891 we cited data for 49 gubernias. Of these, the latest data
      are lacking only for one, namely, Archangel Gubernia. Subtracting the
      figures for this gubernia from those given above, we get for the same 48
      gubernias in 1888-1891 the following picture:
    





      A comparison of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900 reveals the growing expropriation
      of the peasantry. The number of households increased by nearly 1
      million. The number of horses diminished, although very slightly. The
      number of horseless households increased with particular rapidity, and
      their percentage rose from 27.3 to 29.2. Instead of 5.6 million poor
      peasants (horseless and one-horse), we now have

 

6.6 million. The entire
      increase in the number of households has gone to enlarging the number of
      poor ones. The percentage of households rich in horses diminished. Instead
      of 2.2 million households with many horses, we have only 2 million. The
      number of middle and well-to-do households combined (with 2 and more
      horses) remained almost stationary (4,465,000 in 1888-1891 and 4,508,000
      in 1896 1900).

    
      Thus the conclusions to be drawn from these data are as follows.

    
      The increasing poverty and expropriation of the peasantry is beyond doubt.

    
      As for the relation of the top group of the peasantry to the bottom one,
      this remained almost unchanged. If, in the manner described above, we
      constitute the bottom groups of 50% of the households and the top groups
      of 20% of the households, we shall get the following: in 1888-1891 the
      poor, 50% of the households, had 13.7% of the horses. The rich, 20% of the
      households, had 52.6%. In 1896-1900 the poor, 50% of the households, also
      had 13.7% of the total peasant-owned horses, while the rich, 20% of the
      households, had 53.2% of the total number of horses. Consequently, the
      relationship between the groups remained almost unchanged.

    
      Lastly, the peasantry as a whole became poorer in horses. Both the number
      and the percentage of the many-horse households decreased. On the one
      hand, this evidently marks the decline of peasant farming generally in
      European Russia. On the other hand, one must not forget that the number of
      horses employed in agriculture in Russia is abnormally high for the area
      cultivated. It could not be other wise in a small-peasant country. The
      drop in the number of horses consequently represents to a certain degree
      “the restoration of the normal proportion between the number of
      draught animals and the amount of arable” among the peasant
      bourgeoisie (see Mr. V. V.’s arguments on this point above, in
      Chapter II, § 1).

    
      It will be appropriate here to touch on the arguments on this question in
      the latest works of Mr. Vikhlyayev (“Sketches of Russian
      Agricultural Reality,” St. Petersburg, published by the magazine
      Khozyain[Farmer]) and of

 

Mr. Chernenkov (A
      Characterisation of Peasant Farming, Part I, Moscow, 1905). They were
      so carried away by the diversity of the figures on the distribution of
      horses among the peasantry that they turned economic analysis into a
      statistical exercise. Instead of studying the types of peasant farm (day
      labourer, middle peasant, entrepreneur), they make a study, like amateurs,
      of endless columns of figures, just as though they have set out to
      astonish the world by their arithmetical zeal.

    
      Only thanks to such play with figures was Mr. Chernenkov able to fling the
      objection at me that I am “prejudiced” in interpreting
      “differentiation” as a new (and not old) and for some reason
      completely capitalist phenomenon. Mr. Chernenkov was, of course, free to
      think that I was drawing conclusions from statistics and forgetting
      economics!—that I was proving something from a mere change in the
      number and the distribution of horses! To view intelligently the
      differentiation of the peasantry, one must take the picture as a whole:
      the renting of land, the purchase of land, machines, outside employments,
      the growth of commercial agriculture, and wage-labour. Or maybe
      Mr. Chernenkov considers these also are neither “new” nor
      “capitalist” phenomena?
    

 
  

X. Summary Of Zemstvo Statistics And Army-Horse 
Census Returns

|

XII. Zemstvo Statistics On Peasant Budgets

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Zemstvo Statistics on Peasant Budgets




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: XII. Zemstvo 
Statistics On Peasant Budgets








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      XII. Zemstvo Statistics On Peasant Budgets
    

      To finish with the problem of the differentiation of the peasantry, let us
      examine it from yet another aspect—that of the highly specific data
      of peasant budgets. We shall thus see clearly how profound is the
      difference between the types of peasantry under discussion.

    
      In the appendix to Evaluation Returns on Peasant Landownership in
Zemlyansk, Zadonsk, Korotoyak and Nizhnedevitsk
Uyezds (Voronezh, 1889) there are “statistics on the
composition and budgets of typical farms,” which are distinguished
for their extraordinary

completeness.[1]

 Of the

 

      67 budgets we leave out one, as being quite incomplete (budget No. 14 for
      Korotoyak Uyezd), and divide the rest into six groups according to draught
      animals, as follows: a—with no hoses; b—with
      1 horse; c—with 2 horses; d—with 3 horses;
      e—with 4 horses and f—with 5 horses and more
      (we shall designate the groups only by these letters a to
      f). True, classification along these lines is not quite suitable
      for this locality (in view of the enormous significance of
      “industries” in the economy of both the bottom groups and the
      top), but we have to take it for the sake of comparing the budget data
      with the above-examined house-to-house census data. Such a comparison can
      only be made by dividing the “peasantry” into groups, whereas
      general and all-round “averages” are purely fictitious, as we
      have seen and shall see further

on.[2]

 Let us note here, incidentally, the interesting
      phenomenon that “average” budget figures nearly always
      characterise the farm of above average type, i.e., they picture the facts
      in a better light than they actually

are.[3]

 This happens, probably, because the very term
      “budget” presupposes a farm that is balanced to at least a
      minimum degree, a kind that is not easily found among the poor. To
      illustrate this let us compare the budget and other data of the
      households, classified according to draught animals held.
    






      This makes it clear that the budget figures can only be used by striking
      the average for each separate group of peasants. This is what we have done
      with the data mentioned. We give them under three headings: (A) general
      budget results; (B) characterisation of crop farming; and (C)
      characterisation of the standard of living.

    
      (A) The general data regarding the magnitude of expenditure and income are
      as follows:
    





      Thus, the sizes of the budgets of the different groups vary enormously;
      even if we leave aside the extreme groups, the

 

      budget in e is over five times that in b, whereas the
      size of the family in e is less than three times that in
      b.

    
      Let us examine the distribution of

expenditures[4]:

    





      It is sufficient to glance at the farm expenditure as compared with the
      total expenditure for each group to see that here we have both
      proletarians and proprietors: in group a the farm expenditure is
      only 14% of the total expenditure, whereas in group f it is
      61%. The differences in the absolute figures of farm expenditure go
      without saying. Such expenditure is negligible in the case not only of the
      horseless but also of the one-horse peasant, and the one-horse
      “peasant” is much closer to the ordinary type (in capitalist
      countries) of allotment-holding farm labourer and day labourer. Let us
      also note the very considerable differences in the percentage of
      expenditure on food (a’s nearly double f
      ’s); as we know, a big percentage is evidence of a low standard
      of living and is what most sharply differentiates the budget of the
      proprietor from that of the worker.
    


      Now let us take the items of

income [5]:

    






expenditure[28]



      Thus, income from “industries” exceeds the gross income from
      agriculture in the two extreme groups: the proletarian horseless peasant,
      and the rural entrepreneur. The “personal industries” of the
      bottom peasant groups consist, of course, mainly of work for hire, while
      income from the leasing of land is an important item in the
      “miscellaneous incomes.” The group of “independent
      farmers” even includes those whose income from the leasing of land
      is slightly less, and sometimes even more, than the gross income from
      agriculture. For example, in the case of one horseless peasant, the gross
      income from agriculture is 61.9 rubles, and from the leasing of land 40
      rubles; in the case of another, the income from agriculture is 31.9 rubles
      and from the leasing of land 40 rubles. It must not be forgotten,
      furthermore, that the income from the leasing of land and from farm
      labouring goes entirely to cover the personal needs of the
      “peasant,” while from the gross agricultural income we must
      deduct expenditure on the conduct of the farm. After making this
      deduction, we shall find that the net income of the

 

      horseless peasant from agriculture is 41.99 rubles, and from
      “industries” 59.04 rubles, and in the case of the one-horse
      peasant, 69.37 and 49.22 rubles. The mere juxtaposition of these figures
      shows that we have before us types of agricultural labourers with
      allotments which cover part of the subsistence expenditure (and because of
      this reduce wages). To confuse such types of peasants with
      proprietors (agriculturists and industrialists) means blatantly
      to disregard all the requirements of scientific research.

    
      At the other pole of the countryside we see just such proprietors
      as combine with independent crop farming commercial and industrial
      operations which yield an income that is considerable (under the given
      standard of living) and amounts to several hundred rubles. The utter
      indefiniteness of the heading “personal industries” conceals
      the differences between the bottom and the top groups in this respect, but
      the very size of the incomes from these “personal industries”
      reveals the extent of this difference (let us remind the reader that in
      the Voronezh statistics the category “personal industries” may
      include begging, agricultural labouring, service as steward, manager,
      etc., etc.).

    
      As regards the size of net income, the horseless and one-horse peasants
      again stand out very sharply, with their most miserable
      “balances” (1 to 2 rubles) and even deficits on the money
      side. The resources of these peasants are no larger, if not smaller, than
      those of wage-workers. Only beginning with the 2-horse peasants do we see
      at least some net incomes and balances of a few dozen rubles (without
      which there cannot be the slightest question of proper farming). Among the
      well-to-do peasantry net incomes reach sums (120 to 170 rubles) that raise
      them well above the general level of the Russian working

class.[6]




      Naturally, the combining of workers and employers in one category and the
      striking of an “average” budget provide a picture of
      “moderate sufficiency” and of a “moderate” net
      income: income 491 rubles, expenditure 443 rubles, balance 48 rubles,
      including 18 rubles in cash. But that sort of average is absolutely
      fictitious. It simply conceals the utter poverty of the mass of peasants
      in the bottom groups (a and b, i.e., 30 budgets out of
      66), who with their trivial incomes (120 to 180 rubles per family
      gross income) are unable to make ends meet and live mainly by
      regular farm labouring and day labouring.

    
      An exact calculation of income and expenditure in cash and kind enables us
      to determine the relation of the differentiation of the peasantry to the
      market, for which only cash income and expenditure are
      important. The proportion of the cash part of the budget to the total
      budget in the various groups is as follows:
    





      We see, consequently, that the percentage of the cash income and
      expenditure increases (expenditure with particular regularity) from
      the middle groups to the extreme ones. The farming is of the most
      sharply expressed commercial character in the case of the peasant with no
      horses and of the one with many. This means that both live mainly by
      selling commodities, except that in the one instance the commodity

 

      is labour-power, while in the other it is goods produced for sale, with
      (as we shall see) a considerable employment of wage-labour, i.e., a
      product that assumes the form of capital. In other words, these budgets
      also show that the differentiation of the peasantry creates a home
      market for capitalism by converting the peasant into a farm labourer,
      on the one hand, and into a small-commodity producer, a petty bourgeois,
      on the other.

    
      Another, and no less important, deduction from these data, is that in
      all the peasant groups farming has to a very large extent become
      commercial, has become dependent upon the market: in no case does the
      cash part of income or expenditure fall below 40%. And this percentage
      must be regarded as a high one, for we are discussing the gross incomes of
      small agriculturists, in which even the maintenance of cattle is included,
      i.e., straw, bran,

etc.[7]

 Evidently, even the peasantry in the central
      black-earth belt (where money economy is, on the whole, more feebly
      developed than in the industrial belt, or in the outlying steppe regions)
      cannot exist at all without buying and selling and are already completely
      dependent on the market, on the power of money. It is needless to
      say how tremendously important this fact is, and how grave the error our
      Narodniks commit when they try to hush it

up,[8]

 being carried away by their sympathies
      for the natural economy which has passed out of existence never to
      return. In modern society it is impossible to exist without selling, and
      anything that retards the development of commodity production merely
      results in a worsening of the conditions of the producers. “The
      disadvantages of the capitalist mode of production,” says Marx,
      speaking of the peasant, “. . . coincide here therefore with the
      disadvantages occasioned by the imperfect development of the capitalist
      mode of production. The peasant turns merchant and industrialist without
      the

 

      conditions enabling him to produce his products as commodities”
      (Das Kapital, III, 2, 346. Russ. trans.,

p. 671).[29]

      Let us observe that the budget data utterly refute the view, still fairly
      widespread, that taxes play an important part in the development of
      commodity production. Undoubtedly, quit-rents and taxes were at one time
      an important factor in the development of exchange, but at the present
      time commodity economy has become firmly established, and the
      indicated importance of taxes is becoming altogether secondary. A
      comparison of the expenditure on taxes and duties with the peasants’
      total cash expenditure shows a ratio of 15.8% (for the respective groups
      it is: a—24.8%; b—21.9%;
      c—19.3%; d—18.8%; e—15.4% and
      f—9.0%). Hence, the maximum expenditure on taxes is one
      third of the remaining cash expenditure unavoidably incurred by the
      peasant under the present conditions of social economy. If, however, we do
      not take the role of taxes in the development of exchange, but take them
      relative to the income, we shall see that it is an excessively high
      one. How heavily the traditions of the pre-Reform epoch weigh down upon
      the peasant of today is seen most strikingly in the existence of taxes
      which absorb one-seventh of the gross expenditure of the small farmer, or
      even of the allotment-holding farm labourer. Moreover, the distribution of
      taxes within the village community is astonishingly uneven: the better off
      the peasant, the smaller the part of his total expenditure that goes in
      taxes. The horseless peasant pays in proportion to his income nearly three
      times as much as the peasant owning many horses (see above, table on
      distribution of expenditure). We speak of the distribution of taxes within
      the village community, because if we calculate the amount of taxes and
      duties per dessiatine of allotment land, it will be found to be nearly
      uniform. After all that has been stated, this unevenness should not
      astonish us; it is inevitable in our village community, so long as the
      village community retains its compulsory, feudal character. As we know,
      the peasants share all taxes according to land held: share of taxes and
      share of land merge in their minds in the one concept “soul,”
      or

      person.[9]

 As

 

      we have seen, however, the differentiation of the peasantry leads to a
      diminution of the role of allotment land at both poles of the contemporary
      countryside. Naturally, under such conditions the distribution of taxes
      according to allotment land held (which is inseparably connected with the
      compulsory nature of the village community) leads to the shifting of the
      tax burden from the well-to-do peasants to the poor.  The village
      community (i.e., collective

responsibility[30] with no right to refuse land) becomes
      more and more harmful to the peasant

poor.[10]

      (B) Passing to the characterisation of peasant farming, let us start by
      citing general data on the farms:
    






      From this table it is evident that the relationship existing between the
      groups in regard to the leasing out and the renting of land, size of
      families and area under crops, hiring of farm labourers, etc., is
      identical with that shown by the budget data and the above-examined mass
      data. But that is not all: the absolute figures on the economy of each
      group also prove to be very close to the data for whole uyezds. Here is a
      comparison of the budget and above examined data:
    






household[11]


      Thus, the position of the horseless and one-horse peasants in all the
      localities indicated is almost identical, so that the budget data may be
      regarded as sufficiently typical.

    
      We cite data on the property and implements of the peasant farms in the
      different groups.
    






      This table graphically illustrates the difference in the extent to which
      the various groups are provided with implements and livestock, a point we
      mentioned above on the basis of the mass data. We see here the completely
      different degree to which the various groups hold property, this
      difference being such that even the horses of the poor peasant are very
      different from those of the affluent

      peasant.[12]

 The
      horse of the one-horse peasant is a veritable “living
      fraction”—not a “quarter of a horse,” to be sure,
      but fully “twenty-seven fifty-seconds” of a

      horse![13]
[31]



      Let us take further the data regarding the items of farm

expenditure.[14]






      These data are very eloquent. They strikingly reveal to us how utterly
      wretched is the “farm” not only of the horseless but also of
      the one-horse peasant; and how utterly wrong is the customary method of
      lumping such peasants with the few but powerful peasants who spend
      hundreds of rubles on their farms, are in a position to improve their
      implements, hire “working folk,” and “buy in” land
      on a large scale, renting to the amount of 50, 100 and 200 rubles a

      year.[15]

 Let us
      note, by the way, that the relatively high expenditure of the horseless
      peasant on “labourers and job-work” is very likely to be
      explained by the fact that the statisticians have placed under this
      heading two entirely different things: the hiring of a worker who has to
      work with his employer’s implements, i.e., the hiring of a farm
      labourer or day labourer; and the hiring of a neighbouring peasant who has
      with his own implements to cultivate the hirer’s land. These types
      of “hire,” diametrically


 

      opposite in significance, must be strictly distinguished from one another,
      as is done, for example, by V. Orlov (see Statistical Returns for
      Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. 1).
    





      Let us now examine the data on income from agriculture. Unfortunately, in
      the Returns these data are far too inadequately analysed (partly,
      maybe, because of their paucity). For example, the question of yield is
      not examined: there is no information on the sale of each particular kind
      of produce and on the conditions of sale. Let us therefore confine
      ourselves to the following brief table:
    





      What immediately strikes one in this table is the glaring exception: the
      huge drop in the percentage of cash income from agriculture in the top
      group, despite the fact that it cultivates the biggest area. Farming on
      the biggest scale is thus apparently in the greatest degree natural
      economy. It will be extremely interesting to make a closer examination of
      this seeming exception, which throws light on the highly important
      question of the connection between agriculture and
      “industries” of an entrepreneur character. As we have already
      seen, the significance of industries of this type is particularly great in
      the budgets of the peasants owning many horses. Judging from the data
      under examination, especially typical of the peasant bourgeoisie in this
      locality is the tendency to combine agriculture with

 

      commercial and industrial

      enterprises.[16]

 It
      is not difficult to see, firstly, that it is wrong to compare farmers of
      this type with cultivators pure and simple, and, secondly, that
      agriculture under such circumstances very often only seems to be
      natural economy. When agriculture is combined with the technical
      processing of agricultural produce (flour milling, oil-pressing,
      potato-starch manufacture, distilling, etc.), the money income from such
      farming may be assigned to income from the industrial establishments and
      not from agriculture. Actually, indeed, the agriculture in this case will
      be commercial, not natural, economy. The same thing has to be said of the
      farm in which a mass of agricultural produce is consumed in kind on the
      maintenance of farm labourers and of horses employed on some industrial
      enterprise (for example, mail-carrying). And it is precisely this type of
      farm that we have among the top group (budget No. 1 in Korotoyak
      Uyezd. Family of 18 persons, 4 working members, 5 farm labourers, 20
      horses; income from agriculture—1,294 rubles, nearly all in kind,
      and from industrial enterprises—2,675 rubles. And such a
      “natural-economy peasant farm” is combined with the horseless
      and one-horse farms for the purpose of striking a general
      “average”}. This example shows us once again how important it
      is to combine classification according to scale and type of agricultural
      activity with classification according to scale and type of
      “industrial” activity.

    
      (C) Let us now examine the data on the peasants’ standard of
      living. Expenditure on food in kind is given incompletely in the
      Returns. We single out the most important items: agricultural
      produce and

      meat.[17]







      This table shows that we were right in combining the horseless and
      one-horse peasants and contrasting them to the rest. The distinguishing
      feature of the groups of peasants mentioned is insufficiency of food and
      its inferior quality (potatoes). The food of the one-horse peasant is in
      some respects even worse than that of the horseless peasant. The general
      “average” even on this question is entirely fictitious, the
      insufficient nourishment of the mass of the peasants being obscured by the
      satisfactory nourishment of the well-off peasantry, who consume almost one
      and a half times as much agricultural produce and three times as much

      meat[18]

 as do the
      poor peasants.

    
      For the purpose of comparing the remaining data on the peasants’
      food, all produce must be taken at its value—in rubles:
    







produce[19]




produce[20]



      Thus, the general data on the peasants’ food confirm what has been
      said above. Three groups stand out clearly: the bottom group (horseless
      and one-horse), the middle group (two and three-horse), and the top group,
      whose food is nearly twice as good as that of the bottom one. The general
      “average” wipes out both extreme groups. Cash expenditure on
      food is highest, both absolutely and relatively, in the two extreme
      groups—among the rural proletarians and the rural bourgeoisie. The
      former buy more, although they consume less, than the middle peasants;
      they buy the most essential agricultural produce, that of which they
      suffer a shortage. The latter buy more because they consume more,
      increasing particularly their consumption of non-agricultural produce. A
      comparison of these two extreme groups shows us clearly how a home market
      is created in a capitalist country for articles of personal

      consumption.[21]



      The remaining items of expenditure on personal consumption are as follows:
    





      It is not always correct to calculate this expenditure per head of both
      sexes, because the cost of fuel, lighting, household effects, etc., for
      example, is not proportionate to the number of members of the family.

    
      These data also show the division of the peasantry (according to standard
      of living) into three different groups. Moreover, the following
      interesting peculiarity comes to light: the cash part of the expenditure
      on all personal consumption is highest in the bottom groups (in
      group a about half the expenditure is in money), whereas in the
      top groups the cash expenditure does not increase, amounting to only about
      a third. How can this be reconciled with the above noted fact that, in
      general, the percentage of money expenditure increases in both extreme
      groups? Obviously in the top groups the cash expenditure is
      incurred mainly on productive consumption (expenditure on the
      farm), whereas in the bottom groups it is on personal
      consumption. Here are the exact data on this:
    






      Consequently, the transformation of the peasantry into a rural proletariat
      creates a market mainly for articles of consumption, whereas its
      transformation into a rural bourgeoisie creates a market mainly for means
      of production. In other words, among the bottom groups of the
      “peasantry” we observe the transformation of labour-power into
      a commodity, and in the top ones the transformation of means of production
      into capital. Both these transformations result in precisely that process
      of the creation of a home market which theory has established for
      capitalist countries in general. That is why F. Engels, writing on the
      famine of 1891, said that it signified the creation of a home market
      for

  capitalism[32]—a 
  proposition that is unintelligible to
      the Narodniks, who regard the ruin of the peasantry merely as the decay of
      “people’s production,” and not as the transformation of
      patriarchal into capitalist economy.

    
      Mr. N.–on has written a whole book on the home market, without noticing
      the process of the creation of a home market by the differentiation of the
      peasantry. In his article “How Are We to Explain the Increase in Our
      State Revenues?” (Novoye Slovo[New Word], 1896,
      No. 5, February) he deals with this question in the following argument:
      the tables of the income of the American worker show that the lower the
      income, the larger is the relative expenditure on food. Consequently, with
      a decline in food

 

      consumption there is a still greater decline in the consumption of other
      products. And in Russia there is a decline in the consumption of bread and
      vodka; hence there is also a decline in the consumption of other products,
      from which it follows that the greater consumption of the well-to-do
      “stratum” (p. 70) of the peasantry is more than balanced by
      the diminution of the consumption of the masses.—This argument
      contains three errors: firstly, by substituting the worker for the
      peasant, Mr. N.–on skips over the question; the point at issue is the
      process of the creation of workers and
      employers. Secondly, by substituting the worker for the peasant,
      Mr. N.–on reduces all consumption to personal consumption and forgets
      about productive consumption, about the market for means of
      production. Thirdly, Mr. N.–on forgets that the process of the
      differentiation of the peasantry is at the same time one of the
      displacement of natural by commodity economy, that, consequently, the
      market cannot be created by increasing consumption, but by transforming
      consumption in kind (even if more abundant) into cash or paying
      consumption (even if less abundant). We have just seen that the horseless
      peasants consume less, but buy more articles of personal consumption than
      the middle peasantry. They become poorer, but at the same time receive and
      spend more money,—and both these sides of the process are necessary
      for

capitalism.[22]

      In conclusion, let us make use of the budget figures to compare the
      standard of living of the peasants and the rural workers. Calculating the
      extent of personal consumption, not per head, but per adult working person
      (according to the rates of the Nizhni-Novgorod statisticians in the above
      mentioned compilation), we get the following table:
    






      To compare the data on the standard of living of rural workers with this,
      we may take, firstly, average prices of labour. For 10 years (1881-1891)
      the average pay of a farm labourer hired by the year in Voronezh Gubernia
      was 57 rubles, and including keep,

99 rubles,[23]

 so that keep cost 42 rubles. The
      amount of personal consumption by allotment-holding farm labourers and day
      labourers (horseless and one-horse peasants) is below this level. The
      total cost of a family’s keep amounts to only 78 rubles in the case
      of the horseless “peasant” (in a family of 4) and 98 rubles in
      the case of the one-horse “peasant” (in a family of 5), i.e.,
      less than the cost of a farm labourer’s keep. (We have
      omitted from the budgets of the horseless and one-horse peasants farm
      expenditure and also taxes and duties, for in this locality the allotment
      is leased at not less than the amount of the taxes.)  As was to be
      expected, the position of the labourer who is tied to his allotment is
      worse than that of the labourer who is free from such tie (we say nothing
      of the tremendous degree to which the tying of people down to allotments
      develops relations of bondage and personal dependence). The cash
      expenditure of the farm labourer is far higher than the cash expenditure
      on personal consumption of the one-horse and horseless peasant.

 

      Consequently, the tying of people down to allotments retards the growth of
      the home market.

    

      Secondly, we can make use of Zemstvo statistics on consumption by farm
      labourers. Let us take from the Statistical Returns for Orel
      Gubernia the data on Karachev Uyezd (Vol. V, Pt. 2, 1892), which are
      based on information concerning 158 cases of agricultural

wage-labour.[24]

 Converting the
      monthly ration into one for a year, we get the following:
    






rye[25]



      Consequently, the standard of living of the one-horse and horseless
      peasants is not higher than that of farm labourers, and if
      anything rather approximates to the minimum standard of living of the
      latter.

    
      The general conclusion from our review of the data on the bottom group of
      the peasantry is, accordingly, the following: both in its relation to the
      other groups, which are ousting the bottom section of the peasantry from
      agriculture, in its scale of farming, which covers only part of the
      expenditure on maintaining the family, in its source of livelihood (sale
      of labour-power), and, lastly, in its

 

      standard of living, this group should be assigned to the
      allotment-holding farm labourers and day

labourers.[26]

      In thus concluding our exposition of the Zemstvo statistics on peasant
      budgets, we cannot but stop to examine the methods of treating the budget
      data employed by Mr. Shcherbina, the compiler of Evaluation
      Returns and author of the article on peasant budgets in the
      well-known book The Influence of Harvests and Grain Prices,
      etc.

  (Vol. II).[33] 
  Mr. Shcherbina states on some point in the
      Returns that he is using the theory “of the well-known
      political economist K. Marx” (p. 111); as a matter of fact, he
      positively distorts this theory, confusing the difference between constant
      and variable capital with the difference between fixed and circulating
      capital (ibid.), and quite senselessly applying these terms and
      categories of developed capitalism to peasant farming (passim),
      etc. The whole of Mr. Shcherbina’s treatment of the budget figures
      is nothing but a gross and incredible abuse of “average
      magnitudes.” All the evaluation returns concern the
      “average” peasant. The income from the land computed for the 4
      uyezds is divided by the number of farms (recall that for the horseless
      peasant this income is about 60 rubles per family, and for the rich
      peasant about 700 rubles). The “magnitude of constant capital”
      (sic!!?) “per farm” (p. 114), i.e., the value of the
      whole property, is determined; the “average” value of
      implements, the average value of commercial and industrial establishments
      (sic!) is determined as 15 rubles per farm. Mr. Shcherbina
      ignores the detail that these establishments are the private property of
      the well-to-do minority, and divides them among all “equally”!
      The “average” expenditure on the renting of land (p. 118) is
      determined;

 

      as we have seen, it amounts to 6 rubles in the case of the one-horse
      peasant and to 100 to 200 rubles in the case of the rich peasant. All this
      is added together and divided by the number of farms. Even the
      “average” expenditure on “repair of capitals” is
      determined (ibid.). The Lord alone knows what that means! If it
      means replenishment and repair of implements and livestock, here are the
      figures we have already cited: with the horseless peasant this expenditure
      equals 8 (eight) kopeks per farm, and with the rich peasant
      75 rubles. Is it not evident that if we add such “peasant
      farms” together and divide by the number of items added, we shall
      get the “law of average requirements” discovered by
      Mr. Shcherbina in the returns for Ostrogozhsk Uyezd (Vol. II, Pt. 2, 1887)
      and so brilliantly applied subsequently? And from such a “law”
      it will not be difficult to draw the conclusion that “the peasant
      satisfies not his minimum requirements, but their average level”
      (p. 123 and many others), that peasant farming is a special “type of
      development” (p. 100), etc., etc. This ingenuous device of
      “equalising” the rural proletariat and the peasant bourgeoisie
      is reinforced by the already familiar classification according to
      allotment. Had we applied it, for example, to the budget data, we would
      have combined in one group such peasants, for example (in the category of
      those having large allotments, with 15 to 25 dess. per family), as: one
      who leases half his allotment (of 23.5 dess.) sows 1.3 dess., lives mainly
      by means of “personal industries” (how surprisingly well this
      sounds!) and secures an income of 190 rubles for 10 persons of both sexes
      (budget No. 10 in Korotoyak Uyezd); and another who rents an additional
      14.7 dess., sows 23.7 dess., employs farm labourers and has an income of
      1,400 rubles for 10 persons of both sexes (budget No. 2 in Zadonsk
      Uyezd). Is it not clear that we shall get a special “type of
      development” if we add the farms of farm labourers and day labourers
      to those of peasants employing workers, and divide the total by the number
      of items added? One has only to make regular and exclusive use of
      “average” data on peasant farming, and all “false
      ideas” about the differentiation of the peasantry will be eliminated
      once and for all. That is exactly what Mr. Shcherbina does by adopting
      this method en

grand[27]
 

      in his article in the book The Influence of Harvests,
      etc. Here a huge effort is made to calculate the budgets of the
      whole of the Russian peasantry—and all by means of the very same,
      tried and tested, “averages.” The future historian of Russian
      economic literature will note with astonishment that the prejudices of
      Narodism caused the most elementary requirements of economic statistics to
      be forgotten, namely, that a strict distinction be drawn between employers
      and wage-workers, regardless of the form of land tenure that unites them,
      and regardless of the multiplicity and variety of the intermediary types
      between them.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      A big defect of these data is, firstly, lack of classification according
      to different indices; secondly, lack of text giving that information about
      the farms selected which could not be included in the tables (that sort of
      text is supplied, for example, to the data on the budgets for Ostrogozhsk
      Uyezd). Thirdly, extremely inadequate

 

treatment of data on all
      non-agricultural occupations and all sorts of “employments”
      (all “industries” are given only 4 columns, whereas
      the description of clothing and footwear alone takes up 152 columns!).—Lenin

[2]
      “Averages” of exclusively this kind are used, for example, by
      Mr. Shcherbina both in the publications of the Voronezh Zemstvo and in his
      article on peasant budgets in the book The Influence of Harvests and
      Grain Prices, etc.—Lenin

[3]
      This applies, for example, to the budget data for Moscow Gubernia
      (Returns, Vols. VI and VII), Vladimir Gubernia (Industries of
      Vladimir Gubernia), Ostrogozhsk Uyezd of Voronezh Gubernia
      (Returns, Vol. II, Part 2), and particularly to the budgets cited
      in the Transactions of the Commission of Inquiry into Handicraft

      Industry[34] (of
      Vyatka, Kherson, Nizhni-Novgorod, Perm and other gubernias). The budgets
      given by Messrs. Karpov and Manokhin in the Transactions and also
      by Mr. P. Semyonov (in Material for a Study of the Village
      Community, St. Petersburg, 1880) and by Mr. Osadchy (Shcherbani
      Volost, Elisavetgrad Uyezd, Kherson Gubernia)
      compare favourably with the others in that they describe the various
      groups of peasants.—Lenin

[4]
      The Returns separate all “expenditure on personal and farm
      needs other than food” from expenditure on the maintenance of
      animals, and under the first heading, expenditures on lighting and on
      rent, for example, are put side by side. This is obviously wrong. We have
      separated personal from farm (“productive”)
      consumption, and under the latter heading we have included expenditure on
      tar, rope, horse-shoeing, building repairs, implements, harness; on
      labourers and job workers, on herdsman, on the renting of land, and on the
      maintenance of animals and poultry.—Lenin

[5]
      The item “balances from previous years” consists of grain (in
      kind) and cash; here the total figures are given, as we are dealing with
      gross expenditure and income, in cash and kind.

    
      The four columns relating to “industries” are copied from the
      Returns, which give no other information about the
      “industries.” Let us observe that in group e, carting
      should obviously be put under the heading of industrial establishments; it
      furnishes two members of this group with 250 rubles income each, and one
      of them employs a farm labourer.—Lenin

[6]
      An apparent exception is provided by category e with its big
      deficit (41 rubles), which, however, is covered by a loan. This is
      explained by the fact that in three of the households (out of the 5 in
      this category) they celebrated weddings that cost 200 rubles. (The total
      deficit of these 5 households amounted to 206 rubles 90 kopeks.) As a
      result, this group’s expenditure on personal consumption, other than
      food, rose to the very high figure of 10 rubles 41 kopeks per person of
      both sexes, whereas in no other group, not excepting the rich group
      (f), does this expenditure amount to even 6 rubles. Consequently,
      this deficit is quite opposite in character to that of the poor
      peasants.

 

It is a deficit resulting not from inability to satisfy minimum
      requirements, but from increased requirements out of proportion to the
      income of the given year.—Lenin

[7]
      Expenditure on the maintenance of cattle is almost entirely in kind: of a
      total expenditure of 6,316.21 rubles on this item by the 66 households,
      only 1,535.2 rubles were spent in cash, and of this sum
      1,102.5 rubles were spent by one
      farmer-entrepreneur who kept 20 horses, evidently for industrial
      use.—Lenin

[8]
      This error was particularly often met with in the debates (of 1897) on the
      significance of low grain

prices.[35]—Lenin

[9]
      V. Orlov, Peasant Farming, Statistical Returns for Moscow
Gubernia, Vol. IV, Pt. I.—Trirogov, The Village Community
and

 

the Poll Tax.—Keussler, Zur Geschichte und Krttik des
βauerlichen Gemeindebesitzes in Russland (A Contribution to the
History and Critique of Peasant Communal Landownership in
Russia. —Ed.).—V. V., The Peasant
Community (Results of Zemstvo Statistical Investigation,
Vol. 1).—Lenin

[10]
      It goes without saying that still greater harm will be done to the peasant
      poor by Stolypin’s (November 1906? breaking up of the village
      community. This is the Russian “enrichissez-vous”
      (“enrich yourselves”—Ed.). Black
      Hundreds—rich peasants! Loot all you can, so long as you bolster up
      tottering absolutism! (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[11]
      Area under crops not for 4 uyezds, but only for Zadonsk Uyezd, Voronezh
      Gubernia.—Lenin

[12]
      German agricultural literature includes several monographs by Drechsler
      containing data on the weight of the cattle owned by farmers of
      various groups, classified according to amount of land

held.[36] These data show
      even more strikingly than the figures we have cited from Russian Zemstvo
      statistics the immeasurably inferior quality of the cattle owned
      by the small peasants as compared with those owned by the big peasants,
      particularly by the landlords. I hope to analyse these data for the press
      in the near future. (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[13]
      If these budget standards of the value of buildings, implements and
      animals to be found in the various groups of peasants were applied to the
      summary data for 49 gubernias of European Russia that were cited above, it
      would be seen that one-fifth of the peasant households owns a considerably
      larger quantity of means of production than all the rest of the peasantry.—Lenin

[14]
      Expenditure on the maintenance of livestock is mostly in kind, the rest of
      the farm expenditure is mostly in money.—Lenin

[15]
      How dear to the heart of such an “enterprising muzhik” must be
      Mr. Karyshev’s “theory of rent” which advocates long
      leases, lower rents, compensation for improvements, etc. That is just what
      he needs.—Lenin

[16]
      Of the 12 horseless peasants not one obtains any income from industrial
      establishments and undertakings; of the 18 with one horse each, one does;
      of the 17 with two horses two do; of the 9 with three horses three do; of
      the 5 with four horses two do; of the 5 owning more than 4 horses four do.—Lenin

[17]
      Under this head we combine the following items in the Returns:
      beef, mutton, pork and lard. Where other cereals are calculated in terms
      of rye it is according to the standards in Yanson’s Comparative
      Statistics adopted by the Nizhni-Novgorod statisticians (see
      Material for Gorbatov Uyezd. Basis of calculation: percentage of
      absorbable

protein).[37]—Lenin

[18]
      The extent to which the meat consumption of the village peasants is
      smaller than that of town dwellers is seen from even the following
      fragmentary data. In Moscow in 1900, cattle weighing about 4 million poods
      and of a total value of 18,986,714 rubles 59 kopeks were slaughtered in
      the city abattoirs (Moskovsktve Vedormosti[Moscow
      Recorder], 1901, No. 55). This works out per head, both sexes, at
      about 4 poods or nearly 18 rubles per annum. (Note to 2nd
      edition.)—Lenin

[19]
      Beef, pork, lard, mutton, butter, dairy produce, poultry and eggs.—Lenin

[20]
      Salt, salted and fresh fish, herrings, vodka, beer, tea and sugar.—Lenin

[21]
      Of the money expenditure on agricultural produce first place goes to the
      purchase of rye, mainly by the poor, then the purchase of vegetables
      Expenditure on vegetables is valued at 85 kopeks per head of both sexes
      (ranging from 56 kopeks in group b to 1 ruble 31 kopeks in group
      e), including 47 kopeks in money. This interesting fact shows us
      that even among the rural population, not to speak or the urban, a market
      is created for the produce of one of the forms of commercial agriculture,
      namely, market gardening. Expenditure on vegetable oil is 2/3 in kind;
      that is to say, in this sphere domestic production and primitive
      handicraft still prevail.—Lenin

[22]
      This fact, which at first sight seems a paradox, is actually fully in
      keeping with the fundamental contradictions of capitalism, which are met
      with at every step in real life. That is why close observers of rural life
      have been able to note this fact quite independently of theory. “For
      the development of his activities,” says Engelhardt about the kulak,
      the huckster, etc, “it is important that the peasants should be poor
      . . . that the peasants should receive much money” (Letters from
      the Countryside, p. 493). Engelhardt’ s sympathy for a
      substantial (sic !!) agricultural life” (ibid.)
      did not prevent him at times from disclosing the most profound
      contradictions within the celebrated village community.—Lenin

[23]
Agricultural and Statistical Information Obtained from
Farmers. Published by the Department of Agriculture. Vol. V, St,
Petersburg, 1892, S. A. Korolenko, Hired Labour on Farms,
etc.—Lenin

[24]
      The difference between the conditions in Orel and Voronezh gubernias is
      slight, and, as we shall see, the data given are of the usual kind. We do
      not take the data in the above-mentioned work of S. A. Korolenko (see the
      juxtaposition of those data in Mr. Maress’s article in The
      Influence of Harvests, etc., I, 11), for even the author
      himself admits that Messrs. the landowners from whom these data were
      obtained sometimes “were carried away”... .—Lenin

[25]
      Computed in the manner stated above.—Lenin

[26]
      The Narodniks will probably draw from our comparison between the standard
      of living of farm labourers and that of the bottom group of the peasantry,
      the conclusion that we “stand for” dispossessing the peasantry
      of the land, etc. Such a conclusion will be a wrong one. All that follows
      from what has been said is that we “stand for” abolishing all
      restrictions on the peasants’ right freely to dispose of their land,
      to give up their allotments, and to leave the village community. Only the
      peasant himself can be the judge of whether it is more advantageous to be
      a farm labourer with an allotment or without one. Hence such restrictions
      can on no account and in no way be justified. The defence of these
      restrictions by the Narodniks, on the other hand, turns the latter into
      servants of the interests of our agrarians.—Lenin

[27]
Extensively.—Ed.

 



[34]
The Transactions of the Commission of Inquiry into Handicraft Industry
      in Russia mentioned here and further on constitute a series of 16
      volumes, which appeared from time to time in the years 1879 to 1887. The
      “Commission of Inquiry into

 

Handicraft Industry in Russia”
      (called, for short, the “Handicraft Commission”} was set up in
      1874 under the auspices of the Council of Trade and Manufactures, at the
      request of the First All-Russia Congress of Owners of Factories and Works,
      that took place in 1870. The Commission included representatives of the
      Ministries of Finance, Home Affairs, State Properties, and of the Russian
      Geographical Society, Free Economic Society, Moscow Agricultural Society,
      Russian Technical Society and Society for the Promotion of Russian
      Industry and Trade. The valuable material published by the
      “Handicraft Commission” in its Transactions were
      mainly the fruits of the work of local, often little-known,
      officials. Lenin, who made a detailed study of the Commission’s
      Transactions, drew from them numerous facts and figures showing
      the development of capitalist relations in Russia’s handicraft
      industry. [p. 149]
    



[28]
      In this column Lenin also includes incomes from fruit growing and stock
      raising.
    



[35]
      A paper by Prof. A. I. Chuprov on grain prices was discussed by the Free
      Economic Society in March 1897.


The Free Economic Society
      (F.E.S.) was a privileged scientific body, founded in 1765 with the aim,
      as its Statutes indicated of “disseminating information beneficial
      to agriculture and industry.” Scientists, from the ranks of liberal
      nobles or bourgeoisie, made up the membership of the F.E.S. The Society
      undertook investigations by questionnaire and sent out expeditions to
      study various branches of the national economy and parts of the country;
      it periodically issued Transactions of the F.E.S., containing the
      results of investigations conducted, and verbatim reports of papers read
      and of discussions held in the Society’s sections. The
      Transactions of the F.E.S. are frequently mentioned by Lenin in
      his works.
    



[29]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 791.
    



[30]
Collective responsibility—the peasants of each village
      community were collectively responsible for making timely and full
      payments and for the fulfillment of all sorts of services to the state and
      the landlords (payment of taxes and of land redemption installments,
      provision of recruits for the army, etc.). This form of bondage, which was
      retained even after serfdom was abolished in Russia, was done away with
      only in 1906.
    



[36]
      Drechsler’s data are analysed by Lenin in his The Agrarian
      Question and the “Critics of Marx” (Chapter XI,
      “Stock Raising on Small and Large Farms”}. See present
      edition, Vol. 13. [p.  159]
    



[31]
      The expressions “quarter of a horse” and “living
      fraction” belong to the writer Gleb Uspensky. See his sketches
      Living Figures in the Selected Works of Uspensky, 1938
      edition.
    



[37]
      See Y. E. Yanson, Comparative Statistics of Russia and West European
      Countries. Vol. II. Industry and Trade. Section I. Agricultural
      Statistics. St. Petersburg, 1880, pp. 422-423 326, etc.
    



[32]
      The famine of 1891 affected the east and south-east gubernias of European
      Russia with particular severity, its scale exceeding all similar
      calamities that had befallen the country. It ruined masses of peasants and
      at the same time hastened the process of the creation of a home market and
      the development of capitalism in Russia. This was dealt with by Engels in
      his article “Socialism in Germany.” He also referred to it in
      his letters to Nikolai-on dated October 29, 1891, March 15 and June 18,
      1892.
    



[33]
      Lenin’s comments on F. A. Shcherbina’s article are published
      in the Lenin Miscellany XXXIII, pp. 70-84.
    

 
  

XI. A Comparison of the Army-Horse Censuses 
of 1888-1891 and 1896-1900

|

XIII. Conclusions From Chapter II

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Conclusions from Chapter II.




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Two: XIII. 
Conclusions From Chapter II








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM 
in RUSSIA
Chapter II. The Differentiation 
of the Peasantry




      XIII. Conclusions From Chapter II
    

      Let us sum up the main points that follow from the data examined above:

    
      1) The social-economic situation in which the contemporary Russian
      peasantry find themselves is that of commodity economy. Even in the
      central agricultural belt (which is most backward in this respect as
      compared with the south eastern border regions or the industrial
      gubernias), the peasant is completely subordinated to the market, on which
      he is dependent as regards both his personal consumption and his farming,
      not to mention the payment of taxes.

    
      2) The system of social-economic relations existing among the peasantry
      (agricultural and village-community) shows us the presence of all those
      contradictions which are inherent in every commodity economy and every
      order of capitalism: competition, the struggle for economic independence,
      the grabbing of land (purchasable and rentable), the concentration of
      production in the hands of a minority, the forcing of the majority into
      the ranks of the proletariat, their exploitation by a minority through the
      medium of merchant’s capital and the hiring of farm labourers. There
      is not a single economic phenomenon among the peasantry that does not bear
      this contradictory form, one specifically peculiar to the capitalist
      system, i.e., that does not express a struggle and antagonism of
      interests, that does not imply advantage for some and disadvantage for
      others. It is the case with the renting of land, the purchase of land, and
      with “industries” in their diametrically opposite types; it is
      also the case with the technical progress of farming.
    


      We attach cardinal importance to this conclusion not only as regards
      capitalism in Russia, but also as regards the significance of the Narodnik
      doctrine in general. It is these contradictions that show us clearly and
      irrefutably that the system of economic relations in the
      “community” village does not at all constitute a special
      economic form (“people’s production,” etc.), but is an
      ordinary petty-bourgeois one. Despite the theories that have prevailed
      here during the past half-century, the Russian community peasantry are not
      antagonists of capitalism, but, on the contrary, are its deepest and most
      durable foundation. The deepest—because it is here, remote from all
      “artificial” influences, and in spite of the institutions
      which restrict the development of capitalism, that we see the constant
      formation of the elements of capitalism within the “community”
      itself. The most durable—because agriculture in general, and the
      peasantry in particular, are weighed down most heavily by the traditions
      of the distant past, the traditions of patriarchal life, as a consequence
      of which the transformative effects of capitalism (the development of the
      productive forces, the changing of all social relations, etc.) manifest
      themselves here most slowly and

gradually.[1]

      3) The sum-total of all the economic contradictions among the peasantry
      constitutes what we call the differentiation of the peasantry. The
      peasants themselves very aptly and strikingly characterise this process
      with the term

“depeasantising.”[2]

 This process signifies the utter
      dissolution of the old, patriarchal peasantry and the creation of new
      types of rural inhabitants.

    
      Before we proceed to describe these types, let us note the
      following. Reference to this process was made in our literature long ago
      and has been repeated very often. For example, in his day Mr. Vasilchikov,
      who made use of the works of the Valuyev

Commission,[16] noted the formation of a “rural
      proletariat” in Russia and the “differentiation of the peasant
      social estate” (Landownership and Agriculture, 1st ed.,
      Vol. I, Chapter IX). This fact was also mentioned by V. Orlov
      (Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. IV, Pt. 1, p. 14)
      and by many others. But all these

 

      references were very fragmentary. No attempt was ever made to study this
      phenomenon systematically, and that is why we lack, to this day, adequate
      information about this phenomenon notwithstanding the wealth of data
      provided by the Zemstvo house-to-house censuses. Connected with this is
      the fact that the majority of the writers who have dealt with this problem
      regard the break-up of the peasantry simply as the emergence of property
      inequality, as simple “differentiation,” to use the favourite
      term of the Narodniks in general and of Mr. Karyshev in particular (see
      his book on Rentings and his articles in Russkoye
      Bogatstvo). Undoubtedly, the emergence of property inequality is the
      starting-point of the whole process, but the process is not at all
      confined to property “differentiation.” The old peasantry is
      not only “differentiating,” it is being completely dissolved,
      it is ceasing to exist, it is being ousted by absolutely new types of
      rural inhabitants—types that are the basis of a society in which
      commodity economy and capitalist production prevail. These types are the
      rural bourgeoisie (chiefly petty bourgeoisie) and the rural
      proletariat—a class of commodity producers in agriculture and a
      class of agricultural wage-workers.

    
      It is extremely instructive that the purely theoretical analysis of the
      process of the formation of agricultural capitalism points to the
      differentiation of the small producers as an important factor in this
      process. We have in mind one of the most interesting chapters in Vol. III
      of Capital, namely Chapter 47, “Genesis of Capitalist
      Ground-Rent.” As the starting-point of this genesis Marx takes
      labour-rent

(Arbeitsrente)[3]

—“. . .

where the direct producer, using instruments of labour
      (plough, cattle, etc.) which actually or legally belong to him, cultivates
      soil actually owned by him during part of the week, and works during the
      remaining days upon the estate of the feudal lord without any compensation
      from the feudal lord. . .” (Das Kapital,

 

      III, 2, 323. Russ. trans., 651). The next form of rent is rent in
      kind (Produktenrente), when the direct producer produces the
      entire product on land which he himself exploits, and gives up to the
      landowner the whole of the surplus product in kind. The producer here
      becomes more independent and is enabled to acquire by his labour a certain
      surplus over and above the amount of produce that satisfies his
      indispensable needs. “Similarly, this form” of rent
      “will give rise to greater differences in the economic position of
      the individual direct producers. At least the possibility for such a
      differentiation exists, and the possibility for the direct producer to
      have in turn acquired the means to exploit other labourers directly”
      (S. 329. Russ. trans.,
  657.)[17] 
  And so, while natural economy still prevails, at
      the very first expansion of the independence of the dependent peasants,
      there already appear the germs of their differentiation. But these germs
      can develop only under the next form of rent, money rent, which
      represents a mere change in the form of rent in kind. The direct producer
      gives up to the landowner not produce, but the price of this

produce.[4]

 The basis of this type
      of rent remains the same: the direct producer is as hitherto the
      traditional possessor of the land, but “the basis of this type of
      rent . . . is approaching its dissolution” (330). Money rent
      “presupposes a considerable development of commerce, of urban
      industry, of commodity production in general, and thereby of money
      circulation”

  (331).[18] 
  The traditional, common-law relationship between
      the dependent peasant and the landowner is transformed here into a purely
      cash, contract-based

 

      relationship. This leads, on the one hand, to the expropriation of the old
      peasantry, and, on the other, to the peasant buying out his land and his
      liberty. The transformation of rent in kind into money rent is furthermore
      not only inevitably accompanied, but even anticipated, by the formation of
      a class of propertyless day labourers, who hire themselves out for
      money. During their genesis, when this new class appears but sporadically,
      the custom necessarily develops among the more prosperous peasants subject
      to rent payments (rentepflichtigen) of exploiting agricultural
      wage-labourers for their own account. . . . In this way, they gradually
      acquire the possibility of accumulating a certain amount of wealth and
      themselves becoming transformed into future capitalists. The old
      self-employed possessors of land themselves thus give rise to a nursery
      school for capitalist tenants, whose development is conditioned by the
      general development of capitalist production beyond the bounds of the
      countryside” (Das Kapital, III, 2, 332. Russ. trans.,

      659–660).[19]

      4) The differentiation of the peasantry, which develops the latter’s
      extreme groups at the expense of the middle “peasantry,”
      creates two new types of rural inhabitants. The feature common to both
      types is the commodity, money character of their economy. The first new
      type is the rural bourgeoisie or the well-to-do peasantry. These include
      the independent farmers who carry on commercial agriculture in all its
      varied forms (the principal ones of which we shall describe in Chapter),
      then come the owners of commercial and industrial establishments, the
      proprietors of commercial enterprises, etc. The combining of commercial
      agriculture with commercial and industrial enterprises is the type of
      “combination of agriculture with industries” that is
      specifically peculiar to this peasantry. From among these
      well-to-do peasants a class of capitalist farmers is created, since the
      renting of land for the sale of grain plays (in the agricultural belt) an
      enormous part in their farms, often a more important part than the
      allotment. The size of the farm, in the majority of cases, requires a
      labour force larger than that available in the family, for which reason
      the formation of a body of farm labourers, and still more of day
      labourers, is a necessary condition for the existence

 

      of the well-to-do

peasantry.[5]

 The spare cash obtained by these peasants in the
      shape of net income is either directed towards commercial operations and
      usury, which are so excessively developed in our rural districts, or,
      under favourable conditions, is invested in the purchase of land, farm
      improvements, etc. In a word, these are small agrarians. Numerically, the
      peasant bourgeoisie constitute a small minority of the peasantry, probably
      not more than one-fifth of the total number of households (which is
      approximately three-tenths of the population), although, of course, the
      proportion fluctuates considerably according to district. But as to their
      weight in the sum-total of peasant farming, in the total, quantity of
      means of production belonging to the peasantry, in the total amount of
      produce raised by the peasantry, the peasant bourgeoisie are undoubtedly
      predominant. They are the masters of the contemporary countryside.

    
      5) The other new type is the rural proletariat, the class of
      allotment-holding wage-workers. This covers the poor peasants,
      including those that are completely landless; but the most typical
      representative of the Russian rural proletariat is the allotment-holding
      farm labourer, day labourer, unskilled labourer, building worker or other
      allotment holding worker. Insignificant farming on a patch of land, with
      the farm in a state of utter ruin (particularly evidenced by the leasing
      out of land), inability to exist without the sale of labour-power (=
      “industries” of the indigent peasants), an extremely low
      standard of living (probably lower even than that of the worker without an
      allotment)—such are the distinguishing features of this

type.[6]

 One must assign not
      less than half the total peasant households (which is

 

      approximately 4/10 of the population) to membership of the rural
      proletariat, i.e., all the horseless and a large part of the one-horse
      peasants (this, of course, is only a wholesale, approximate calculation,
      one subject to more or less considerable modifications in the different
      areas, according to local conditions). The grounds which compel us to
      believe that such a considerable proportion of the peasantry already
      belong to the rural proletariat have been advanced

above.[7]

 It should be added
      that our literature frequently contains too stereotyped an understanding
      of the theoretical proposition that capitalism requires the free, landless
      worker. This proposition is quite correct as indicating the main trend,
      but capitalism penetrates into agriculture particularly slowly and in
      extremely varied forms. The allotment of land to the rural worker is very
      often to the interests of the rural employers themselves, and that is why
      the allotment-holding rural worker is a type to be found in all capitalist
      countries. The type assumes different forms in different countries: the
      English cottager is not the same as the small-holding peasant of France or
      the Rhine provinces, and the latter again is not the same as the
      Knecht in Prussia. Each of these bears traces of a specific
      agrarian system, of a specific history of agrarian relations—but
      this does not prevent the economist from classing them all as one type of
      agricultural proletarian. The juridical basis of his right to his plot of
      land is absolutely immaterial to such a classification. Whether the land
      is his full property (as a

 

      small-holding peasant), or whether he is only allowed the use of it by the
      landlord or the

      Rittergutsbesitzer,[8]

      or, finally, whether he possesses it as a member of a Great Russian
      peasant community—makes no difference at

all.[9]

 In assigning the indigent peasants to
      the rural proletariat we are saying nothing new. This term has already
      been used repeatedly by many writers, and only the Narodnik economists
      persist in speaking of the peasantry in general, as of something
      anti-capitalist, and close their eyes to the fact that the mass of the
      “peasantry” have already taken a quite definite place in the
      general system of capitalist production, namely, as agricultural and
      industrial wage-workers. In our country, people are very fond of singing
      the praises of our agrarian system, which retains the village community
      and the peasantry, etc., and of contrasting this to the Ostsee system,
      with its capitalist organisation of agriculture. It will not be without
      interest, therefore, to see what types of the agricultural population in
      the Ostsee

region[20] are sometimes assigned to the class of farm
      labourers and day labourers. The peasants in the Ostsee gubernias are
      divided into those with large plots (25 to 50 dess. in separate lots),
      cottagers (with plots of 3 to 10 dess.) and landless peasants. As
      Mr. S. Korolenko

 

      quite rightly remarks, the cottager “most closely approximates to
      the general type of Russian peasant of the central gubernias”
      (Hired Labour, p. 495); he is everlastingly compelled to divide
      his time between seeking employment and cultivating his plot of land. But
      what is particularly interesting to us is the economic position of the
      farm labourers. The fact is that the landlords themselves find it
      advantageous to allot them land on account of wages. Here are
      some examples of the holdings of Ostsee farm labourers: 1) 2 dess. of land
      (we have converted Loftstelle into dessiatines: 1 Loftstelle =
      1/3 dess.); the husband works 275 days and the wife 50 days a year at a
      wage of 25 kopeks per day; 2) 2 2/3 dess. of land; “the farm
      labourer keeps 1 horse, 3 cows, 3 sheep and 2 pigs” (pp. 508, 518);
      the farm labourer works alternate weeks and the wife works 50 days; 3) 6
      dess. of land (Bauska Uyezd, Courland Gubernia), “the farm labourer
      keeps 1 horse, 3 cows, 3 sheep and several pigs” (p. 518), he works
      3 days a week and his wife 35 days a year; 4) in Hasenpoth Uyezd, Courland
      Gubernia—8 dess. of land, “in all cases the farm labourers get
      their flour milled gratis and free medical aid and medicine, and their
      children attend school” (p. 519), etc. We draw the reader’s
      attention to the size of the holdings and the scale of the
      farming of these farm labourers, i.e., to the very conditions that,
      in the opinion of the Narodniks, set our peasants apart from the general
      European agrarian system, which corresponds to capitalist production. We
      combine all the examples given in the publication quoted: 10 farm
      labourers own 31.5 dess. of land, that is, an average of 3.15 dess. per
      labourer. The farm labourers here include peasants who work the lesser
      part of the year for the landlord (the husband half the year, and the
      wife 35 to 50 days) and also one-horse peasants who own 2 and even 3 cows
      each. The question arises: what constitutes the notorious difference
      between our “community peasant” and the Ostsee farm labourer
      of this type? In the Ostsee region they call things by their proper names,
      whereas in Russia one-horse farm labourers are combined with wealthy
      peasants, “averages” are struck, and sentimental talk is
      indulged in about the “community spirit,” the “labour
      principle,” “people’s production” and the
      “combination of agriculture with industries”... .
    


      6) The intermediary link between these post-Reform types of
      “peasantry” is the middle peasantry. It is
      distinguished by the least development of commodity
      production. The independent agricultural labour of this category of
      peasant covers his maintenance in perhaps only the best years and under
      particularly favourable conditions, and that is why his position is an
      extremely precarious one. In the majority of cases the middle peasant
      cannot make ends meet without resorting to loans, to be repaid by
      labour-service, etc., without seeking “subsidiary” employment
      on the side, which also consists partly in the sale of labour power,
      etc. Every crop failure flings masses of the middle peasants into the
      ranks of the proletariat. In its social relations this group fluctuates
      between the top group, towards which it gravitates but which only a small
      minority of lucky ones succeed in entering, and the bottom group, into
      which it is pushed by the whole course of social evolution. We have seen
      that the peasant bourgeoisie oust not only the bottom group, but also the
      middle group, of the peasantry. Thus a process specifically characteristic
      of capitalist economy takes place, the middle members are swept away and
      the extremes are reinforced—the process of
      “depeasantising.”

    
      7) The differentiation of the peasantry creates a home market for
capitalism. In the bottom group, this formation of a market takes
      place on account of articles of consumption (the market of personal
      consumption). The rural proletarian, by comparison with the middle
      peasantry, consumes less, and, moreover, consumes food of worse
      quality (potatoes instead of bread, etc.), but buys more. The
      formation and development of a peasant bourgeoisie creates a market in
      twofold fashion: firstly and mainly on account of means of production
      (the market of productive consumption), since the well-to-do peasant
      strives to convert into capital those means of production which he
      “gathers” from both landlords “in straitened
      circumstances” and peasants in the grip of ruin. Secondly, a
      market is also created here on account of personal consumption, due to
      the expansion of the requirements of the more affluent

      peasants.[10]




      8) On the question of whether the differentiation of the peasantry is
      progressing, and if so at what rate, we have no precise statistics that
      can be compared with the data in the combined tables (§§ I-VI). This is
      not surprising, for till now (as we have already remarked) no attempt
      whatever has been made to study even the statics of the differentiation of
      the peasantry systematically and to indicate the forms in which this
      process is taking

place.[11]

 But all the general data on the economy of our
      rural districts indicate an uninterrupted and rapidly increasing
      differentiation: on the one hand, the “peasants” are
      abandoning and leasing out their land, the number of horseless peasants is
      growing, the “peasants” are fleeing to the towns, etc.; on the
      other hand, the “progressive trends in peasant farming” are
      also taking their course, the “peasants” are buying land,
      improving their farms, introducing iron ploughs, developing grass
      cultivation, dairy farming, etc. We now know which
      “peasants” are taking part in these two diametrically opposite
      sides of the process.

    
      Furthermore, the development of the migration movement is giving a
      tremendous impetus to the differentiation of the peasantry, and especially
      of the agricultural peasantry. It is well known that the migration of
      peasants is mainly from the agricultural gubernias (migration from the
      industrial gubernias is quite negligible), and precisely from the densely
      populated central gubernias, where there is the greatest development of
      labour-service (which retards the differentiation of the peasantry). That
      is the first point. The second point is that it is mainly the peasants in
      medium circumstances who are leaving the areas of emigration

 

      and mainly the extreme groups who are remaining at home. Thus, migration
      is accelerating the differentiation of the peasantry in the areas of
      emigration and is carrying the elements of differentiation to the new
      places (the agricultural wage-labour of settlers in Siberia in the first
      period of their new

life.[12]

 This connection between migration and the
      differentiation of the peasantry is fully proved by I. Hourwich in his
      superb research work, Peasant Migration to Siberia (Moscow,
      1888). We strongly recommend to the reader this book which our Narodnik
      press has strenuously tried to hush

up.[13]

      9) A tremendous part, as is known, is played in our rural districts by
      merchant’s and usurer’s capital. We consider it superfluous to
      cite numerous facts and indicate sources relating to this phenomenon: the
      facts are well known and do not directly concern our theme. The only
      question of interest to us is the following: What relation has
      merchant’s and usurer’s capital in our countryside to the
      differentiation of the peasantry? Is there any connection between the
      relations among the various groups of peasants described above and the
      relations between peasant creditors and peasant debtors? Is usury a factor
      and a motive force of differentiation, or does it retard this
      differentiation?

    
      Let us first indicate how theory presents this question. In the analysis
      of capitalist production given by the author of Capital very
      great significance was attached, as we know, to merchant’s and
      usurer’s capital. The main points of Marx’s views on this
      subject are the following: 1) merchant’s and usurer’s capital,
      on the one hand, and industrial capital[i.e., capital invested in
      production, whether agricultural or industrial, on the other, represent a
      single type of economic phenomenon, which is covered by the general
      formula: the buying of commodities in order to sell at a profit (Das
      Kapital, I, 2. Abschnitt, Chapter IV, especially pp. 148-149 of the
      second German

  edition[21]). 
  2) Merchant’s and usurer’s capital
      always historically precede

 

      the formation of industrial capital and are logically the
      necessary premise of its formation (Das Kapital, III, 1,
      S.  312-316; Russ. trans., pp. 262-265; III, 2, 132-137, 149;
      Russ. trans., pp. 488-492,

      502)[22];
     but in themselves neither merchant’s capital nor
     usurer’s capital represents a sufficient
     premise for the rise of industrial capital (i.e., capitalist
     production); they do not always break up the old mode
     of production and replace it by the capitalist mode of
     production; the formation of the latter
     “depends entirely upon the stage of historical
     development and the attendant circumstances”
     (ibid., 2, 133; Russ. trans., p.

      489).[23] “To
      what extent they” (commercial and merchant’s capital)
      “bring about a dissolution of the old mode of production depends on
      their solidity and internal structure. And whither this process of
      dissolution will lead, in other words, what new mode of production will
      replace the old, does not depend on commerce, but on the character of the
      old mode of production itself” (ibid., III, 1, 316;
      Russ. trans.,

      265).[24] 3) The
      independent development of merchant’s capital is inversely
      proportional to the degree of development of capitalist
      production (ibid., S. 312; Russ. trans.,

      262)[25]; the
      greater the development of merchant’s and usurer’s capital,
      the smaller the development of industrial capital (= capitalist
      production), and vice versa.

    
      Consequently, as applied to Russia, the question to be answered is: Is
      merchant’s and usurer’s capital being linked up with
      industrial capital? Are commerce and usury, in disintegrating the old mode
      of production, leading to its replacement by the capitalist mode of
      production, or by some other

system?[14]

 These are questions of fact, questions that must
      be answered in regard to all aspects of

 

      the national economy of Russia. As regards peasant cultivation the data
      reviewed above contain the reply, and an affirmative reply, to this
      question. The ordinary Narodnik view that the “kulak” and the
      “enterprising muzhik” are not two forms of one and the same
      economic phenomenon, but totally unconnected and opposite types of
      phenomena, is absolutely without foundation. It is one of those Narodnik
      prejudices which no one has ever even attempted to prove by an analysis of
      precise economic data. The data indicate the contrary. Whether the peasant
      hires workers for the purpose of expanding production, whether he trades
      in land (recall the data quoted above on the large scale of land renting
      among the rich) or in groceries, or whether he trades in hemp, hay,
      cattle, etc., or money (usurer), he represents a single economic type, and
      his operations amount, at bottom, to one and the same economic
      relation. Furthermore, that in the Russian community village the role of
      capital is not confined to bondage and usury, that capital is also
      invested in production, is apparent from the fact that the well-to-do
      peasant puts his money into the improvement of his farm, into the purchase
      and renting of land, the acquisition of improved implements, the hiring of
      workers, etc., and not only into trading establishments and undertakings
      (see above). If capital in our countryside were incapable of creating
      anything but bondage and usury, we could not, from the data on production,
      establish the differentiation of the peasantry, the formation of a rural
      bourgeoisie and a rural proletariat; the whole of the peasantry would
      represent a fairly even type of poverty-stricken cultivators, among whom
      only usurers would stand out, and they only to the extent of money owned
      and not to the extent and organisation of agricultural
      production. Finally, from the above-examined data follows the important
      proposition that the independent development of merchant’s and
      usurer’s capital in our countryside retards the
      differentiation of the peasantry. The further the development of commerce
      proceeds, bringing the country closer to the town, eliminating the
      primitive village markets and undermining the monopoly of the village
      shopkeeper, and the more there develop forms of credit that accord with
      European standards, displacing the village usurer, the further

 

      and deeper must the differentiation of the peasantry proceed. The capital
      of the well-to-do peasants, forced out of petty trade and usury, will flow
      more abundantly into production, whither it is already beginning to flow.

    
      10) Another important phenomenon in the economy of our countryside that
      retards the differentiation of the peasantry is the survivals of corvée
      economy, i.e., labour-service. Labour-service is based on the payment of
      labour in kind, hence, on a poor development of commodity
      economy. Labour-service presupposes and requires the middle peasant, one
      who is not very affluent (otherwise he would not agree to the bondage of
      labour-service) but is also not a proletarian (to undertake labour-service
      one must have one’s own implements, one must be at least in some
      measure a “sound” peasant).

    
      When we said above that the peasant bourgeoisie are the masters of the
      contemporary countryside, we disregarded the factors retarding
      differentiation: bondage, usury, labour-service, etc. Actually, the real
      masters of the contemporary countryside are often enough not the
      representatives of the peasant bourgeoisie, but the village usurers and
      the neighbouring landowners. It is, however, quite legitimate to disregard
      them, for otherwise it is impossible to study the internal system of
      economic relationships among the peasantry. It is interesting to note that
      the Narodnik also employs this procedure, only he stops half-way and does
      not carry his reasoning to its logical conclusion. Speaking of the burden
      of taxes, etc., in The Destiny of Capitalism, Mr. V. V. observes
      that due to these reasons “the conditions for a natural
      (sic!) life no longer exist” (287) for the village
      community, for the “mir”. Excellent! But the whole question is
      precisely: what are these “natural conditions” that do not yet
      exist in our countryside? To obtain a reply to this question one must
      study the system of economic relationships within the village community,
      lifting away, if one may so express it, the survivals of pre-Reform times
      which obscure these “natural conditions” of life in our
      countryside. Had Mr. V. V. done this, he would have seen that this system
      of village relationships reveals the absolute differentiation of the
      peasantry, that

 

      the more completely bondage, usury, labour-service, etc., are forced out,
      the more profoundly will the differentiation of the peasantry

proceed.[15]

 Above we have
      shown, on the basis of Zemstvo statistics, that this differentiation is
      already an accomplished fact, that the peasantry have completely split up
      into opposite groups.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Cf. Das Kapital, I2,

S. 527.[26]—Lenin

[2]
Agricultural Survey of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia for 1892.—Lenin

[3]
      In the Russian translation (p. 651 and foll.) this term is given as
      “trudovaya renta” (“trudovaya” is the adjectival
      form of “trud”—labour. —Ed.). We think
      that our translation (“otrabotochnaya renta”—from
      “otrabotat,” to work off, to pay off by
      labour. —Ed.) is more correct, for the Russian language
      contains the specific term “otrabotki” (labour-service) which
      means precisely the work of the dependent peasant for the

landowner.[27]—Lenin

[4]
      A strict distinction must be drawn between money rent and capitalist
      ground-rent the latter presupposes the existences in agriculture of
      capitalists and wage-workers; the former the existence of dependent
      peasants. Capitalist rent is that part of surplus-value which remains
      after the deduction of the employer’s profit, whereas money rent is
      the price of the entire surplus product paid by the peasant to the
      landowner. An example of money rent in Russia is the quit-rent paid by the
      peasant to the landlord. Undoubtedly, the taxes which our peasants now
      have to pay represent, in part, money rent. Sometimes peasant renting of
      land also approximates to the paying of money rent; that is when the high
      rent the peasant has to pay for the land leaves him no more than a meagre
      wage.—Lenin

[5]
      Let us note that the employment of wage-labour is not an essential feature
      of the concept “petty bourgeoisie.” This concept covers all
      independent production for the market, where the social system of economy
      contains the contradictions described by us above (Sec. 2), particularly
      where the mass of producers are transformed into wage-workers.—Lenin

[6]
      To prove that it is correct to assign the indigent peasants to the class
      of allotment-holding wage-workers, one must show not only how, and what
      sort of, peasants sell labour-power, but also how and what sort of,
      employers buy labour-power. This will be shown in subsequent chapters.—Lenin

[7]
      Prof. Conrad considers the criterion for the real peasant in Germany to be
      ownership of a pair of draught animals (Gespann bauernguter), see
      Landownership and Agriculture (Moscow, 1896 pp. 84-85). For
      Russia the criterion should rather be put higher. In defining the concept
      “peasant,” what Conrad takes is the percentage of persons or
      households engaged in “hired labour” or “subsidiary
      industries” generally (ibid.),—Prof Stebut, who
      cannot be denied authority on questions of fact, wrote in 1882:
      “Since the fall of serfdom, the peasant with his small economic
      unit, engaged exclusively in growing grain, that is to say, principally in
      the central black-earth belt of Russia, has in the majority of cases
      become an artisan, a farm labourer or a day labourer, for whom agriculture
      is only a subsidiary occupation” (“Articles on Russian
      Agriculture, Its Defects and the Measures for Its Improvement,”
      Moscow, 1883, p. 11) Evidently the artisans here also include wage-workers
      in industry (building, etc.) However incorrect this use of terms, it is
      very widespread in our literature, even in specifically economic
      literature.—Lenin

[8]
Lord of the
      manor.—Ed.


[9]
      Let us quote examples of the various European forms of wage-labour in
      agriculture from the Handw\"ort der Staatswiss. (Land ownership
      and Agriculture, Moscow, 1896). “The peasants’
      holding,” says J. Conrad, “must be distinguished from the
      parcel, from the patch of the ‘ landless peasant’ or the
      ‘ market gardener,’ the owner of which is obliged to seek
      additionally outside occupation and employment”
      (pp. 83-84). “In France, according to the 1881 census, 18 million
      persons, i.e., somewhat less than half the population, obtained their
      livelihood in agriculture about 9 million owners of land, 5 million tenant
      farmers and half-croppers, 4 million day labourers and owners of small
      plots, or tenants obtaining their livelihood mainly by
      wage-labour. . . . It is assumed that at least 75% of the agricultural
      labourers in France have their own land” (p. 233, Goltz). In
      Germany, the rural workers include the following categories who
      possess land: 1) cottars, cottagers, gardeners[something like our
      gift-land peasants]; 2) contract day labourers; they possess land, and
      hire themselves out for a definite part of the year[cf. our

      “three-dayers”]. [28] “Contract day labourers
      constitute the
      bulk of the agricultural labourers in those parts of Germany where big
      landed property predominates” (p. 236); 3) agricultural labourers
      who do their farming on rented land (p. 237).—Lenin

[10]
      Only this fact that a home market is created by the differentiation of the
      peasantry can explain, for example, the enormous growth of the home market
      for cotton goods, the manufacture of which

 

has grown so rapidly in the
      post-Reform period along with the wholesale ruin of the
      peasantry. Mr. N.–on, who illustrates his theories about the home market
      with this very example of our textile industry, was totally unable to
      explain the existence of this contradictory phenomenon.—Lenin

[11]
      The sole exception is I. Hourwich’s splendid work The Economics
of the Russian Village, New York,
1892. Russ. trans. <<[Transcriber’s Note : Here the
title is given in Russian characters.—  ]>> Moscow,
1896. One must marvel at the skill with which Mr. Hourwich processed the
Zemstvo statistical returns, which furnish no combined tables of groups
of peasants according to economic strength.—Lenin

[12]
      Restriction of migration thus has an enormously retarding effect upon the
      differentiation of the peasantry.—Lenin

[13]
      See also Mr. Preemak’s Material in Figures for a Study of
      Migration to Siberia. (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[14]
      Mr V. V. touched upon this question on the very first page of The
      Destiny of Capitalism, but neither in this nor in any other of his
      works did he attempt to examine the facts about the relation between
      merchant’s and industrial capital in Russia. Mr. N.–on, although
      claiming to be a faithful follower of Marx’s theory, preferred,
      however, to replace the precise and clear category “merchant’s
      capital” by the vague and diffuse term of his own
      coinage—”capitalisation” or “the capitalisation of
      income”; and under cover of this hazy term successfully evaded,
      positively evaded, this question. The predecessor of capitalist production
      in Russia, according to him, is not merchant’s capital, but
      . . . “people’s

  production.”[29]—Lenin

[15]
    Incidentally. In speaking of Mr. V. V.’s The Destiny of
Capitalism, and particularly of Chapter VI, from which the
annotation is taken, one cannot but indicate that it contains very good
and quite fair pages. These are the pages where the author does
not deal with the “destiny of capitalism” and
not even with capitalism at all, but with the methods of
exacting taxes. It is characteristic that Mr. V. V. does not notice the
inseparable connection between these methods and the survivals of corvée
economy,



which latter (as we shall see below) he is capable of
idealising!—Lenin
 



[26]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 504-505. [p.  173]
    



[16]
      The Valuyev Commission—the “Commission to Investigate
      the Condition of Russian Agriculture “ which functioned under the
      chairmanship of the tsar’s minister P. A. Valuyev. In the years
      1872-1873 the Commission collected a large amount of material dealing with
      the condition of agriculture in post-Reform Russia: Governors’
      reports, statements and depositions of landlords, marshals of the
      nobility, Zemstvo administrations, volost boards, grain merchants, village
      priests, kulaks, statistical and agricultural societies and other bodies
      connected with agriculture. This material was published in Papers of
      the Commission of Inquiry into the Condition of Russian Agriculture,
      St. Petersburg, 1873.
    



[27]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 770.


Lenin’s note on the wrong translation of the term “Arbeitsrente” as
      “trudovaya renta” refers to the translation by Nikolai-on
      (Danielson) of 1896.  [p.  174]
    



[17]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 776.
    



[18]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 777-778.
    



[19]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 779.
    



[28]
Gift-land peasants, those of the former landlords’
      peasants, who, at the time of the Reform of 1861, by
      “agreement” with their landlords received their allotments as
      a gift (without having

 

to redeem them). The gilt-lander received a
      miserable strip, amounting altogether to a quarter of the so-called
      “top” or “statutory” allotment, i.e., of the
      allotment established by law for the given locality. All the rest of the
      lands that had constituted the peasants’ allotments before the
      Reform were seized by the landlord, who held his
      “gift-landers,” forcibly dispossessed of their land, in a
      state of economic bondage even after serfdom was abolished.
    

      “Three-dayers,” a category of allotment-holding
      agricultural wage-workers. Farming the land he held on a poverty level,
      the “three-dayer” was a day labourer who, in return for grain
      or 20 to 30 rubles in cash, had to agree to conditions of bondage or pay
      off the debt by working three days a week throughout the summer on the
      farm of the kulak or the landlord who made the loan. This type of
      allotment-holding agricultural labourer was met with on a particularly
      extensive scale in the north western gubernias of tsarist Russia.
    



[20]
Ostsee region—the Baltic region of tsarist Russia, which
      included the gubernias of Esthland, Courland and Liflandia. This area is
      now the territory of the Latvian and Estonian Soviet Socialist Republics.
    



[21]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 163-165.
    



[22]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 322-327, 580-584,
      595-596.
    



[23]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 581.
    



[24]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 326.
    



[25]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 323.
    



[29]
      The Narodnik theory of “people’s production” is
      criticised by Lenin in his earlier work What the “Friends of the
      People” Are and How They Fight the Social-Democrats. (See
      present edition, Vol. 1.)
    

 
  

XII. Zemstvo Statistics On Peasant Budgets

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from Corvée to Capitalist Economy




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter III. The Landowners' Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 189-251
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. The Main Features of CorvÃ©e Economy
  191



II. The Combination of the CorvÃ©e and the Capitalist Systems of Economy
  193



III. Description of the Labour-Service System
  198



IV. The Decline of the Labour-Service System
  205



V. The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem
  210



VI. The Story of Engelhardt’s Farm
  215



VII. The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture
  219



VIII. The Significance of Machinery in Agriculture
  228



IX. Wage-Labour in Agriculture
  237



X. The Significance of Hired Labour in Agriculture
  242

 
 
 

Note
 
 



      The first six sections of this chapter originally appeared as an article
      in the journal Nachalo (Beginning ), Issue No. 3, March
      1899 (pp. 96-117) under the title of “The Dislodgement of
      CorvÃ©e by
      Capitalist Economy in Contemporary Russian Agriculture.” The article
      was accompanied by the following editorial note: “This article is an
      extract from the author’s considerable investigation of the
      development of capitalism in Russia.” [p. 191]
    








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Main Features of Corvée Economy




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: I. The Main Features of CorvÃ©e Economy








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy










      From peasant economy we must now pass to landlord economy.  Our task is to
      examine, in its main features, the present social-economic system of
      landlord economy and to describe the nature of the evolution of this
      system in the post-Reform epoch.
    



      I. The Main Features of CorvÃ©e Economy
    

      As our starting-point in examining the present system of landlord economy
      we must take the system of that economy which prevailed in the epoch of
      serfdom. The essence of the economic system of those days was that the
      entire land of a given unit of agrarian economy, i.e., of a given estate,
      was divided into the lord’s and the peasants’ land; the latter
      was distributed in allotments among the peasants, who (receiving other
      means of production in addition, as for example, timber, sometimes cattle,
      etc.)  cultivated it with their own labour and their own implements, and
      obtained their livelihood from it. The product of this peasants’
      labour constituted the necessary product, to employ the terminology of
      theoretical political economy; necessary – for the peasants in providing
      them with means of subsistence, and for the landlord in providing him with
      hands; in exactly the same way as the product which replaces the variable
      part of the value of capital is a necessary product in capitalist
      society. The peasants’ surplus labour, on the other hand, consisted
      in their cultivation, with the same implements, of the landlord’s
      land; the product of that labour went to the landlord. Hence, the surplus

 

      labour was separated then in space from the necessary labour: for the
      landlord they cultivated his land, for themselves their allotments; for
      the landlord they worked some days of the week and for themselves
      others. The peasant’s allotment in this economy served, as it were,
      as wages in kind (to express oneself in modern terms), or as a means of
      providing the landlord with hands. The peasants’ “own”
      farming of their allotments was a condition of the landlord economy, and
      its purpose was to “provide” not the peasant with means of
      livelihood but the landlord with

hands.[1]

      It is this system of economy which we call CorvÃ©e [Russ.: barshchina]
      economy. Its prevalence obviously presumes the following necessary
      conditions: firstly, the predominance of natural economy. The feudal
      estate had to constitute a self-sufficing, self-contained entity, in very
      slight contact with the outside world. The production of grain by the
      landlords for sale, which developed particularly in the latter period of
      the existence of serfdom, was already a harbinger of the collapse of the
      old regime. Secondly, such an economy required that the direct producer be
      allotted the means of production in general, and land in particular;
      moreover, that he be tied to the land, since otherwise the landlord was
      not assured of hands. Hence, the methods of obtaining the surplus product
      under CorvÃ©e and under capitalist economy are diametrically opposite: the
      former is based on the producer being provided with land, the latter on
      the producer being dispossessed of the

land.[2]

 Thirdly, a

 

      condition for such a system of economy was the personal dependence of the
      peasant on the landlord. If the landlord had not possessed direct power
      over the person of the peasant, he could not have compelled a man who had
      a plot of land and ran his own farm to work for him. Hence, “other
      than economic pressure,” as Marx says in describing this economic
      regime, was necessary (and, as has already been indicated above, Marx
      assigned it to the category of labour-rent ; Das
      Kapital, III, 2,

324).[3] The form and degree of this coercion may be the
      most varied, ranging from the peasant’s serf status to his lack of
      rights in the social estates. Fourthly, and finally, a condition and a
      consequence of the system of economy described was the extremely low and
      stagnant condition of technique, for farming was in the hands of small
      peasants, crushed by poverty and degraded by personal dependence and by
      ignorance.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      An extremely vivid description of this system of economy is given by
      A. Engelhardt in his Letters from the Countryside (St. Petersburg
      1885, pp. 556-557). The author quite rightly points out that feudal
      economy was a definite, regular and complete system, the director of which
      was the landlord, who allotted land to the peasants and assigned them to
      various jobs.—Lenin

[2]
      In opposing the view of Henry George, who said that the expropriation of
      the mass of the population is the great and universal cause of poverty and
      oppression, Engels wrote in 1887: “This is not quite correct
      historically. . . . In the Middle Ages, it was not the expropriation of
      the people from, but on the contrary, their appropriation to the land
      which became the source of feudal oppression. The peasant retained his
      land, but was attached to it as a serf or villein, and made liable to
      tribute to the lord in labour and in produce” (The Condition of
      the Working-Class in England in 1844, New York, 1887, Preface,

p. III).[4]—Lenin
 


[4]
      See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, On Britain, Moscow, 1953,
      p. 10.
    


[3]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 771.
    

 
  


|

II. The Combination of the CorvÃ©e and the Capitalist Systems of Economy

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Combination of the Corvée and the Capitalist Systems of Economy




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: II. 
The Combination of the CorvÃ©e and the Capitalist Systems of Economy








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      II. The Combination of the CorvÃ©e and the
      Capitalist Systems of Economy
    

      The CorvÃ©e system of economy was undermined by the abolition of
      serfdom. All the main foundations of this system were undermined: natural
      economy, the self-contained and the self-sufficient character of the
      landed estate, the close connection between its various constituents, and
      the landlord’s power over the peasants. The peasant’s farm was
      separated from that of the landlord; the peasant was to buy back his land
      and become the full owner of it; the landlord, to adopt the capitalist
      system of farming, which, as has just been observed, has a diametrically
      opposite basis. But such a transition to a totally different system could
      not, of course, take place at once, and for two different reasons. First,
      the conditions required for capitalist production did not yet exist. A
      class of people was required who were accustomed to work for hire; the
      peasants’ implements had to be replaced by those of the landlord;
      agriculture had to be organised on the same lines as any other commercial
      and industrial enterprise and not as the business of the lord. All these
      conditions could only take shape gradually, and the attempts of some
      landlords,

 

      immediately after the Reform, to import machinery and even workers from
      abroad could not but end in a fiasco. The other reason why the transition
      to the capitalist conduct of affairs was not possible at once was that the
      old CorvÃ©e system of economy had been undermined, but not yet completely
      destroyed. The peasants’ farms were not entirely separated from
      those of the landlords, for the latter retained possession of very
      essential parts of the peasants’ allotments: the “cut-off

      lands,”[5] the
      woods, meadows, watering places, pastures, etc. Without these lands (or
      easement rights) the peasants were absolutely unable to carry on
      independent farming, so that the landlords were able to continue the old
      system of economy in the form of labour-service. The possibility of
      exercising “other than economic pressure”

      also 

      remained in the shape of the peasants’
      temporarily-bound

status,[6] collective responsibility, corporal punishment,
      forced labour on public works, etc.

    
      Thus, capitalist economy could not emerge at once, and CorvÃ©e economy
      could not disappear at once. The only possible system of economy was,
      accordingly, a transitional one, a system combining the features of both
      the CorvÃ©e and the capitalist systems. And indeed, the post-Reform system
      of farming practised by the landlords bears precisely these features.
      With all the endless variety of forms characteristic of a transitional
      epoch, the economic organisation of contemporary landlord farming amounts
      to two main systems, in the most varied combinations – the

      labour-service[1]

 system and the capitalist system. The
      first consists in the landlord’s land being cultivated with the
      implements of the neighbouring peasants, the form of payment not altering
      the essential nature of this system (whether payment is in money, as in
      the case of job-hire, or in produce, as in the case of half-cropping, or
      in land or grounds, as in the case of labour-service in the narrow sense
      of the term). This is a direct survival of CorvÃ©e

economy,[2]

 and the economic
      characterisation of the latter,

 

      given above, is applicable almost entirely to the labour-service system
      (the only exception being that in one of the forms of the labour-service
      system one of the conditions of CorvÃ©e economy disappears, namely, under
      job-hire, where labour instead of being paid in kind is paid in
      money). The capitalist farming system consists of the hire of workers
      (annual, seasonal, day, etc.) who till the land with the owner’s
      implements. The systems mentioned are actually interwoven in the most
      varied and fantastic fashion: on a mass of landlord estates there is a
      combination of the two systems, which are applied to different
      farming

      operations.[3]

 It is
      quite natural that the combination of such dissimilar and even opposite
      systems of economy leads in practice to a whole number of most profound
      and complicated conflicts and contradictions, and that the pressure of
      these contradictions results in a number of the farmers going bankrupt,
      etc. All these are phenomena characteristic of every transitional period.

    
      If we raise the question as to the relative incidence of the two systems,
      we shall have to say, first of all, that no precise statistics are
      available on the matter, and it is not likely that they could be
      collected: that would require a registration

 

      not only of all estates, but of all economic operations performed on all
      the estates. Only approximate data are available, in the shape of general
      descriptions of individual localities as to the predominance of one or
      another system. Data of this kind are given in a summarised form for the
      whole of Russia in the above-mentioned publication of the Department of
      Agriculture, Hired Labour, etc. On the basis of these
      data, Mr.  Annensky has drawn up a very striking chart showing the
      incidence of these systems (The Influence of Harvests,

      etc.,[7] I,
      170).  Let us summarise these data in a table, and supplement them with
      figures on the cultivated area on private owners’ lands in 1883-1887
      (according to Statistics of the Russian Empire, IV. The average
      harvest in European Russia in the five years 1883 1887. St. Petersburg,

      1888).[4]








      Thus, although the labour-service system predominates in the purely
      Russian gubernias, the capitalist system of landlord farming must be
      considered the predominant one at present in European Russia as a whole.
      Moreover, our table gives a far from complete picture of this
      predominance, for Group I of the gubernias includes some in which the
      labour-service system is not applied at all (the Baltic gubernias, for
      example), whereas Group III includes not a single gubernia, and in all
      probability not a single farmed estate in which the capitalist system is
      not applied at least in part. Here is an illustration of this based on
      Zemstvo statistics (Raspopin; “Private-Landowner Farming in Russia
      According to Zemstvo Statistics,” in Yuridichesky Vestnik
      [Legal Messenger ], 1887, Nos. 11-12. No.  12, p. 634):
    





      Lastly, it must be observed that sometimes the labour-service system
      passes into the capitalist system and merges with it to such an extent
      that it becomes almost impossible to distinguish one from the other. For
      example, a peasant rents a plot of land, undertaking in return to perform
      a definite number of days’ work (a practice which, as we know, is
      most widespread; see examples in the next section). How are we to draw a
      line of demarcation between such a “peasant” and the
      West-European or Ostsee “farm labourer” who receives a plot of
      land on undertaking to work a definite number of days? Life creates forms
      that unite in themselves with remarkable gradualness systems of economy
      whose basic features constitute opposites. It becomes impossible to say
      where “labour-service” ends and where “capitalism”
      begins.
    


      Having established the fundamental fact that the whole variety of forms of
      contemporary landlord farming amounts to two

      systems – the labour-service 

      and the capitalist systems, in various combinations, we shall now proceed
      to give an economic description of the two systems and determine which of
      them is eliminating the other under the influence of the whole course of
      economic evolution.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      We are now replacing the term “CorvÃ©e” by the term
      “labour-service” since the latter expression corresponds in
      greater measure to post-Reform relations and is by now generally accepted
      in our literature.—Lenin

[2]
      Here is a particularly striking example: “In the south of Yelets
      Uyezd (Orel Gubernia),” writes a correspondent of the Department

 

of
      Agriculture, “on the big landlords’ farms, side by side with
      cultivation with the aid of annual labourers, a considerable part of the
      land is tilled by peasants in return for land leased to them. The ex-serfs
      continue to rent land from their former landlords, and in return till
      their land Such villages continue to bear the name of
      ‘CorvÃ©e’ of such-and-such a landlord” (S.
      A. Korolenko, Hired Labour, etc, p. 118) Here is one
      more example: “On my farm,” writes another landlord,
      “all the work is done by my former peasants (8 villages with
      approximately 600 persons); in return for this they get the use of
      pastures for their cattle (from 2,000 to 2,500 dess.); except that
      seasonal workers do the first ploughing and sow with seed drills”
      (ibid., p. 325. From Kaluga Uyezd)—Lenin

[3]
      “Most of the estates are managed in the following way: part,
      although a very small part, of the land is cultivated by the owners with
      their own implements, with the aid of labourers hired by the year”
      and other “workers, but all the rest of the land is leased to
      peasants for cultivation either on a half-crop basis” or in return
      for land, or for money (Hired Labour, ibid.,
      96). . . . “On the majority of estates simultaneous resort is made
      to nearly all, or at any rate many, forms of hire” (i.e., methods of
      “providing the farm with man power”).  Agriculture and
      Forestry in Russia published by the Department of Agriculture for the
      Chicago Exhibition, St. Petersburg, 1893, p. 79.—Lenin

[4]
      Of the 50 gubernias of European Russia the following are excluded:
      Archangel, Vologda, Olonets, Vyatka, Perm, Orenburg and Astrakhan. In
      these gubernias the area cultivated in 1883-1887 amounted to 562,000
      dess. on private owners’ estates out of a total of 16,472,000 dess.
      cultivated on such land in the whole of European Russia. – Group I
      includes the following: the 3 Baltic gubernias, the 4 Western (Kovno,
      Vilna, Grodno and Minsk), the 3 South-Western (Kiev, Volhynia, Podolsk),
      the 5 Southern (Kherson, Taurida, Bessarabia, Ekaterinoslav, Don), and 1
      South-Eastern (Saratov); then follow the St. Petersburg, Moscow and
      Yaroslavl gubernias.  Group II includes: Vitebsk, Mogilev, Smolensk,
      Kaluga, Voronezh, Poltava and Kharkov. Group III includes the rest of the
      gubernias. – To be more exact one should deduct from the total area
      cultivated on private owners’ land the gown area belonging to
      tenants, but no such statistics are available. We would add that such a
      correction would

 

hardly alter our conclusion as to the predominance of the
      capitalist system, since a large part of the landowners’ fields in
      the black-earth belt is rented, and the labour-service system predominates
      in the gubernias of this belt.—Lenin
 


[5]
      “Cut-off-lands ” (otrezki ) – the pasture
      lands woods, etc., which the landlords “cut off,” i.e., of
      which they deprived the peasants when serfdom was abolished in Russia.
    


[6]
Temporarily-bound peasants – serfs who, after the abolition of
      serfdom in 1861, were obliged to perform certain services for the
      landlords, i.e., do CorvÃ©e service or pay quit-rent. The
      “temporarily-bound status” continued until the peasants, by
      agreement with the landlords, had acquired their allotments by the payment
      of redemption money. The landlords were obliged to accept redemption
      payments only after the edict of 1881, by which the “obligatory
      relation” between the peasants and the landlords had to cease as
      from January 1, 1883.
    


[7]
      The two volumes of The Influence of Harvests and Grain Prices on
      Certain Aspects of the Russian National Economy reached Lenin in the
      village of Shushenskoye in 1897. He made a careful study of them while
      working on The Development of Capitalism in Russia, as is proved
      by his numerous marginal comments in the volumes. While he exposed the
      method which the Narodniks were so fond of employing, the distortion of
      the actual situation by quoting “average” statistics which in
      fact obscured the differentiation of the peasantry, Lenin carefully
      checked and made use of the concrete material in the volumes. Thus, on
      page 153 of Vol. 1 Lenin drew up a table showing the distribution, in the
      different gubernias of Russia, of the various forms of economy
      (capitalist, labour-service, and mixed). This material, along with some
      additions from other sources, went to make up the table given in the text.
    

 
  

I. The Main Features of CorvÃ©e Economy

|

III. Description of the Labour-Service System

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Description of the Labour-Service System




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: III. Description of the Labour-Service System








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      III. Description of the Labour-Service System
    

      Labour-service, as has already been observed above, is of exceedingly
      varied types. Sometimes peasants undertake for a money payment to
      cultivate with their own implements the fields of the landowner –
      so-called “job-hire,” “dessiatine

      employments,”[1]

 cultivation of

“cycles”[2]
[10]

 (i.e., one dessiatine of spring crop and
      one of winter crop), etc. Sometimes the peasant borrows grain or money,
      under taking to work off either the entire loan or the interest on

it.[3]

 Under this form a
      feature peculiar to the labour-service system in general stands out with
      great clarity – the bondage, the usurious character of this sort of hire
      of labour. In some cases the peasants work “for trespass”
      (i.e., undertake to work off the legally established fine for cattle
      trespass), or work simply “out of respect” (cf. Engelhardt,
      loc. cit., 56), i.e., gratis, or just for a drink, so as
      not to lose other “employments” by the landowner. Lastly,
      labour-service in return for land is very widespread in the shape either
      of half-cropping or directly of work for land rented, for grounds used,
      etc.

    
      Very often the payment for rented land assumes the most diverse forms,
      which sometimes are even combined, so that side by side with money rent we
      find rent in kind and “labour-service.” Here are a couple of
      examples: for every dessiatine, 1 1/2 dess. to be cultivated + 10 eggs +

 

      1 chicken + 1 day’s female labour; for 43 dess. of spring crop land
      12 rubles per dess., and 51 dess. of winter-crop land 16 rubles per
      dess. in cash + threshing of so many stacks of oats, 7 stacks of buckwheat
      and 20 stacks of rye + manuring of not less than 5 dessiatines of rented
      land with manure from own animals, at the rate of 300 cart-loads
      per dessiatine (Karyshev, Rentings, p. 348). In this case even
      the peasant’s manure is converted into a constituent part of the
      private landowner’s farm! The widespread and varied character of
      labour-service is indicated by the abundance of terms used for it:
      otrabotki, otbuchi, otbutki, barshchina, basarinka, posobka, panshchina,
      postupok, viyemka, etc. (ibid., 342). Sometimes the peasant
      pledges himself to perform “whatever work the owner orders”
      (ibid., 346), or in general to “pay heed,”
      “give ear” to him, to “help out.” Labour-service
      embraces the “whole cycle of jobs in rural life. It is as
      labour-service that all operations relating to field-cultivation and grain
      and hay harvesting get done, firewood is stocked and loads are
      carted” (346-347), roofs and chimneys are repaired (354, 348), and
      the delivery-of poultry and eggs is undertaken (ibid.). An
      investigator of Gdov Uyezd, St.  Petersburg Gubernia, quite justly remarks
      that the types of labour-service to be met with are of the “former,
      pre-Reform, CorvÃ©e character”

(349).[4]

      Particularly interesting is the form of labour-service for land, so-called
      labour-service renting and rent payment in

kind.[5]

 In the preceding chapter we have seen
      how capitalist relations are manifested in peasant renting of land; here
      we see “renting” which is simply a survival of

 

      CorvÃ©e

economy,[6]

      and which sometimes passes imperceptibly into the capitalist system of
      providing the estate with agricultural workers by alloting patches of land
      to them.  Zemstvo statistics establish beyond doubt this connection
      between such “renting” and the lessors’ own
      farming. “With the development of their own farming on the private
      landowners’ estates, the owners had to guarantee themselves a
      supply of workers at the required time. Hence, there develops in many
      places the tendency among them to distribute land to the peasants on the
      labour-service basis, or for a part of the crop together with
      labour-service. . . .” This system of farming “. . . is fairly
      widespread. The more frequently the lessors do their own farming, the
      smaller the amount of land available for leasing and the greater the
      demand for such land, the more widely does this form of land renting
      develop” (ibid., p. 266, cf. also 367). Thus, we have here
      renting of a very special kind, under which the landowner does not abandon
      his own farm, but which expresses the development of private-landowner
      cultivation, expresses not the consolidation of the peasant farm by
      the enlargement of area held, but the conversion of the peasant into
      an agricultural labourer. In the preceding chapter we have seen that
      on the peasant’s farm the renting of land is of contradictory
      significance: for some it is a profitable expansion of their farms; for
      others it is a deal made out of dire need. Now we see that on the
      landlord’s farm, too, the leasing of land is of contradictory
      significance: in some cases it is the transfer of the farm to another
      person for a payment of rent; in others it is a method of conducting
      one’s own farm, a method of providing one’s estate with
      manpower.

    
      Let us pass to the question of the payment of labour under
      labour-service. The data from various sources are at one in testifying to
      the fact that the payment of labour where it is hired on a labour-service
      and bonded basis is always lower than under capitalist
      “free” hire.  Firstly, this is proved by the fact that rent in
      kind, i.e., on the basis of labour-service and half-cropping (which, as we
      have just

 

      seen, is merely labour-service and bonded hire), is every where, as a
      general rule, more costly than money rent, very much more costly
      (ibid., p. 350), sometimes twice as much (ibid., 356,
      Rzhev Uyezd, Tver Gubernia). Secondly, rent in kind is developed to the
      greatest degree among the poorest groups of peasants (ibid., 261
      and foll.).  This is renting from dire need, “renting” by the
      peasant who is no longer able to resist his conversion, in this way, into
      an agricultural wage-worker. The well-to-do peasants do what they can to
      rent land for money. “The tenant takes advantage of every
      opportunity to pay his rent in money, and thus to reduce the cost of using
      other people’s land” (ibid., 265) – and we would
      add, not only to reduce the cost of renting the land, but also to escape
      bonded hire. In Rostovon-Don Uyezd the remarkable fact was even observed
      of money rent being abandoned in favour of

skopshchina,[11] as rents went up,
      despite a drop in the peasants’ share of the harvest
      (ibid., p. 266). The significance of rent in kind, which utterly
      ruins the peasant and turns him into a farm labourer, is quite clearly
      illustrated by this

fact.[7]

 Thirdly,

 

      a direct comparison between the price of labour in the case of
      labour-service hire and of capitalist “free” hire shows the
      latter to be greater. In the above-quoted publication of the Department of
      Agriculture, Hired Labour, etc., it is calculated that
      the average pay for the complete cultivation, with the peasant’s own
      implements, of a dessiatine of land under winter grain is 6 rubles (data
      for the central black-earth belt for the 8 years, 1883-1891). If, however,
      we calculate the cost of the same amount of work on a hired labour basis,
      we get 6 rubles 19 kopeks for the work of the labourer alone, not counting
      the work of the horse (the pay for the horse’s work cannot be put at
      less than 4 rubles 50 kopeks, loc.  cit., 45). The
      compiler rightly considers this to be “absolutely abnormal”
      (ibid.). We would merely observe that the fact that payment for
      labour under purely capitalist hire is greater than under all forms of
      bondage and under other pre-capitalist relations has been established not
      only in agriculture, but also in industry, and not only in Russia, but
      also in other countries. Here are more precise and more detailed Zemstvo
      statistics on this question (Statistical Returns for Saratov
      Uyezd, Vol. I, Pt. III, pp. 18-19. Quoted from Mr. Karyshev’s
      Rentings, p. 353). (See Table on p.  203.)
    

      Thus, under labour-service (just as under bonded hire combined with usury)
      the prices paid for labour are usually less than half those under
      capitalist

      hire.[8]

 Since
      labour





      service can only be undertaken by a local peasant, and one who must
      be “provided with an allotment,” the fact of the tremendous
      drop in pay clearly indicates the importance of the allotment as wages in
      kind. The allotment, in such cases, continues to this day to serve as a
      means of “guaranteeing” the landowner a supply of cheap
      labour. But the difference between free and

“semi-free”[9]

      labour is far from
      exhausted by the difference in pay. Of enormous importance also is the
      circumstance that the latter form of labour always presupposes the
      personal dependence of the one hired upon the one who hires him, it always
      presupposes the greater or lesser retention of “other than economic
      pressure.” Engelhardt very aptly says that the lending of money for
      repayment by labour-service is explained by the greater security of such
      debts: to extract payment from the peasant on a distraint order is a
      difficult matter, “but the authorities will compel the
      peasant to perform the work he

 

      has undertaken to do, even if his own grain remains ungathered”
      (loc. cit., 216). “Only long years of slavery, of
      serf labour for the lord, have been able to produce the
      indifference” (only apparent) with which the cultivator leaves his
      own grain in the rain to go carting somebody else’s sheaves
      (ibid., 429). Without one or other form of binding the population
      to their domiciles, to the “community,” without a certain lack
      of civic rights, labour-service as a system would be impossible. It stands
      to reason that an inevitable consequence of the above-described features
      of the labour-service system is low productivity of labour: methods of
      farming based on labour-service can only be the most stereotyped; the
      labour of the bonded peasant cannot but approximate, in quality, to the
      labour of the serf.

    
      The combination of the labour-service and the capitalist systems makes the
      present system of landlord farming extremely similar in its economic
      organisation to the system that prevailed in our textile industry before
      the development of large-scale machine industry. There, part of the
      operations was done by the merchant with his own implements and with
      wage-workers (fixing the yarn, dyeing and finishing the fabric, etc.), and
      part with the implements of peasant handicraftsmen who worked for him,
      using his material. Here, part of the operations is performed by
      wage-workers, using the employer’s implements, and another part by
      the labour and the implements of peasants working on the land of
      others. There, combined with industrial capital was merchant’s
      capital, and the handicrafts man, besides being weighed down by capital,
      was burdened with bondage, the operations of the subcontractor, the truck
      system, etc. Here, likewise, combined with industrial capital is
      merchant’s and usurer’s capital accompanied by all forms of
      pay reduction and intensification of the producer’s personal
      dependence. There, the transitional system lasted for centuries, being
      based on a primitive hand-labour technique, and was smashed in some three
      decades by large-scale machine industry; here, labour-service has
      continued almost since the rise of Rus (the landowners forced the
      villeins into bondage as far back as the time of Russkaya

      Pravda[12]),
      perpetuating routine technique, and has begun rapidly to give way to
      capitalism only in the post-Reform epoch. In both

 

      cases, the old system merely implies stagnation in the forms of production
      (and, consequently, in all social relations), and the domination of the
      Asiatic way of life. In both cases, the new, capitalist forms of economy
      constitute enormous progress, despite all the contradictions inherent in
      them.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
Statistical Returns for Ryazan  Gubernia.—Lenin

[2]
      Engelhardt, loc.  cit.—Lenin

[3]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. V, Pt 1, Moscow,
      l879, pp, 186-189. We give these references only as an illustration. A
      mass of similar information is to be found in all the literature on
      peasant and private-landowner farming.—Lenin

[4]
      It is noteworthy that the enormous variety of forms of labour-service in
      Russia, and of forms of land renting with all sorts of supplementary
      payments, etc., are covered in their entirety by the main forms
      of pre-capitalist relations in agriculture indicated by Marx in Chapter
      47, Vol. III of Capital. In the preceding chapter, we have
      indicated that there are three main forms: 1) labour-rent, 2) rent in
      kind, and 3) money rent. It is, therefore quite natural that Marx should
      want specifically Russian data as illustrations for the section dealing
      with ground-rent.—Lenin

[5]
      According to Results of Zemstvo Statistical Investigations
(Vol. II), of all the land rented by peasants, 76% is paid for in money;
3 to 7% by labour-service, 13 to 17% with part of the product and,
finally, 2 to 3% by a combination of methods.—Lenin

[6]
      Cf. examples given in footnote to pp. 194-195.  When CorvÃ©e economy
      existed, the landlord gave the peasant land so that the peasant might work
      for him. When land is leased on the labour-service basis, the economic
      aspect of the matter is obviously the same.—Lenin

[7]
      The summary of the latest data on land renting (Mr. Karyshev in the book:
      The Influence of Harvests, etc., Vol 1) has fully
      confirmed the fact that it is only want that compels peasants to rent land
      on a half-crop or a labour-service basis, and that the well-to-do peasants
      prefer to rent land for money (pp. 317-320), as rent in kind is everywhere
      incomparably more costly for the peasant than in cash (pp.  342-346). All
      these facts, however, have not prevented Mr. Karyshev from presenting the
      situation as though “the poor peasant . . . is better able to
      satisfy his need for food by slightly extending his crop area to other
      people’s land on a half-crop basis” (321). Such are the
      fantastic ideas to which a bias in favour of “natural economy”
      can lead one! It has been proved that the payment of rent in kind is more
      costly than payment in cash, that it constitutes a sort of truck-system in
      agriculture, that the peasant is completely ruined and turned into a farm
      labourer – and yet our economist talks of improving “food”!
      Half-crop payment for rent, if you please, “helps .  . . the needy
      section of the rural population to obtain” land by renting it
      (320). Our economist here calls it “help” to obtain land on
      the worst conditions, on the condition that the peasant is turned into a
      farm labourer.  The question arises: what is the difference between the
      Russian Narodniks and the Russian agrarians, who always have been and
      always are ready to render the “needy section of the rural
      population” this kind of “help”?  By the way, here is an
      interesting example. In Khotin Uyezd, Bessarabia Gubernia, the average
      daily earnings of a half cropper are estimated at 60 kopeks, and a day
      labourer in the summer

 

at 35 to 50 kopeks. “It seems that the
      earnings of a half-cropper are, after all, higher than
      the wages of a farm labourer ” (344; Mr. Karyshev’s
      italics). This “after all” is very characteristic. But, unlike
      the farm labourer, the half-cropper has his farm expenses, has he not? He
      has to have a horse and harness, has he not? Why was no account taken of
      these expenses? Whereas the average daily wage in the summer in Bessarabia
      Gubernia is 40 to 77 kopeks (1883-1887 and 1888-1892) the average wage of
      a labourer with horse and harness is 124 to 180 kopeks (1883-1887 and
      1888-1892). Does it not rather “seem” that the farm labourer
      “after all” earns more than the half-cropper? The average
      daily wage of a labourer working without a horse of his own (average for a
      whole year) is estimated at 67 kopeks for Bessarabia Gubernia in the
      period 1882-1891 (ibid., 178)—Lenin

[8]
      After this, what can one do but describe as reactionary the criticism of
      capitalism made, for instance, by a Narodnik like Prince Vasilchikov? The
      very word “hired,” he exclaims pathetically, is contradictory,
      for hire presupposes non-independence, and non-independence

 

rules out
      “freedom.” This Narodnik-minded landlord forgets, of course,
      that capitalism substitutes free non-independence for bonded
      non-independence.—Lenin

[9]
      An expression employed by Mr. Karyshev, loc. cit. It is
      a pity Mr. Karvshev did not draw the conclusion that half-crop renting
      “helps” the survival of “semi-free” labour!—Lenin
 


[10]
Cultivation of cycles – an enslaving form of labour-service
      rendered to the landlord by the peasant as rental for land obtained from
      him in post-Reform Russia. The landlord lent the peasant land or made him
      a loan in cash or kind for which the peasant undertook to cultivate a
      “cycle,” using his own implements and draught animals; this
      meant cultivating one dessiatine of spring crops and one of winter crops,
      occasionally supplemented by reaping a dessiatine of crops.
    


[11]
Skopshchina – the name given in the southern parts of Russia to
      the payment of land rent in kind, on terms of bondage, the tenant paying
      the landowner “s kopny” (from the corn-shock) a portion of the
      harvest (a half, and sometimes more), and usually fulfilling miscellaneous
      labour services in addition.
    


[12]
Villeins – feudally dependent peasants in ancient Rus (9th-13th
      centuries) who performed CorvÃ©e service for the princes and other temporal
      and clerical lords and also paid rent in kind. The feudal lords seized the
      land of the villeins and compelled them to work on the feudal estates.

    


Russkaya Pravda (Russian Law ) – the first written
      codification of laws and princes’ decrees (11th-12th centuries). The
      statutes of the Russkaya Pravda protected the lives and property
      of the feudal lord and are indicative of the bitter class struggle between
      peasants in feudal bondage and their exploiters.
    

 
  

II. The Combination of the CorvÃ©e and the Capitalist Systems of Economy

|

IV. The Decline of the Labour-Service System

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Decline of the Labour-Service System




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: IV. The Decline of the Labour-Service System








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      IV. The Decline of the Labour-Service System
    

      The question now arises: in what relation does the labour-service system
      stand to the post-Reform economy of Russia?

    
      First of all, the growth of commodity economy conflicts with the
      labour-service system, since the latter is based on natural economy, on
      unchanging technique, on inseparable ties between the landlord and the
      peasant. That is why this system is totally impracticable in its complete
      form, and every advance in the development of commodity economy and
      commercial agriculture undermines the conditions of its practicability.

    
      Next we must take account of the following circumstance. From the
      foregoing it follows that labour-service, as practised in present-day
      landlord farming, should be divided into two types: 1) labour-service that
      can only be performed by a peasant farmer who owns draught animals and
      implements (e. g., cultivation of “cycle dessiatine,”
      ploughing, etc.), and 2) labour-service that can be performed by a rural
      proletarian who has no implements (for example, reaping, mowing,
      threshing, etc.). It is obvious that for both peasant and landlord
      farming, the first and the second type of labour-service are of opposite
      significance, and that the latter type constitutes a direct transition to
      capitalism, merging with it by a number of quite imperceptible
      transitions. In our literature labour-service is usually referred to in
      general, without this distinction being made. Yet in the process of the
      elimination of labour-service by capitalism the shifting of the centre of
      gravity from the first type of labour-service to the second is of enormous
      importance. Here is an example from Statistical Returns for Moscow
      Gubernia : “On the majority of the estates . . . the
      cultivation of the fields and the crops, i.e., the jobs on the careful

 

      fulfilment of which the harvest depends, are done by regular workers,
      whereas the harvesting, i.e., the job in the performance of which
      promptness and speed are the prime consideration, is given to neighbouring
      peasants to be done in return for money lent, or for the use of pasture
      and other grounds” (Vol. V, Pt. 2, p. 140). On such farms most of
      the hands are hired on the labour-service basis, but the capitalist system
      undoubtedly predominates, and the “neighbouring peasants” are
      at bottom turned into rural workers, similar to the “contract day
      labourers” in Germany, who also have land and also hire themselves
      out for a definite part of the year (see above, p. 179, footnote).  The
      enormous drop in the number of horses owned by peasants and the increase
      in the number of horseless households as a result of the crop failures of
      the

90s[1]

 could not
      but exert great influence in accelerating this process of the elimination
      of labour-service by the capitalist

system.[2]

      Finally, one of the most important reasons for the decline of the
      labour-service system should be sought in the

 

      differentiation of the peasantry. The connection between labour-service
      (of the first type) and the middle group of the peasantry is
      clear and a priori – as we have already observed above – and
      can be proved by Zemstvo statistics. For example, the abstract for Zadonsk
      Uyezd, Voronezh Gubernia, gives returns of the number of farms doing
      job-work, in the various groups of peasantry. Here are the data in
      percentages:
    





      From the above it is clear that participation in job-work is less
      prevalent in the two extreme groups. The largest percentage of households
      taking job-work is to be found in the middle group of the peasantry. Since
      job-work is also frequently assigned in Zemstvo statistical abstracts to
      the category of “employments” in general, we see here,
      consequently, an example of the typical “employments” of the
      middle peasantry – exactly as in the preceding chapter we acquainted
      ourselves with the typical “employments” of the bottom and top
      groups of the peasantry. The types of “employments” examined
      there express the development of capitalism (commercial and industrial
      establishments and the sale of labour-power), whereas the type of
      “employments” mentioned here, on the contrary, expresses the
      backwardness of capitalism and the predominance of labour-service (if we
      assume that in the sum-total of “job-work” the predominant
      jobs are such as we have assigned to labour-service of the first type).

    
      The greater the decline of natural economy and of the middle peasantry,
      the more vigorously is labour-service bound to be eliminated by
      capitalism. The well-to-do peasants cannot, naturally, serve as a basis
      for the labour-service system, for it is only dire need that compels the
      peasant to undertake the worst-paid jobs, jobs that are ruinous for his
      own farm. But the rural proletariat are equally

 

      unsuitable for the labour-service system, though for another reason:
      having no farm of his own, or possessing a miserable patch of land, the
      rural proletarian is not tied down to it to the extent that the
      “middle” peasant is, and, as a consequence, it is far easier
      for him to go elsewhere and hire himself out on “free” terms,
      i.e., for higher pay and without bondage at all.  Hence the universal
      dissatisfaction of our agrarians at the peasants leaving for the towns or
      for “outside employments” generally, hence their complaints
      that the peasants have “little attachment” (see below,



p. ). The development of purely capitalist wage-labour saps
      the very roots of the labour-service

      system.[3]



      It is supremely important to note that this inseparable connection between
      the differentiation of the peasantry and the elimination of labour-service
      by capitalism – a connection so obvious in theory – has long been noted
      by agricultural writers who have observed the various methods of farming
      on the landlord estates. In the preface to his collection of articles on
      Russian agriculture written between 1857 and 1882, Prof. Stebut points out
      that . . . “In community peasant agriculture the
      farmer-industrialists are becoming differentiated from the farm
      labourers. The former, who are becoming cultivators on a big scale,
      are beginning to employ farm labourers and usually cease to take job-work,
      unless they find it absolutely necessary to enlarge their crop area
      somewhat, or to obtain the use of pasture land, which in most cases cannot
      be done except by taking job-work; the latter, on the other hand, cannot
      take any job-work for lack of horses. Hence the obvious necessity for
      a transition, and a speedy transition, to farming based on
      wage-labour, since the peasants who still take job-work by the
      dessiatine are, due to the feeble state of their horses and to the
      multitude of jobs they undertake, beginning to turn out work that is bad
      from the viewpoint both of quality and of promptness of fulfilment”
      (p. 20).

    
      References to the fact that the ruin of the peasantry is leading to the
      elimination of labour-service by capitalism are also made in current
      Zemstvo statistical material. In Orel Gubernia, for example, it has been
      observed that the drop in grain prices ruined many tenants and that the
      land owners were compelled to increase the area cultivated on capitalist
      lines. “Simultaneously with the expansion of the area cultivated by
      the landlords, we observe everywhere a tendency to replace job-work by the
      labour of regular farm hands and to do away with the use of
      peasants’ implements . .  . a tendency to improve the cultivation of
      the soil by the introduction of up-to-date implements . . . to change the
      system of farming, to introduce grass crops, to expand and improve
      livestock farming and to make it profitable” (Agricultural
      Survey of Orel Gubernia for 1887-88, pp.  124-126. Quoted from
      P. Struve’s Critical Remarks, pp. 242-244). In Poltava
      Gubernia, in 1890, when grain prices were low, there was observed “a
      diminution in peasant renting of land . . .

 

      throughout the gubernia. . . . Correspondingly, in many places, despite
      the severe drop in grain prices, there was an increase in the area
      cultivated by landowners employing regular labour” (The
      Influence of Harvests, etc., I, 304). In Tambov Gubernia, a
      considerable increase has been observed in the prices paid for work done
      by horses: for the three years 1892-1894, these prices were 25 to 30%
      higher than for the three years 1889-1891 (Novoye Slovo, 1895,
      No. 3, p. 187). This rise in the cost of work done by horses, a natural
      result of the decline in the number of peasant horses, cannot but entail
      the ousting of labour-service by the capitalist system.

    
      It is by no means our intention, of course, to use these separate
      references in order to prove that labour-service is being eliminated by
      capitalism: no complete statistics on this subject are available. We are
      merely using them to illustrate the point that there is a
      connection between the differentiation of the peasantry and the
      elimination of labour-service by capitalism. General and mass-scale data,
      which prove irrefutably that this elimination is going on, relate to the
      employment of machinery in agriculture and to the employment of labour
      freely hired. But before passing to these data, we must first deal with
      the views of the Narodnik economists on contemporary farming by private
      landowners in Russia.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      The horse census of 1893-1894 in 48 gubernias revealed a drop of 9.6% in
      the number of horses possessed by all horse owners, and a drop of 28,321
      in the number of horse owners. In Tambov, Voronezh, Kursk, Ryazan, Orel,
      Tula and Nizhni-Novgorod gubernias, the decline in the number of horses
      between 1888 and 1893 was 21.2%. In seven other gubernias of the
      black-earth belt the decline between 1891 and 1893 was 17%. In 38
      gubernias of European Russia in 1888-1891 there were 7,922 260 peasant
      households, of which 5,736,436 owned horses; in 1893-1894, there were in
      these gubernias 8,288,987 households, of which 5,647,233 owned
      horses. Consequently, the number of horse-owning households dropped by
      89,000, while the number of horseless increased by 456,000 The percentage
      of horseless households rose from 27.6% to 31.9% (Statistics of the
      Russian Empire, XXXVII. St.  Petersburg, 1896.) Above we have shown
      that in 48 gubernias of European Russia the number of horseless households
      rose from 2.8 million in 1888-1891 to 3.2 million in 1896-1900 – i.e.,
      from 27.3% to 29.2%. In four southern gubernias (Bessarabia,
      Ekaterinoslav, Taurida, Kherson), the number of horseless households rose
      from 305,800 in 1896 to 341,600 in 1904, i.e., from 34.7% to 36.4%
      (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[2]
      Cf.  also S. A. Korolenko, Hired Labour, etc.,
      pp. 46-47, where, on the basis of the horse censuses of 1882 and 1888,
      examples are cited of how the drop in the number of horses possessed by
      peasants is accompanied by an increase in the number of horses possessed
      by private landowners.—Lenin

[3]
      Here is a particularly striking example. Zemstvo statisticians explain the
      comparative incidence of money renting and renting in kind in various
      parts of Bakhmut Uyezd, Ekaterinoslav Gubernia, in the following way:

    “Money renting is most widespread . . . in the coal and
      salt-mining districts, and least widespread in the steppe and purely
      agricultural area The peasants, in general, are not eager to go out to
      work for others, and are particularly reluctant to accept irksome and
      badly paid work on private estates. Work in the coal mines, in ore-mining
      and in metallurgy generally, is arduous and injurious to the
      worker’s health, but, generally speaking, it is better paid, and
      attracts the worker with the prospect of monthly or weekly wages in cash,
      as he does not usually get money when he works on the landlord’s
      estate for the reason that there he is either working in payment of the
      ‘bit’ of land he has rented, or of straw or grain he has
      borrowed, or has managed to get his pay in advance to cover his ordinary
      needs, etc.

    “All this induces the worker to avoid working on estates, and
      he does avoid doing so when there is an opportunity of earning money in
      some place other than the landlord’s ‘estate.’ And this
      opportunity occurs mostly where there are many mines, at which the workers
      are paid ‘good’ money. With the ‘pence’ the
      peasant earns in the mines, he can rent land, without having to pledge
      himself to work on an estate, and in this way renting for money
      establishes its sway” (quoted from Results of Zemstw Statistical
      Investigations, Vol. II, p. 265). In the steppe, non-industrial
      divisions of the uyezd, on the other hand, land renting on a skopshchina
      and a labour-service basis establishes its sway.

    Thus, to escape labour-service the peasant is ready to flee even to
      the mines!  Prompt payment in cash, the impersonal form of hire and
      regular working hours “attract” the worker to such an extent
      that he even prefers the mines underground to agriculture, the agriculture
      about which our Narodniks wax so idyllic. The whole point is that the
      peasant knows from bitter experience the real value of the labour-service
      idealised by the agrarians and the Narodniks, and he knows how much better
      are purely capitalist relations.—Lenin
 

 
  

III. Description of the Labour-Service System

|

V. The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: V. The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      V. The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem
    

      The point that the labour-service system is simply a survival of CorvÃ©e
      economy is not denied even by the Narodniks. On the contrary, it is
      admitted – although in an insufficiently general form – by Mr. N.–on
      (Sketches, § IX) and by Mr. V. V. (particularly explicitly in his
      article “Our Peasant Farming and Agronomy,” in
      Otechestvenniye Zapiski, 1882, No. 8-9). The more astonishing is
      it that the Narodniks do their utmost to avoid admitting the clear and
      simple fact that the present system of private-landowner farming is a
      combination of the labour-service and the capitalist systems, and that,
      consequently, the more developed the former, the weaker the latter, and
      vice versa. They avoid analysing the relation of each of these systems to
      the productivity of labour, to the payment of the worker’s labour,

 

      to the basic features of the post-Reform economy of Russia, etc. To put
      the question on this basis, on the basis of recognising the
      “change” actually taking place, meant to
      admit the inevitability of the progressive elimination of labour-service
      by capitalism. To avoid drawing that conclusion, the Narodniks did not
      stop even at idealising the labour-service system. This monstrous
      idealisation is the basic feature of the Narodnik views on the evolution
      of landlord economy. Mr. V. V. even went so far as to write that
      “the people . . . are the victors in the struggle for the form of
      agricultural technique, although their victory has resulted in their
      greater ruin” (The Destiny of Capitalism, p. 288). To admit
      such a “victory” is more eloquent than to admit
      defeat! Mr. N.–on discerned in the allotment of land to the peasants
      under CorvÃ©e and under labour-service economy the “principle”
      “of linking the producer and the means of production,” but he
      forgot the tiny circumstance that this allotting of land served as a means
      of guaranteeing a supply of labour for the landlords.  As we have
      indicated, Marx, in describing pre-capitalist systems of agriculture,
      analysed all the forms of economic relations that, in general,
      exist in Russia, and clearly emphasised the necessity of small-scale
      production and of a tie between the peasant and the land in the case of
      both labour-rent, rent in kind and money rent. But could it ever have
      entered his head to elevate this allotting of land to the dependent
      peasant into a “principle” of an eternal tie between the
      producer and the means of production? Did he forget even for a moment that
      this tie between the producer and the means of production was the
      source of, and condition for, medieval exploitation, constituted the basis
      for technical and social stagnation and necessarily required all sorts of
      “other than economic, pressure”?

    
      An exactly similar idealisation of labour-service and of bondage is
      displayed by Messrs. Orlov and Kablukov in Moscow Zemstvo Returns when
      they quote as a model the farm of a certain Mme. Kostinskaya in Podolsk
      Uyezd (see Vol. V, Pt. I, pp. 175-176, and Vol. II, pp. 59-62,
      Sect. II). In Mr. Kablukov’s opinion, this farm proves “that
      it is possible to arrange matters in such a way as to preclude (sic
      !!)  such an antagonism” (i.e., antagonism of interests

 

      between landlord and peasant farming) “and assist in achieving a
      flourishing (sic !) condition of both peasant and private
      farming” (Vol. V, Pt. I, pp. 175-176). It seems, then, that the
      flourishing condition of the peasants consists in labour-service and
      bondage. They have no pastures or cattle runs (Vol. II,
      pp. 60-61), – which does not prevent Messrs. the Narodniks from regarding
      them as “sound” peasants – and rent these grounds, for which
      they pay the proprietress in work, performing “all the jobs
      on her estate ... thoroughly, punctually and

promptly.”[1]

      That is the limit in idealising an economic system which is a direct
      survival of CorvÃ©e service!

    
      The methods employed in all such Narodnik reasoning are very simple; we
      have only to forget that the allotment of land to the peasant is one of
      the conditions of CorvÃ©e or labour-service economy, we have only to omit
      the circumstance that this allegedly “independent” cultivator
      must render labour-rent, rent in kind or money rent, – and we get the
      “pure” idea of “the tie between the producer and the
      means of production.” But the actual relation between capitalism and
      pre-capitalist forms of exploitation does not change in the least from the
      fact of simply omitting these

      forms.[2]



      Let us deal somewhat with another, very curious, argument of
      Mr. Kablukov. We have seen that he idealises labour-service; but it is
      remarkable that when he, as a statistician, describes real types
      of purely capitalist farms in Moscow Gubernia, his description,
      in spite of himself, and in a distorted way, is a reflection of the very
      facts that prove the progressive nature of capitalism in Russian
      agriculture. We beg the reader’s attention, and apologise in advance
      for our rather lengthy quotations.

    
      Besides the old types of farms employing hired labour, there is to be
      found in Moscow Gubernia
    


      “a new, recent, emergent type of farm that has totally broken
      with all tradition and regards things simply, in the way people
      regard every  industry that is to serve as a source of
      income. Agriculture in this case is  not regarded as . . . a
      lord’s hobby, as an occupation anybody may engage in.  . . . No,
      here the necessity is recognised of having . . . special
      knowledge.  . . . The basis of calculation” (as to the
      organisation of production) “is the  same as in all other forms
      of production” (Statistical Returns for Moscow
      Gubernia, Vol. V, Pt. I, pp. 185-186).



      Mr. Kablukov does not notice that this description of the new type of farm
      which has only “recently emerged,” in the 70s, proves
      precisely the progressive nature of capitalism in agriculture. It was
      capitalism that first turned agriculture from a “lord’s
      hobby” into ordinary industry, it was capitalism that first
      compelled people “to regard things simply,” “to break
      with tradition” and to equip themselves with “special
      knowledge.” Before capitalism this was both unnecessary and
      impossible, because the farms of the different manors, village communities
      and peasant families were “self-sufficing,” were not dependent
      on other farms, and no power on earth could drag them out of their
      age-long stagnation. Capitalism was the force which created (through the
      medium of the market) the social accounting of the output of the
      individual producers, and compelled them to reckon with the demands of
      social development. It is this that constitutes the progressive role of
      capitalism in agriculture in all European countries.

    
      Listen now to the way Mr. Kablukov describes our purely capitalist farms:
    



      “Only then is account taken of labour-power as a necessary factor in
      acting upon nature; without this factor all organisation of the
      landlord’s estate will be fruitless. Thus, with all appreciation of
      its significance, this element, at the same time, is not regarded as an
      independent source of income, as was the case under serfdom, or as is the
      case now in those instances when what is made the basis of the
      estate’s profitability is not the product of labour, the obtaining
      of which is the direct purpose of its application, not the striving to
      apply this labour to the production of its more valuable products and
      thereby to enjoy its results, but the striving to reduce the share of the
      product which the worker gets for himself, the desire to reduce the cost
      of labour to the master as near as possible to zero”
      (p. 186). Reference is made to farming based on labour in return for the
      use of cut-off lands. “Under these circumstances, for a farm to be
      profitable the owner requires neither knowledge nor special qualities. All
      that is obtained from this labour represents clear income for the owner or
      at all events such income as is obtained almost without any expenditure of
      circulating capital. But such farming cannot, of course, be well conducted
      and cannot be called farming in the strict sense of the term, any more
      than the leasing of all pasture and other grounds can be called such;
      there is no economic organisation here” (186). And quoting examples
      of the leasing of cut-off lands in return for labour-service, the author
      concludes: “The main emphasis in the farm economy, the manner of
      extracting an income from the soil, is rooted in the exertion of influence
      upon the worker rather than upon matter and its forces” (189).



      This argument is an extremely interesting example of how distorted is the
      picture of actual facts when viewed from the angle of a wrong
      theory. Mr. Kablukov confuses production with the social system of
      production.  Under every social system production consists in “the
      exertion of influence” upon matter and its forces. Under every
      social system only the surplus product can be the landowner’s source
      of “income.” In both respects the labour-service system of
      economy is fully identical with the capitalist system, Mr.
      Kablukov’s opinion notwithstanding. The real difference between them
      is that labour-service necessarily presupposes the lowest productivity of
      labour; hence, no possibility exists for increasing income by increasing
      the surplus product; that can only be done by one means, namely, by
      employing all sorts of bonded forms of hire. Under purely capitalist
      economy, on the contrary, bonded forms of hire must go by the board, for
      the proletarian, not being tied to the land, is useless as an object of
      bondage; – to raise the productivity of labour becomes not only possible,
      but also

 

      necessary as the sole means of increasing income and with standing severe
      competition. Thus, the description of our purely capitalist farms, given
      by the very Mr. Kablukov who so zealously tried to idealise
      labour-service, fully confirms the fact that Russian capitalism is
      creating the social conditions which necessarily demand
      the rationalisation of agriculture and the abolition of bondage, whereas
      labour-service, on the contrary, precludes the possibility of
      rationalising agriculture and perpetuates technical stagnation and the
      producer’s condition of bondage. Nothing could be more frivolous
      than the customary Narodnik exultation over the fact that capitalism in
      our agriculture is weak. So much the worse if it is weak, for it only
      indicates the strength of pre-capitalist forms of exploitation, which are
      incomparably more burdensome to the producer.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      Cf. Volgin, op. cit., pp  280-281.—Lenin

[2]
      “It is said that the spread of labour-service renting in place of
      money renting . . . is a retrogressive fact. But do we say that it is
      desirable or beneficial? We . . . have never asserted that it is
      progressive,” stated Mr. Chuprov on behalf of all the authors of
      The Influence of Harvests, etc. (see Verbatim Report of
      the Debates in the F E. S. of March 1 and 2,

1897,[3] p. 38) This statement is untrue even
      formally, for Mr. Karyshev (see above) described labour-service as
      “help” to the rural population. And in substance this
      statement absolutely contradicts the actual content of all the Narodnik
      theories with their idealisation of labour-service. It is to the great
      credit of Messrs. T.-Baranovsky and Struve that they have correctly
      presented the question (1897) of the significance of low grain
      prices: the criterion for appraising them must be whether such prices
      promote the elimination of labour-service by capitalism or not. Such a
      question is obviously one of fact, and in answering it we differ somewhat
      from the writers mentioned. On the basis of the data given in the text
      (see particularly § VII of this chapter and also Chapter IV ), we consider
      it possible and even probable that the period of low grain prices will be
      marked by a no less, if not more, rapid elimination of labour-service by
      capitalism than was the preceding historical period of high grain prices.—Lenin
 


[3]
      The Verbatim Report of the Debates of March 1 and 2 appeared in the
      Transactions of the Free Economic Society, 1897, No. 4.
    

 
  

IV. The Decline of the Labour-Service System

|

VI. The Story of Engelhardt’s Farm

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Story of Engelhardt’s Farm




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: VI. The Story of Engelhardt's Farm








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      VI. The Story of Engelhardt’s Farm
    

      Quite a special place among the Narodniks is held by Engelhardt. To
      criticise his appraisal of labour-service and capitalism would mean to
      repeat what has already been said in the preceding section. We think it
      far more expedient to set against Engelhardt’s Narodnik views the
      story of Engelhardt’s own farm. Such a critique will also be of
      positive value, because the evolution of this farm reflects in miniature,
      as it were, the main features of the evolution of all private-landowner
      farming in post-Reform Russia.

    
      When Engelhardt settled down on the farm it was based on the traditional
      labour-service and bondage, which preclude “proper farming”
      (Letters from the Countryside, 559). Labour-service was the cause
      of the poor condition of cattle raising, of the poor cultivation of the
      soil and of the monotonous persistence of obsolete systems of field
      cultivation (118).  “I saw that it was impossible . . . to go on
      farming in the old way” (118).  The competition of grain from the
      steppe regions was bringing down prices and making farming unprofitable

      (p. 83).[1]

We would observe that from the

 

      very outset, along with the labour-service system a certain part was
      played on the farm by the capitalist system: wage-workers, although very
      few in number, were also employed on the farm when it was run in the old
      way (the cowman and others), and Engelhardt asserts that the wages of his
      farm labourer (drawn from among allotment-holding peasants) were
      “fabulously low” (11), low because “it was
      impossible to give more ” considering that cattle-raising was
      in a bad way. The low productivity of labour made it impossible to raise
      wages. Thus, the starting-point on Engelhardt’s farm was the
      features, familiar to us, of all Russian farms: labour-service, bondage,
      the very lowest productivity of labour, “incredibly low”
      payment of labour, routine farming.

    
      What changes did Engelhardt introduce into this state of things? He began
      to sow flax – a commercial and industrial crop requiring the employment
      of labour on a big scale. The commercial and capitalist character of the
      cultivation was accordingly enhanced. But how was he to obtain labour?
      Engelhardt tried at first to employ in the new (commercial) cultivation
      the old system, that of labour-service. Nothing came of that; the work was
      badly done, the “dessiatine” proved to be beyond the strength
      of the peasants, who resisted with all their might “gang work”
      and bonded terms of labour. “The system had to be changed. Meanwhile
      I got on my feet. I acquired my own horses, harness, carts, ploughs and
      harrows and was already in a position to run the farm with regular
      workers. I began to produce flax, partly with my regular workers and
      partly on a job basis, hiring labourers for definite jobs”
      (218). Thus, the transition to the new system of farming and to commercial
      cultivation demanded the replacement of labour-service by the capitalist
      system. To increase productivity of labour, Engelhardt resorted to the
      well-tried method of capitalist production: piece work. Women were engaged
      to work by the stack, or the pood, and Engelhardt (not without some na\"ive
      triumph) tells of the success of this system; the cost of cultivation
      increased (from 25 rubles per dess. to 35 rubles), but profit also
      increased by 10 to 20 rubles; the women’s productivity

 

      of labour increased following the change from bonded to hired labour (from
      half a pood per night to a whole pood) and the earnings of the women
      increased to 30-50 kopeks per day (“unprecedented in our
      parts”). The local textile merchant was full of praise for
      Engelhardt: “Your flax has given a great fillip to trade”
      (219).

    
      Applied at first to the cultivation of the commercial crop, hired labour
      gradually began to embrace other agricultural operations. One of the first
      operations to be withdrawn by capital from the labour-service system was
      threshing. It is well known that on all farms run by private landowners
      this work is mostly performed on capitalist lines. “Part of the
      land,” wrote Engelhardt, “I lease to peasants for cultivation
      in cycles, for otherwise I would find it hard to cope with the reaping of
      the rye” (211). Thus, labour-service functions as a direct
      transition to capitalism, by ensuring the farmer a supply of day labourers
      in the busiest season. At first cycle-cultivation included threshing, but
      here, too, the poor quality of the work done compelled the farmer to
      resort to hired labour. Land began to be leased for cycle-cultivation
      without threshing, which latter was done partly by farm labourers and
      partly, through the medium of a contractor, by a team of wage-workers, at
      piece rates. Here, too, the results of replacing labour-service by the
      capitalist system were: 1) an increase in the productivity of labour:
      formerly 16 people threshed 900 sheaves per day, now 8 did 1,100 sheaves;
      2) an increase in the yield; 3) a reduction in threshing time; 4) an
      increase in the worker’s earnings; 5) an increase in the
      farmer’s profits (212).

    
      Further, the capitalist system also embraced tillage operations. Iron
      ploughs were introduced in place of the old wooden ones, and the work
      passed from the bound peasant to the farm labourer. Engelhardt
      triumphantly reports the success of his innovation, the diligence of the
      labourers, and quite justly shows that the customary accusations flung at
      the labourer of being lazy and dishonest are due to the “brand of
      serfdom” and to bonded labour “for the lord,” and that
      the new organisation of farming also demands something of the farmer: a
      display of enterprise, a knowledge of people and ability to handle them, a
      knowledge of the job and its scope, acquaintance with the technical and
      commercial

 

      aspects of agriculture – i.e., qualities that were not and could not be
      possessed by the

Oblomovs[2] of the feudal or bondage suffering
      countryside. The various changes in the technique of agriculture are
      inseparably connected with one another and inevitably lead to the
      transformation of its economy. “For example, let us suppose you
      introduce the cultivation of flax and clover – that will immediately
      necessitate numerous other changes, and if these are not made, the
      business will not run smoothly. The ploughing implements will have to be
      changed and iron ploughs substituted for wooden ones, iron harrows for
      wooden ones, and this in turn will require a different type of horse, a
      different type of labourer, a different system of farming as regards
      the hire of labourers, etc.” (154-155).

    
      The change in the technique of agriculture thus proved to be inseparably
      bound up with the elimination of labour-service by capitalism.
      Particularly interesting in this regard is the gradualness with which this
      elimination takes place: the system of farming, as hitherto, combines
      labour-service and capitalism, but the main weight gradually shifts from
      the former to the latter. Here is a description of how Engelhardt’s
      reorganised farm operated:

    
      “Nowadays I have much work to do, because I have changed the whole
      system of farming. A considerable part of the work is done by regular
      labourers and day labourers. The work is extremely varied. I clear
      brushwood for wheat growing, uproot birches for flax growing. I have
      rented meadow land by the Dnieper, and have sown clover, lots of rye and
      much flax. I need an enormous number of hands. To secure them, you have to
      make arrangements in good time, for when the busy season starts everybody
      will be occupied either at home or on other farms. This recruitment of
      labour is done by advancing money or grain for work to be done”
      (pp.116-117).

    
      Labour-service and bondage remained, consequently, even on a
      “properly” conducted farm; but, firstly, they now occupied a
      subordinate position as compared with free hire, and, secondly, the very
      labour-service underwent a change; it was mainly the second type of
      labour-service which remained, that implying the labour not of peasant
      farmers, but of regular labourers and agricultural day labourers.

    


      Thus, Engelhardt’s own farm is better than all arguments in refuting
      Engelhardt’s Narodnik theories. He set out to farm on rational
      lines, but was unable to do so, under the given social and economic
      conditions, except by organising the farm on the basis of employing farm
      labourers. The raising of the technical level of agriculture and the
      supplanting of labour-service by capitalism proceeded hand in hand on this
      farm, as it does on all private-landowner farms in general in Russia. This
      process is most clearly reflected in the employment of machinery in
      Russian agriculture.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      This fact that the competition of cheap grain serves as the motive for
      change in technique and, consequently, for replacing labour-service by
      free hire, deserves special attention. The competition of grain from the
      steppe regions was also felt even in the years of high

 

grain prices; the
      period of low prices, however, lends this competition particular force.—Lenin
 


[2]
Oblomov – a type of landlord who lacked will-power, did nothing
      and was extremely lazy. A character in Goncharov’s novel of that
      name.
    

 
  

V. The Narodnik Attitude to the Problem

|

VII. The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: VII. The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      VII. The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture
    

      The post-Reform epoch is divided into four periods as regards the
      development of agricultural machinery production and the employment of
      machinery in

      agriculture.[1]

 The
      first period covers the years immediately preceding the peasant Reform and
      the years immediately following it. The landlords at first rushed to
      purchase foreign machinery so as to get along without the
      “unpaid” labour of the serfs and to avoid the difficulties
      connected with the hiring of free workers. This attempt ended, of course,
      in failure; the fever soon died down, and beginning with 1863-1864 the
      demand for foreign machinery dropped. The end of the 70s saw the beginning
      of the second period, which continued until 1885. It was marked by an
      extremely steady and extremely rapid increase in
      machinery imports from abroad; home production also grew steadily, but
      more slowly than imports. From 1881 to 1884 there was a particularly rapid
      increase in

 

      imports of agricultural machinery, due partly to the abolition, in 1881,
      of the duty-free import of pig-iron and cast-iron for the needs of
      factories producing agricultural machinery. The third period extended from
      1885 to the beginning of the 90s. Agricultural machinery, hitherto
      imported duty-free, now had an import duty imposed (of 50 kopeks gold per
      pood) . The high duty caused an enormous drop in machinery imports, while
      home production developed slowly owing to the agricultural crisis which
      set in at that time. Finally, the beginning of the 90s evidently saw the
      opening of a fourth period, marked by a fresh rise in the import of
      agricultural machinery, and by a particularly rapid increase of its home
      production.

    
      Let us cite statistics to illustrate these points. Average annual imports
      of agricultural machinery at various periods were as follows:
    





      There are, unfortunately, no such complete and precise data on the
      production of agricultural machinery and implements in Russia. The
      unsatisfactory state of our factory and-works statistics, the confusing of
      the production of machinery in general with the production of specifically
      agricultural machinery, and the absence of any firmly established rules
      for distinguishing between “factory” and
      “handicraft” production of agricultural machinery – all this
      prevents a complete picture of the development of agricultural machinery
      production in Russia being obtained. Combining all the data available from
      the above-mentioned sources, we get the following picture of the
      development of agricultural machinery production in Russia:
    






      These data show the vigorousness of the process in which primitive
      agricultural implements are giving way to improved ones (and,
      consequently, primitive forms of farming to capitalism). In 18 years the
      employment of agricultural machinery increased more than 3.5-fold, and
      this was mainly because of the expansion of home production, which more
      than quadrupled. Noteworthy, too, was the shifting of the main centre of
      such production from the Vistula and Baltic gubernias to the south-Russian
      steppe gubernias. Whereas in the 70s the main centre of agricultural
      capitalism in Russia was the western outer gubernias, in the 1890s still
      more outstanding areas of agricultural capitalism were created in the
      purely Russian

gubernias.[2]

      It is necessary to add, regarding the data just cited, that although they
      are based on official (and, as far as we know, the only) information on
      the subject under examination, they are far from complete and are not
      fully comparable for the different years. For the years 1876-1879 returns
      are available that were specially compiled for the 1882 exhibition; they
      are the most comprehensive, covering not only “factory”

 

      but also “handicraft” production of agricultural implements;
      it was estimated that in 1876-1879 there were, on the average, 340
      establishments in European Russia and the Kingdom of Poland, whereas
      according to “factory” statistical data there were in 1879 not
      more than 66 factories in European Russia producing agricultural machinery
      and implements (computed from Orlov’s Directory of Factories and
      Works for 1879). The enormous difference in these figures is
      explained by the fact that of the 340 establishments less than one-third
      (100) were counted as possessing steam power, and more than half (196) as
      being operated by hand labour; 236 establishments of the 340 had no
      foundries of their own and had their castings made outside
      (Historico-Statistical Survey, loc. cit.). The
      data for 1890 and 1894, on the other hand, are from Collections of
      Data on Factory Industry in Russia (published by Department of
      Commerce and

Industry).[3]

 These data do not fully cover even the
      “factory” production of agricultural machinery and implements;
      for example, in 1890, according to the Collection, there were in
      European Russia 149 works engaged in this industry, whereas Orlov’s
      Directory mentions more than 163 works producing agricultural
      machinery and implements; in 1894, according to the first-mentioned
      returns, there were in European Russia 164 works of this kind (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 21, p. 544), but according to the List of
      Factories and Works there were in 1894-95 over 173 factories
      producing agricultural machinery and implements. As for the small scale,
      “handicraft” production of agricultural machinery and
      implements, this is not included in these data at

      all.[4]

 That

 

      is why there can be no doubt that the data for 1890 and 1894 greatly
      understate the actual facts; this is confirmed by the opinion of experts,
      who considered that in the beginning of the 1890s agricultural machinery
      and implements were manufactured in Russia to a sum of about 10 million
      rubles (Agriculture and Forestry, 359), and in 1895 to a sum of
      nearly 20 million rubles (Vestnik Finansov, 1896, No. 51).

    
      Let us quote somewhat more detailed data on the types and quantity of
      agricultural machinery and implements manufactured in Russia. It is
      considered that in 1876 there were produced 25,835 implements; in 1877 –
      29,590; in 1878 – 35,226; in 1879 – 47,892 agricultural machines and
      implements. How far these figures are exceeded at the present time may be
      seen from the following: in 1879 about 14,500 iron ploughs were
      manufactured, and in 1894 – 75,500 (Vestnik Finansov, 1897,
      No. 21). “Whereas five years ago the problem of the measures to be
      taken to bring about the wider use of iron ploughs on peasant farms was
      one awaiting solution, today it has solved itself. It is no longer a
      rarity for a peasant to buy an iron plough; it has become a common thing,
      and the number of iron ploughs now acquired by peasants every year runs
      into

thousands.”[5]

 The mass of primitive agricultural implements
      employed in Russia still leaves a wide field for the production and sale
      of iron

ploughs.[6]

      The progress made in the use of ploughs has even raised the issue of the
      employment of electricity. According to a report in the
      Torgovo-Promyshlennaya Gazeta [Commercial and Industrial News
      ] (1902, No. 6), at the Second Congress of Electrical Engineers
      “considerable interest was aroused by a paper read by V. A. Rzhevsky
      on ‘Electricity in Agriculture.’” The lecturer
      illustrated by means of some excellent drawings the tillage of fields in
      Germany with the aid of electric ploughs, and, from the plan and estimates
      he had

 

      drawn up at a landowner’s request for his estate in one of 3 the
      southern gubernias, cited figures showing the economies to be effected by
      this method of tilling the land. According to this plan, it was proposed
      to plough 540 dess. annually, and a part of this twice a year. The depth
      of furrow was to be from 4 1/2 to

5 vershoks.[7]

 The soil was pure black earth. In
      addition to ploughs, the plan provided for machinery for other field-work,
      and also for a threshing machine and a mill, the latter of 25 h.p.,
      calculated to operate 2,000 hours per annum. The cost of completely
      equipping the estate, including six versts of overhead cable of
      50-mm. thickness, was estimated at 41,000 rubles. The cost of ploughing
      one dessiatine would be 7 rubles 40 kopeks if the mill were put up, and 8
      rubles 70 kopeks with no mill. It was shown that at the local costs of
      labour, draught animals, etc., the use of electrical equipment would in
      the first case effect a saving of 1,013 rubles, while in the second case,
      less power being used without a mill, the saving would be 966 rubles.

    
      No such sharp change is to be noted in the output of threshing and
      winnowing machines, because their production was relatively well
      established long

ago.[8]

 In fact, a special centre for the
      “handicraft” production of these machines was established in
      the town of Sapozhok, Ryazan Gubernia, and the surrounding villages, and
      the local members of the peasant bourgeoisie made plenty of money at this
      “industry” (cf. Reports and Investigations, I, pp.
      208-210). A particularly rapid expansion is observed in the production of
      reaping machines. In 1879, about 780 of these machines were produced; in
      1893 it was estimated that 7,000 to 8,000 were sold a year, and in 1894-95
      about 27,000. In 1895, for example, the works belonging to J. Greaves in
      the town of Berdyansk, Taurida Gubernia, “the largest works in
      Europe in this line of production” (Vestnik Finansov, 1896,
      No. 51) i.e., in the production of reaping machines, turned out 4,464
      reapers. Among the peasants in Taurida Gubernia reaping machines have
      become so widespread that a special

 

      occupation has arisen, namely, the mechanical reaping of other
      people’s

      grain.[9]

      Similar data are available for other, less widespread, agricultural
      implements. Broadcast seeders, for example, are now being turned out at
      dozens of works, and the more perfect row drills, which were produced at
      only two works in 1893 (Agriculture and Forestry, 360), are now
      turned out at seven works (Productive Forces, I, 51), whose
      output has again a particularly wide sale in the south of
      Russia. Machinery is employed in all branches of agriculture and in all
      operations connected with the production of some kinds of produce: in
      special reviews reference is made to the extended use of winnowing
      machines, seed-sorters, seed-cleaners (trieurs), seed-driers, hay presses,
      flax-scutchers, etc. In the Addendum to the Report on Agriculture
      for 1898,

 

      published by the Pskov Gubernia Zemstvo Administration (Severny
      Kurier [Northern Courier ], 1899, No. 32), the in creasing
      use of machinery is noted, particularly of flax scutchers, in connection
      with the transition from flax production for home use to that for
      commercial purposes.  There is an increase in the number of iron
      ploughs. Reference is made to the influence of migration in augmenting the
      number of agricultural machines and in raising wages. In Stavropol
      Gubernia (ibid., No. 33), agricultural machinery is being
      employed on an increasing scale in connection with the growing immigration
      into this gubernia. In 1882, there were 908 machines: in 1891-1893, an
      average of 29,275; in 1894-1896, an average of 54,874; and in 1895, as
      many as 64,000 agricultural implements and machines.

    
      The growing employment of machines naturally gives rise to a demand for
      engines: along with steam-engines, “oil engines have latterly begun
      to spread rapidly on our farms” (Productive Forces, I, 56),
      and although the first engine of this type appeared abroad only seven
      years ago, there are already 7 factories in Russia manufacturing them. In
      Kherson Gubernia in the 70s only 134 steam-engines were registered in
      agriculture (Material for the Statistics of Steam-Engines in the
      Russian Empire, St. Petersburg, 1882), and in 1881 about 500
      (Historico-Statistical Survey, Vol. II, section on agricultural
      implements). In 1884-1886, in three uyezds of the gubernia (out of six),
      435 steam threshing machines were registered. “At the present time
      (1895) there must be at least twice as many” (Tezyakov,
      Agricultural Workers and the Organisation of Sanitary Supervision over
      Them, in Kherson Gubernia, Kherson, 1896, p. 71).  The
      Vestnik Finansov (1897, No. 21) states that in Kherson Gubernia,
      “there are about 1,150 steam-threshers, and in the Kuban Region the
      number is about the same, etc. . . . Latterly the acquisition of
      steam-threshers has assumed an industrial character. . . . There have been
      cases of a five thousand-ruble threshing machine with steam-engine fully
      covering its cost in two or three good harvest years, and of the owner
      immediately getting another on the same terms. Thus, 5 and even 10 such
      machines are often to be met with on small farms in the Kuban
      Region. There they have become an essential accessory of every farm that
      is at all well

 

      organised.” “Generally speaking, in the south of Russia today,
      more than ten thousand steam-engines are in use for agricultural
      purposes” (Productive Forces, IX,

151).[10]

      If we remember that the number of steam-engines in use in agriculture
      throughout European Russia in 1875 1878 was only 1,351 and that in 1901,
      according to incomplete returns (Collection of Factory
      Inspectors’ Reports for 1903 ), the number was 12,091, in 1902
      – 14,609, in 1903 – 16,021 and in 1904 – 17,287, the gigantic
      revolution brought about by capitalism in agriculture in this country
      during the last two or three decades will be clear to us. Great service in
      accelerating this process has been rendered by the Zemstvos. By the
      beginning of 1897, Zemstvo agricultural machinery and implement depots
      “existed under the auspices of 11 gubernia and 203 uyezd Zemstvo
      boards, with a total working capital of about a million rubles”
      (Vestnik Finansov, 1897, No. 21). In Poltava Gubernia, the
      turnover of the Zemstvo depots increased from 22,600 rubles in 1890 to
      94,900 rubles in 1892 and 210,100 rubles in 1895. In the six years, 12,600
      iron ploughs, 500 winnowing machines and seed-sorters, 300 reaping
      machines, and 200 horse-threshers were sold. “The principal buyers
      of implements at the Zemstvo depots are Cossacks and peasants; they
      account for 70% of the total number of iron ploughs and horse-threshers
      sold. The purchasers of seeding and reaping machines were mainly
      landowners, and large ones at that, possessing over 100 dessiatines”
      (Vestnik Finansov, 1897, No. 4).

    


      According to the report of the Ekaterinoslav Gubernia Zemstvo Board for
      1895, “the use of improved agricultural implements in the gubernia
      is spreading very rapidly.” For example, in the Verkhne-Dnieper
      Uyezd there were:
    





      According to the data of the Moscow Gubernia Zemstvo Board, peasants in
      Moscow Gubernia in 1895 owned 41,210 iron ploughs; 20.2% of all
      householders owned such ploughs (Vestnik Finansov, 1896,
      No. 31). In Tver Gubernia, according to a special record made in 1896,
      there were 51,266 iron ploughs, owned by 16.5% of the total number of
      householders. In Tver Uyezd there were only 290 iron ploughs in 1890, and
      5,581 in 1896 (Statistical Returns for Tver Gubernia, Vol. XIII,
      Pt. 2, pp. 91, 94).  One can judge, therefore, how rapid is the
      consolidation and improvement of the farms of the peasant bourgeoisie.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
See Historico-Statistical Survey of Russian Industry, Vol. I,
      St. Petersburg, 1883 (published for 1882 exhibition), article by
      V. Chernyayev: “Agricultural Machinery Production.” – Ditto,
      Vol.  II, St. Petersburg, 1886, in group IX. – Agriculture and
      Forestry in Russia (St. Petersburg, 1893, published for Chicago
      Exhibition), article by V. Chernyayev: “Agricultural Implements and
      Machines.” – Productive Forces of Russia (St. Petersburg,
      1896, published for 1896 exhibition), article by Mr. Lenin:
      “Agricultural Implements and Machines” (sect. 1). –
      Vestnik Finansov [Financial Messenger ], 1896, No 51 and
      1897 No. 21. – V. Raspopin, article cited. Only the last mentioned
      article puts the question on a political-economic basis; all the previous
      ones were written by agricultural experts.—Lenin

[2]
      To make possible a judgment of the way the situation has changed in recent
      years, we quote data from the Yearbook of Russia (published by
      Central Statistical Committee, St. Petersburg, 1906), for 1900-1903. The
      value of the output of agricultural machinery in the Empire is estimated
      at 12,058,000 rubles, and of imports in 1902 at 15,240,000 rubles, and in
      1903 at 20,615,000 rubles. (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[3]
      In the Vestnik Finansov, No. 21, for 1897, comparative data are
      given for 1888-1894, but their source is not given specifically.—Lenin

[4]
      The total number of workshops engaged in the manufacture and repair of
      agricultural implements was given. for 1864 as 64; for 1871 as 112; for
      1874 as 203; for 1879 as 340; for 1885 as 435; for 1892 as 400; and for
      1895 as approximately 400 (Agriculture and Forestry in Russia,
      p. 358, and Vestnik Finansov, 1896, No. 51). The
      Collections, on the other hand, estimated that in 1888-1894 there
      were only from 157 to 217 factories of this kind (average of 183 for the 7
      years).  Here is an example illustrating the ratio of
      “factory” production of agricultural machinery to
      “handicraft” production: it was estimated that in Perm
      Gubernia in 1894 there were only 4 “factories,” with a
      combined output of 28,000 rubles, whereas for this branch of industry the
      1894-95 census showed 94 “handicraft establishments,” with a

 

combined output of 50,000 rubles, and what is more, the number of
      “handicraft” establishments included such as employed 6
      wage-workers and had an output of over 8,000 rubles. (A Sketch of the
      Condition of Handicraft Industry in Perm Gubernia, Perm, 1896.)—Lenin

[5]
Reports and Investigations of Handicraft Industry in
Russia. Published by Ministry of State Properties, Vol. I, St.
Petersburg, 1892, p. 202. The production of ploughs by peasants is
simultaneously declining, being forced out by factory production.—Lenin

[6]
Agriculture and Forestry in Russia, p. 360.—Lenin

[7]
      7.8 to 8.7 inches. –Ed.—Lenin

[8]
      In 1879 about 4,500 threshing machines were produced, and in 1894-1895
      about 3,500. The latter figure, however, does not include output by
      handicraft industry.—Lenin

[9]
      In 1893, for example, “700 peasants gathered with their machines on
      the Uspensky estate belonging to Falz-Fein (who owned 200,000 dessiatines)
      and offered their services, but half of them went away empty-handed, as
      only 350 were engaged” (Shakhovskoi, Agricultural Outside
      Employments, Moscow, 1896, p. 161). In the other steppe gubernias,
      however, especially the Transvolga gubernias, reaping machines are not
      widely used as yet. Still, in recent years these gubernias too have been
      trying very hard to overtake Novorossia. Thus, the Syzran-Vyazma railway
      carried agricultural machinery, traction-engines and parts weighing 75,000
      poods in 1890, 62,000 poods in 1891, 88,000 poods in 1892, 120,000 poods
      in 1893, and 212,000 poods in 1894; in other words, in a matter of five
      years the quantities carried almost trebled. Ukholovo railway station
      dispatched agricultural machinery of local manufacture to the extent of
      about 30,000 poods in 1893, and about 82,000 poods in 1894, whereas up to
      and including 1892 the weight of agricultural machinery dispatched from
      that station was even less than 10,000 poods per annum. “Ukholovo
      station dispatches mainly threshing machines produced in the villages of
      Kanino and Smykovo, and partly in the uyezd town of Sapozhok, Ryazan
      Gubernia. In the village of Kanino there are three foundries, belonging to
      Yermakov, Karev and Golikov, mainly engaged on agricultural-machinery
      parts. The work of finishing and assembling the machines is done in the
      above-mentioned two villages (Kanino and Smykovo), of which almost the
      entire populations are thus employed” (Brief Review of the
      Commercial Activity of the Syzran-Vyazma Railway in 1894, Pt. IV,
      Kaluga, 1896, pp. 62-63). Interesting in this example are, first, the fact
      of the enormous increase in production precisely in recent years, which
      have been years of low grain prices; and, second, the fact of the
      connection between “factory” and so called
      “handicraft” production. The latter is nothing more nor less
      than an “annex” to the factory,—Lenin

[10]
      Cf. an item from Perekop Uyezd, Taurida Gubernia, in Russkiye
      Vedomosti [Russian Gazette ] of August 19, 1898
      (No. 167). “Owing to the widespread use of reaping machines and
      steam- and horse-threshing machines among our farmers . . . field-work is
      proceeding very rapidly. The old-fashioned method of the threshing with
      ‘rollers’ is a thing of the past. . . . Every year the Crimean
      farmer increases his crop area and therefore has willy-nilly to resort to
      the aid of improved agricultural implements and machines. While it is not
      possible with rollers to thresh more than 150 to 200 poods of grain per
      day, a 10-h.p. steam-thresher will do from 2,000 to 2,500 poods, and a
      horse-thresher from 700 to 800 poods. That is why the demand for
      agricultural implements, reapers and threshers is growing so rapidly from
      year to year that the factories and works producing agricultural
      implements exhaust their stocks, as has happened this year, and are unable
      to satisfy the farmers’ demand.” The drop in grain prices,
      which compels farmers to reduce production costs, must be
      regarded as one of the most important causes of the increased use of
      improved implements.—Lenin
 

 
  

VI. The Story of Engelhardt’s Farm

|

VIII. The Significance of Machinery in Agriculture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Significance of Machinery in Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: VIII. The Significance of Machinery in Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      VIII. The Significance of Machinery in
      Agriculture
    

      Having established the fact of the extremely rapid development of the
      production of agricultural machinery and of the employment of machines in
      Russia’s post-Reform agriculture, we must now examine the social and
      economic significance of this phenomenon. From what has been said above
      regarding the economics of peasant and landlord farming, the following
      conclusions may be drawn: on the one hand, capitalism is the factor giving
      rise to, and extending the use of, machines in agriculture; on the other,
      the application of machinery to agriculture is of a capitalist character,
      i.e., it leads to the establishment of capitalist relations and their
      further development.

    


      Let us dwell on the first of these conclusions. We have seen that the
      labour-service system of economy and the patriarchal peasant economy
      inseparably connected with it are by their very nature based on routine
      technique, on the preservation of antiquated methods of production. There
      is nothing in the internal structure of that economic regime to stimulate
      the transformation of technique; on the contrary, the secluded and
      isolated character of that system of economy, and the poverty and
      downtrodden condition of the dependent peasant preclude the possibility of
      improvements. In particular, we would point to the fact that the payment
      of labour under the labour-service system is much lower (as we have seen)
      than where hired labour is employed; and it is well known that low wages
      are one of the most important obstacles to the introduction of
      machines. And the facts do indeed show us that an extensive movement for
      the transformation of agricultural technique only commenced in the
      post-Reform period of the development of commodity economy and
      capitalism. The competition that is the product of capitalism, and the
      dependence of the cultivator on the world market made the transformation
      of technique a necessity, while the drop in grain prices made this
      necessity particularly

urgent.[1]

      To explain the second conclusion, we must examine landlord and peasant
      farming separately. When a landlord introduces a machine or an improved
      implement, he replaces the implements of the peasant (who has worked for
      him) with his own; he goes over, consequently, from labour-service to the
      capitalist system of farming. The spread of agricultural machines means
      the elimination of labour-service

 

      by capitalism. It is possible, of course, that a condition laid down, for
      example, for the leasing of land is the performance of labour-service in
      the shape of day-work at a reaping machine, thresher, etc., but this will
      be labour-service of the second type, labour-service which converts the
      peasant into a day labourer. Such “exceptions,” consequently,
      merely go to prove the general rule that the introduction of improved
      implements on the farms of private landowners means converting the bonded
      (“independent” according to Narodnik terminology) peasant into
      a wage-worker – in exactly the same way as the acquisition of his own
      instruments of production by the buyer-up, who gives out work to be done
      in the home, means converting the bonded “handicraftsman” into
      a wage-worker. The acquisition by the landlord farm of its own implements
      leads inevitably to the undermining of the middle peasantry, who get means
      of subsistence by engaging in labour-service: We have already seen that
      labour-service is the specific “industry” of the middle
      peasant, whose implements, consequently, are a component part not only of
      peasant, but also of landlord,

farming.[2]

 Hence, the spread of agricultural machinery and
      improved implements and the expropriation of the peasantry are inseparably
      connected. That the spread of improved implements among the peasantry is
      of the same significance hardly requires explanation after what has been
      said in the preceding chapter. The systematic employment of machinery in
      agriculture ousts the patriarchal “middle” peasant as
      inexorably as the steam-power loom ousts the handicraft weaver.

    
      The results of the employment of machinery in agriculture confirm what has
      been said, and reveal all the typical features of capitalist progress with
      all its inherent contradictions.

 

      Machines enormously increase the productivity of labour in agriculture,
      which, before the present epoch, was almost entirely untouched by social
      development. That is why the mere fact of the growing employment of
      machines in Russian agriculture is sufficient to enable one to see how
      utterly unsound is Mr. N.–on’s assertion that there is
      “absolute stagnation” (Sketches, p. 32) in grain
      production in Russia, and that there is even a “decline in the
      productivity” of agricultural labour. We shall return to this
      assertion, which contradicts generally established facts and which Mr.
      N.–on needed for his idealisation of the pre-capitalist order.

    
      Further, machines lead to the concentration of production and to the
      practice of capitalist co-operation in agriculture. The introduction of
      machinery, on the one hand, calls for capital on a big scale, and
      consequently is only within the capacity of the big farmers; on the other
      hand, machines pay only when there is a huge amount of products to be
      dealt with; the expansion of production becomes a necessity with the
      introduction of machines.  The wide use of reaping machines,
      steam-threshers, etc., is therefore indicative of the concentration of
      agricultural production – and we shall indeed see later that the Russian
      agricultural region where the employment of machines is particularly
      widespread (Novorossia) is also distinguished by the quite considerable
      size of its farms. Let us merely observe that it would be a mistake to
      conceive the concentration of agriculture in just the one form of
      extensive enlargement of the crop area (as Mr. N.–on does); as a matter
      of fact, the concentration of agricultural production manifests itself in
      the most diverse forms, depending on the forms of commercial agriculture
      (see next chapter on this point). The concentration of production is
      inseparably connected with the extensive co-operation of workers on the
      farm. Above we saw an example of a large estate on which the grain was
      harvested by setting hundreds of reaping machines into operation
      simultaneously. “Threshers drawn by 4 to 8 horses require from 14 to
      23 and even more workers, half of whom are women and boys, i.e.,
      semi-workers. . . . The 8 to 10 h. p. steam-threshers to be found on all
      large farms” (of Kherson Gubernia), “require simultaneously
      from 50

 

      to 70 workers, of whom more than half are semi-workers, boys and girls of
      12 to 17 years of age” (Tezyakov, loc. cit.,
      93). “Large farms, on each of which from 500 to 1,000 workers are
      gathered together simultaneously, may safely be likened to industrial
      establishments,” the same author justly observes

(p. 151).[3]

 Thus, while our
      Narodniks were arguing that the “village community”
      “could easily” introduce co-operation in agriculture, life
      went on in its own way, and capitalism, splitting up the village community
      into economic groups with opposite interests, created large farms based on
      the extensive co-operation of wage-workers.

    
      From the foregoing it is clear that machines create a home market for
      capitalism: first, a market for means of production (for the products of
      the machine-building industry, mining industry, etc., etc.), and second, a
      market for labour-power. The introduction of machines, as we have seen,
      leads to the replacement of labour-service by hired labour and to the
      creation of peasant farms employing labourers. The mass-scale employment
      of agricultural machinery presupposes the existence of a mass of
      agricultural wage-workers. In the localities where agricultural capitalism
      is most highly developed, this process of the introduction of wage-labour
      along with the introduction of machines is intersected by another process,
      namely, the ousting of wage-workers by the machine. On the one hand, the
      formation of a peasant bourgeoisie and the transition of the landowners
      from labour-service to capitalism create a demand for wage-workers; on the
      other hand, in places where farming has long been based on wage-labour,
      machines oust wage-workers.  No precise and extensive statistics are
      available to show what is the general effect of both these processes for
      the whole of Russia, i.e., whether the number of agricultural wage-workers
      is increasing or decreasing. There can be no doubt that hitherto the
      number has been increasing (see >next section). We imagine that now too it
      is continuing to

increase[4]:

firstly, data on the ousting of wage-workers in

 

      agriculture by machines are available only for Novorossia, while in other
      areas of capitalist agriculture (the Baltic and western region, the outer
      regions in the East, some of the industrial gubernias) this process has
      not yet been noted on a large scale. There still remains an enormous area
      where labour-service predominates, and in that area the introduction of
      machinery is giving rise to a demand for wage-workers. Secondly, the
      growth of intensive farming (introduction of root crops, for example)
      enormously increases the demand for wage-labour (see Chapter IV) . A
      decline in the absolute number of agricultural (as against industrial)
      wage-workers must, of course, take place at a certain stage in the
      development of capitalism, namely, when agriculture through out the
      country is fully organised on capitalist lines and when the employment of
      machinery for the most diverse agricultural operations is general.

    
      As regards Novorossia, local investigators note here the usual
      consequences of highly developed capitalism. Machines are ousting
      wage-workers and creating a capitalist reserve army in
      agriculture. “The days of fabulous prices for hands have passed in
      Kherson Gubernia too. Thanks to .  . . the increased spread of
      agricultural implements . . .” (and other causes) “the
      prices of hands are steadily falling ” (author’s
      italics). . . .  “The distribution of agricultural implements, which
      makes the large farms independent of

workers[5]

 and at the same time reduces the demand
      for hands, places the workers in a difficult position” (Tezyakov,
      loc.  cit., 66-71). The same thing is noted by another
      Zemstvo Medical Officer, Mr. Kudryavtsev, in his work Migrant
      Agricultural Workers at the Nikolayev Fair in the Township of
      Kakhovka, Taurida Gubernia, and Their Sanitary
      Supervision in 1895 (Kherson, 1896). “The prices of hands
      . . . continue to fall, and a considerable number of migrant workers find

 

      themselves without employment and are unable to earn anything; i.e., there
      is created what in the language of economic science is called a reserve
      army of labour – artificial surplus-population” (61). The drop in
      the prices of labour caused by this reserve army is sometimes so great
      that “many farmers possessing machines preferred” (in 1895)
      “to harvest with hand labour rather than with machines”
      (ibid., 66, from Sbornik Khersonskogo Zemstva
      [Kherson Zemstvo Symposium ], August 1895)! More strikingly and
      convincingly than any argument this fact reveals how profound are the
      contradictions inherent in the capitalist employment of machinery!

    
      Another consequence of the use of machinery is the growing employment of
      female and child labour. The existing system of capitalist agriculture
      has, generally speaking, given rise to a certain hierarchy of workers,
      very much reminiscent of the hierarchy among factory workers. For example,
      on the estates in South Russia there are the following categories: a)
      full workers, adult males capable of doing all jobs b)
      semi-workers, women and males up to the age of 20; semi-workers
      are divided again into two categories: aa) 12, 13 to 15, 16 years of age
      – these are semi-workers in the stricter sense of the term – and bb)
      semi-workers of great strength ; “in the language used on
      the estates, ‘three-quarter’

workers,”[6]

 from 16 to 20 years of
      age, capable of doing all the jobs done by the full worker, except
      mowing. Lastly, c) semi-workers rendering little help, children
      not under 8 and not over 14 years of age; these act as swine-herds,
      calf-herds, weeders and plough-boys. Often they work merely for their food
      and clothing. The introduction of agricultural implements “lowers
      the price of the full worker’s labour” and renders possible
      its replacement by the cheaper labour of women and juveniles. Statistics
      on migrant labour confirm the fact of the displacement of male by female
      labour: in 1890, of the total number of workers registered in the township
      of Kakhovka and in the city of Kherson, 12.7% were women; in 1894, for the
      whole gubernia women constituted 18.2% (10,239 out of 56,464); in 1895,
      25.6% (13,474 out of 48,753). Children in 1893 constituted 0.7% (from 10
      to 14 years of

 

      age), and in 1895, 1.69% (from 7 to 14 years of age). Among local workers
      on estates in Elisavetgrad Uyezd, Kherson Gubernia, children constituted
      10.6% (ibid.).

    
      Machines increase the intensity of the workers’ labour. For example,
      the most widespread type of reaping machine (with hand delivery) has
      acquired the characteristic name of “lobogreyka” or

      “chubogreyka,”[7]

 since working with it calls for extraordinary
      exertion on the part of the worker: he takes the place of the delivery
      apparatus (cf. Productive Forces, I, 52). Similarly, intensity of
      labour increases with the use of the threshing machine. The capitalist
      mode of employing machinery creates here (as everywhere) a powerful
      stimulus to the lengthening of the working day. Night work, something
      previously unknown, makes its appearance in agriculture too.  “In
      good harvest years . . . work on some estates and on many peasant farms is
      carried on even at night” (Tezyakov, loc. cit.,
      126), by artificial illumination – torchlight (92). Finally, the
      systematic employment of machines results in traumatism among agricultural
      workers; the employment of young women and children at machines naturally
      results in a particularly large toll of injuries. The Zemstvo hospitals
      and dispensaries in Kherson Gubernia, for example, are filled, during the
      agricultural season, “almost exclusively with traumatic
      patients” and serve as “field hospitals, as it were, for the
      treatment of the enormous army of agricultural workers who are constantly
      being disabled as a result of the ruthless destructive work of
      agricultural machines and implements” (ibid., 126). A
      special medical literature is appearing that deals with injuries caused by
      agricultural machines. Proposals are being made to introduce compulsory
      regulations governing the use of agricultural machines
      (ibid.). The large-scale manufacture of machinery imperatively
      calls for public control and regulation of production in agriculture, as
      in industry. Of the attempts to introduce such control we shall speak
      below.

    
      Let us note, in conclusion, the extremely inconsistent attitude of the
      Narodniks towards the employment of machinery in agriculture.  To admit
      the benefit and progressive nature of the employment of machinery, to
      defend all

 

      measures that develop and facilitate it, and at the same time to ignore
      the fact that machinery in Russian agriculture is employed in the
      capitalist manner, means to sink to the view point of the small and big
      agrarians. Yet what our Narodniks do is precisely to ignore the capitalist
      character of the employment of agricultural machinery and improved
      implements, without even attempting to analyse what types of peasant and
      landlord farms introduce machinery. Mr. V. V. angrily calls
      Mr. V. Chernyayev “a representative of capitalist technique”
      (Progressive Trends, 11). Presumably it is Mr. V.  Chernyayev, or
      some other official in the Ministry of Agriculture, who is to blame for
      the fact that the employment of machinery in Russia is capitalist in
      character! Mr. N.–on, despite his grandiloquent promise “not to
      depart from the facts” (Sketches, XIV), has preferred to
      ignore the fact that it is capitalism that has developed the employment of
      machinery in our agriculture, and he has even invented the amusing theory
      that exchange reduces the productivity of labour in agriculture (p. 74)!
      To criticise this theory, which is proclaimed without any analysis of the
      facts, is neither possible nor necessary. Let us confine ourselves to
      citing a small sample of Mr. N.–on’s reasoning. “If,”
      says he, “the productivity of labour in this country were to double,
      we should have to pay for a chetvert (about six bushels) of wheat not 12
      rubles, but six, that is all” (234). Not all, by far, most worthy
      economist. “In this country” (as indeed in any society where
      there is commodity economy), the improvement of technique is undertaken by
      individual farmers, the rest only gradually following suit. “In this
      country,” only the rural entrepreneurs are in a position to improve
      their technique. “In this country,” this progress of the rural
      entrepreneurs, small and big, is inseparably connected with the ruin of
      the peasantry and the creation of a rural proletariat. Hence, if the
      improved technique used on the farms of rural entrepreneurs were to become
      socially necessary (only on that condition would the price be reduced by
      half), it would mean the passing of almost the whole of agriculture into
      the hands of capitalists, it would mean the complete proletarisation of
      millions of peasants, it would mean an enormous increase in the
      non-agricultural population and an increase in the number of factories
      (for the

 

      productivity of labour in our agriculture to double, there must be an
      enormous development of the machine-building industry, the mining
      industry, steam transport, the construction of a mass of new types of farm
      buildings, shops, warehouses, canals, etc., etc.). Mr. N.–on here repeats
      the little error of reasoning that is customary with him: he skips over
      the consecutive steps that are necessary with the development of
      capitalism, he skips over the intricate complex of social-economic changes
      which necessarily accompany the development of capitalism, and then weeps
      and wails over the danger of “destruction” by capitalism.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      “In the past two years, under the influence of low grain prices and
      of the need to cheapen agricultural jobs at all costs, reaping machines
      have also . . . begun to be so widely employed that depots are unable to
      meet all requirements on time” (Tezyakov, loc cit., p. 71) The
      present agricultural crisis is a capitalist crisis. Like all capitalist
      crises, it ruins capitalist farmers and peasants in one locality, in one
      country, in one branch of agriculture, and at the same time gives a
      tremendous impulse to the development of capitalism in another locality,
      in another country, in other branches of agriculture. It is the failure to
      understand this fundamental feature of the present crisis and of its
      economic nature that constitutes the main error in the reasoning on this
      theme of Messrs. N.–on, Kablukov, etc., etc.—Lenin

[2]
      Mr V. V. expresses this truth (that the existence of the middle peasant is
      largely conditioned by the existence of the labour-service system of
      farming among the landlords) in the following original way: “the
      owner shares, so to speak, the cost of maintaining his (the
      peasant’s) implements.” “It appears,” says
      Mr. Sanin, in a just comment on this, “that it is not the labourer
      who works for the landowner, but the landowner who works for the
      labourer.” A. Sanin, Some Remarks on the Theory of
      People’s Production, in the appendix to the Russian translation
      of Hourwich’s Economics of the Russian Village, Moscow,
      1896, p. 47.—Lenin

[3]
      Cf. also next chapter, § I , where more detailed data are given on the
      size of capitalist farms in this part of Russia.—Lenin

[4]
      It hardly needs to be explained that in a country with a mass of
      peasantry, an absolute increase in the number of agricultural wage-workers
      is quite compatible not only with a relative, but also with an absolute,
      decrease of the rural population.—Lenin

[5]
      Mr. Ponomaryov expresses himself on this score thus. “Machines, by
      regulating the harvesting price, in all probability discipline the workers
      at the same time” (article in Selskoye Khozyaistvo i
      Lesowdstvo [Agriculture and Forestry ], quoted in
      Vestnik Finansov, 1896, No. 14). It will be remembered that the
      “Pindar of the capitalist

factory,”[8] Dr.  Andrew Ure, welcomed machines as
      creating “order” and “discipline” among the
      workers. Agricultural capitalism in Russia has already managed to create
      not only “agricultural factories,” but also the
      “Pindars” of these factories.—Lenin

[6]
      Tezyakov, loc. cit., 72.—Lenin

[7]
      Literally “brow-heater” or
      “forelock-heater.”–Ed.—Lenin
 


[8]
Pindar – ancient Greek lyrical poet. Of his numerous works, four
      volumes of poems have survived in which he extols the victors at the
      games. Pindar’s name has become an epithet used to designate those
      who “eulogise” beyond measure.

    
      In speaking of the Pindar of the capitalist factory Lenin has in mind the
      term applied by Marx in Capita, Volume I, to that apologist of
      capitalism, Dr. Ure.
    

 
  

VII. The Employment of Machinery in Agriculture

|

IX. Wage-Labour in Agriculture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Wage-Labour in Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: IX. Wage-Labour in Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      IX. Wage-Labour in Agriculture
    

      We now pass to the principal manifestation of agricultural capitalism –
      to the employment of hired labour. This feature of post-Reform economy was
      marked most strongly in the outer regions of south and east European
      Russia, in that mass shift of agricultural wage-workers known as the
      “agricultural migration.” For this reason we shall first cite
      data concerning this main region of agricultural capitalism in Russia and
      then examine the data relating to the whole of Russia.

    
      The tremendous movements of our peasants in search of work for hire have
      long ago been noted in our literature. Reference to them was made by
      Flerovsky (Condition of the Working Class in Russia, St.
      Petersburg, 1869), who tried to determine their relative incidence in the
      various gubernias. In 1875, Mr. Chaslavsky gave a general review of
      “agricultural outside employments” (Compendium of
      Political Knowledge, Vol. II) and noted their real significance
      (“there was formed . . . something in the nature of a semi-vagrant
      population . . . something in the nature of future farm
      labourers”). In 1887, Mr. Raspopin gathered together Zemstvo
      statistics on this phenomenon and regarded them not as
      “employments” of the peasants in general, but as a process of
      the formation of a class of wage-workers in agriculture. In the 90s, the
      works of Messrs. S. Korolenko, Rudnev, Tezyakov, Kudryavtsev and
      Shakhovskoi appeared, thanks to which a much fuller study of this
      phenomenon was made.

    
      The principal area to which agricultural wage-workers


migrate embraces Bessarabia, Kherson, Taurida, Ekaterinoslav,
      Don, Samara, Saratov (southern part) and Orenburg gubernias. We confine
      ourselves to European Russia, but it must be observed that the movement
      spreads, ever further afield (especially in the recent period), and covers
      the North Caucasus and the Ural region, etc. Data concerning capitalist
      agriculture in this area (the area of commercial grain farming) will be
      given in the next chapter; there, too, we shall point to other localities
      to which agricultural labourers migrate. The principal area from which
      agricultural labourers migrate is the central black-earth gubernias:
      Kazan, Simbirsk, Penza, Tambov, Ryazan, Tula, Orel, Kursk, Voronezh,
      Kharkov, Poltava, Chernigov, Kiev, Podolia and

Volhynia.[1]

 Thus the movement of
      workers proceeds from the most thickly-populated to the most thinly
      populated localities, the ones being colonised; from the localities where
      serfdom was most developed to those where it was least

developed[2];

from localities where
      labour-service is most developed to localities where it is little
      developed and capitalism is highly developed. Hence, the workers flee from
      “semi-free” to free labour. It would be a mistake to think
      that this flight amounts exclusively to a movement from thickly-populated
      to thinly-populated areas. A study of the movement of workers
      (Mr. S. Korolenko, loc. cit.) has revealed the singular
      and important fact that workers migrate from many areas in such great
      numbers as to create a shortage of hands in these places, one that is
      compensated by the arrival of workers from other places. Hence, the
      departure of workers expresses not only the tendency of the population to
      spread more evenly over the given territory, but also the tendency of the
      workers to go to areas where conditions are better.  This tendency will
      become quite clear to us if we recall that in the area of departure, the
      area of labour-service, agricultural workers’ wages are


particularly low, while in the area of attraction, the area of
      capitalism, wages are far

higher.[3]

      As to the extent of “agricultural migration,” general data
      exist only in the above-mentioned book by Mr. S Korolenko, who calculates
      the surplus of workers (relative to the local demand for them) at
      6,360,000 for the whole of European Russia, including 2,137,000 in the
      above-enumerated 15 gubernias of agricultural emigration, whereas in the 8
      gubernias of immigration the shortage of workers is estimated at 2,173,000
      persons. Despite the fact that Mr. S. Korolenko’s methods of
      calculation are by no means always satisfactory, his general conclusions
      (as we shall see repeatedly below) must be regarded as approximately
      correct, and the number of migratory workers not only not an exaggeration,
      but if anything an understatement of the facts.  There can be no doubt
      that part of these two million workers who come to the South are
      non-agricultural workers. But Mr. Shakhovskoi (loc.
      cit.)  estimates quite arbitrarily, approximately, that
      industrial workers account for half this number. Firstly, we know from all
      sources that the workers who migrate to this region are mainly
      agricultural, and secondly, agricultural workers come there not only from
      the gubernias mentioned above.  Mr. Shakhovskoi himself quotes a figure
      which confirms Mr. S. Korolenko’s calculations. He states that in 11
      black-earth gubernias (which are included in the above-described area from
      which agricultural workers emigrate) there were issued in 1891 a total of
      2,000,703 passports and identity cards (loc. cit.,
      p. 24), whereas according to Mr. S. Korolenko’s calculations the
      number of workers who left these gubernias was only
      1,745,913. Consequently, Mr. S. Korolenko’s figures are not in the
      least exaggerated, and the total number of migratory rural workers in
      Russia must obviously be over 2

      million.[4]

 The

 

      existence of such a mass of “peasants” who abandon their homes
      and allotments (where they have homes and allotments) vividly testifies to
      the tremendous process of the conversion of small cultivators into rural
      proletarians, of the enormous demand by growing agricultural capitalism
      for wage-labour.

    
      The question now arises, what is the total number of rural wage-workers in
      European Russia, both migratory and resident?  The only attempt to answer
      this question that we know is the one made in Mr. Rudnev’s work
      Peasant Industries in European Russia (Sbornik Saratovskogo
      Zemstva [Symposium of the Saratov Zemstvo ], 1894, Nos. 6
      and 11).  This work, an extremely valuable one, gives a summary of the
      Zemstvo statistics for 148 uyezds in 19 gubernias of European Russia. The
      total number of “industrialists” is put at 2,798,122, out of
      5,129,863 working males (18 to 60 years of age), i.e., 55% of the total
      number of working

peasants.[5]

 Under “agricultural industries” the
      author includes only work as hired agricultural labourers (farm
      labourers, day labourers, herdsmen, stockyard workers). An estimate of the
      percentage of agricultural workers to the total number of males of working
      age in various gubernias and districts of Russia, leads the author to the
      conclusion

 

      that in the black-earth belt about 25% of all working males are engaged in
      hired agricultural labour, and in the non-black-earth area about 10%. This
      gives us the number of agricultural workers in European Russia as
      3,395,000, or, in round numbers, 3 1/2 million (Rudnev, loc.
      cit., p. 448. This number is about 20% of the total number of
      males of working age). It must be observed in this connection that,
      according to Mr.  Rudnev, “day labour and agricultural job-work were
      placed in the category of industries by the statisticians only when they
      were the chief occupation of the given person or family”
      (loc. cit.,

446).[6]

      Mr. Rudnev’s figure should be regarded as the minimum, because,
      firstly, the Zemstvo census returns are more or less out-of-date, relating
      to the 80s and at times even to the 70s, and because, secondly, in
      determining the percentage of agricultural workers, no account whatever
      was taken of the Baltic and Western gubernias, where agricultural
      capitalism is highly developed. For want of other data, however, we are
      obliged to take this figure of 3 1/2 million.

    
      It appears, consequently, that about one-fifth of the peasants
      have already reached a position where their “chief occupation”
      is that of wage-labour for rich peasants and landlords. We see here the
      first group of the entrepreneurs who present a demand for the labour-power
      of the rural proletariat. These are the rural entrepreneurs, who employ
      about half of the bottom group of the peasantry. Thus, there is
      to be observed a complete interdependence between the formation of a class
      of rural entrepreneurs and the expansion of the bottom group of the
      “peasantry,” i.e., the increase in the number of rural
      proletarians. Among these rural entrepreneurs a prominent part is played
      by the peasant bourgeoisie: for

      

      example, in 9 uyezds of Voronezh Gubernia, 43.4% of the farm
      labourers are employed by peasants (Rudnev, 434).

      Were we to take this percentage as the standard for all rural
      workers and for the whole of Russia, it would be seen that the
      peasant bourgeoisie present a demand for

 

      some one and a half million agricultural workers. One and the same
      “peasantry” throws on to the market

      millions of workers in search of employers – and presents an
      impressive demand for wage-workers.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      In Chapter VIII , where we examine the movement of wage-workers in Russia
      as an entire process, we shall describe in greater detail the character
      and direction of migration from the various localities.—Lenin

[2]
      In his day Chaslavsky pointed out that in the localities in which workers
      arrived, serfs constituted from 4 to 15% of the total, and in the
      localities which workers left, from 40 to 60%.—Lenin

[3]
      See table of data for 10 years in Chapter VIII, § V: the formation of a
      home market for labour-power.—Lenin

[4]
      There is another way of checking Mr. S. Korolenko’s figure. We learn
      from the above-quoted books of Messrs. Tezyakov and Kudryavtsev that the
      number of agricultural workers who in their search for
      “employments” use the railways at least in part, is about 1/10
      of the total workers (combining the figures of both authors, we get the
      result that out of 72,635 workers interrogated, only 7,827 traveled at
      least part of the journey by rail). Yet the number of workers

 

carried in
      1891 by the three principal railways in the direction examined does not
      exceed 200,000 (170,000 to 189,000) – as we are told by Mr. Shakhovskoi
      (loc. cit., p. 71, according to railway
      returns). Consequently, the total number of workers leaving for the South
      must be about 2 million. Incidentally, the very small proportion of
      agricultural workers who travel by rail points to the incorrectness of
      Mr. N.–on’s view when he assumed that the passenger traffic on our
      railways is in the main that of agricultural workers. Mr. N.–on lost
      sight of the fact that non-agricultural workers receive higher wages and
      therefore make greater use of the railways and that the migration season
      of these workers (for example, builders, navvies, stevedores and many
      others) is also spring and summer.—Lenin

[5]
      By “industries,” as Mr. Rudnev also points out, are meant all
      sorts of occupations by peasants except cultivation on their own,
      purchased or rented land. Undoubtedly, the majority of these
      “industrialists” are wage-workers in agriculture or in
      industry. We therefore call the reader’s attention to the closeness
      of these figures to our estimate of the number of rural proletarians: in
      Chapter II, it was assumed that the latter constitute about 40% of the
      peasants. Here we see that “industrialists” constitute 55%,
      and of these, in all probability, over 40% are engaged in all sorts of
      hired labour.—Lenin

[6]
      This figure does not include, therefore, the mass of peasants for whom
      hired agricultural labor is not the chief occupation, but one of equal
      importance with their own farms.—Lenin
 

 
  

VIII. The Significance of Machinery in Agriculture

|

X. The Significance of Hired Labour in Agriculture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Significance of Hired Labour in Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Three: X. The Significance of Hired Labour in Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter III. The Landowners’ Transition from CorvÃ©e to Capitalist Economy




      X. The Significance of Hired Labour in
Agriculture
    

      Let us now attempt to depict the principal features of the new social
      relations that take shape in agriculture with the employment of hired
      labour, and to define their significance.

    
      The agricultural workers who come to the South in such masses belong to
      the poorest strata of the peasantry. Of the workers who come to Kherson
      Gubernia, 7/10 make the journey on foot, since they lack the money for
      railway fare; “they tramp for hundreds and thousands of versts along
      the railway track and the banks of navigable rivers, admiring the splendid
      pictures of rapidly-moving trains and smoothly-gliding ships”
      (Tezyakov, 35). On the average, the worker takes with him about

2 rubles[1];

often
      enough he even lacks the money to pay for a passport, and gets a monthly
      identity card for ten kopeks. The journey takes from 10 to 12 days, and
      after such a long tramp (sometimes undertaken barefoot in the cold spring
      mud), the traveler’s feet swell and become calloused and
      bruised. About 1/10 of the workers travel on dubi (large boats
      made out of rough boards, holding from 50 to 80 persons and usually packed
      to the limit). The reports of an official commission (the Zvegintsev

      Commission)[10] note
      the grave danger of this form of travel: “not a year passes but that
      one, two or even more of these overcrowded dubi go to the bottom
      with their passengers” (ibid., 34). The overwhelming
      majority of the workers have allotments, but of absolutely insignificant
      dimensions. “As a matter of fact,” Mr. Tezyakov quite justly
      observes, “all these thousands of agricultural workers are landless
      village proletarians, for whom outside employments

 

      are now the sole means of livelihood. . . . Landlessness is growing
      rapidly, and at the same time is swelling the ranks of the rural
      proletariat” (77). Striking confirmation of the rapidity of this
      growth is the number of worker novices, i.e., of those seeking employment
      for the first time. These novices constitute as many as 30%. Incidentally,
      this figure enables us to judge how rapid is the process that creates
      bodies of permanent agricultural workers.

    
      The mass migration of workers has given rise to special forms of hire
      peculiar to highly-developed capitalism. In the South and South-East,
      numerous labour markets have arisen where thousands of workers gather and
      employers assemble. These markets are usually held in towns, industrial
      centres, trading villages and at fairs. The industrial character of the
      centres is of particular attraction to the workers, who readily accept
      employment on non-agricultural jobs, too. Thus, in Kiev Gubernia, labour
      markets are held in Shpola and Smela (large centres of the beet-sugar
      industry), and in the town of Belaya Tserkov. In Kherson Gubernia, they
      are held in the commercial villages (Novoukrainka, Birzula and Mostovoye,
      where on Sundays over 9,000 workers gather, and many other villages), at
      railway stations (Znamenka, Dolinskaya, etc.), and in towns (Elisavetgrad,
      Bobrinets, Voznesensk, Odessa, and others). In the summer, townspeople,
      labourers and “cadets” (the local name for tramps) from Odessa
      also come to hire themselves out for agricultural work. In Odessa rural
      workers hire themselves out in what is called Seredinskaya Square (or the
      “Mowers’ Market”). “The workers make for Odessa,
      avoiding other markets, in the hope of getting better earnings here”
      (Tezyakov, 58). The township of Krivoi Rog is an important centre where
      workers are hired for agriculture and mining. In Taurida Gubernia, the
      township of Kakhovka is particularly noted for its labour market, where
      formerly as many as 40,000 workers gathered; in the nineties from 20,000
      to 30,000 gathered there, and now, judging from certain data, the number
      is still smaller. In Bessarabia Gubernia, mention should be made of the
      town of Akkerman; in Ekaterinoslav Gubernia, of the town of Ekaterinoslav,
      and Lozovaya Station; in Don Gubernia, of Rostov-on-Don, frequented every
      year by as many as 150,000 workers. In

 

      North Caucasus, of the towns of Ekaterinodar and Novorossiisk,
      Tikhoretskaya Station, and other places. In Samara Gubernia, of the
      village of Pokrovskaya (opposite Saratov), the village of Balakovo and
      other places. In Saratov Gubernia, of the towns of Khvalynsk and Volsk. In
      Simbirsk Gubernia, of the town of Syzran. Thus, capitalism has created in
      the outer regions a new form of the “combination of agriculture with
      industries,” namely, the combination of agricultural and
      non-agricultural hired labour. Such a combination is possible on a wide
      scale only in the period of the final and highest stage of capitalism,
      that of large-scale machine industry, which attenuates the importance of
      skill of “hand labour,” facilitates the transition from one
      occupation to another, and levels the forms of

hire.[2]

      Indeed, the forms of hire in this locality are very peculiar and very
      characteristic of capitalist agriculture. All the semi-patriarchal,
      semi-bonded forms of hired labour which one so frequently meets in the
      central black-earth belt disappear here. The only relationships left are
      those between hirers and hired, a commercial transaction for the purchase
      and sale of labour-power. As always under developed capitalist relations,
      the workers prefer hire by the day, or by the week, which enables them to
      make the pay correspond more exactly to the demand for
      labour. “Prices are fixed for the area of each market (within a
      radius of about 40 versts) with mathematical precision, and it is very
      hard for the employers to beat down the price, because the muzhik who has
      come to the market prefers to lie around or go on to another place rather
      than work for lower pay” (Shakhovskoi, 104). It goes without saying
      that violent fluctuations in prices paid for labour cause innumerable
      breaches of contract – only not on one side, as the employers usually
      claim, but on both sides: “concerted action is taken by both
      sides”: the labourers agree among themselves

 

      to demand more, and the employers – to offer less (ibid.,

      107).[3]

 How openly
      “callous cash payment” reigns here in the relations between
      the classes may be seen, for example, from the following fact:
      “experienced employers know very well” that the workers will
      “give in” only when they have eaten up their food
      stock. “A farmer related that when he came to the market to hire
      workers . . . he walked among them, poking with his stick at their
      knapsacks (sic !): if they had bread left, he would not talk to
      them; he would leave the market” and wait “until the knapsacks
      in the market were empty” (from the Selsky Vestnik
      [Rural Herald ], 1890, No. 15, ibid., 107-108).

    
      As under developed capitalism anywhere, so here, we see that the worker is
      particularly oppressed by small capital. The big employer is forced by
      sheer commercial

considerations[4]

 to abstain from petty oppression, which is of
      little advantage and is fraught with considerable loss should disputes
      arise. That is why the big employers, for example (those employing from
      300 to 800 workers), try to keep their workers from leaving at the end of
      the week, and themselves fix prices according to the demand for labour;
      some even adopt a system of wage increases if the price of labour in the
      area goes up – and all evidence goes to show that these increases are
      more than compensated by better work and the absence of disputes
      (ibid., 130-132; 104). A small employer, on the contrary, sticks
      at nothing. “The farmsteaders and German colonists carefully
      ‘choose’ their workers and pay them 15 or 20% more; but the
      amount of work they ‘squeeze’ out of them is 50 per cent
      more” (ibid., 116). The “wenches” who work for
      such an employer

 

      “don’t know day from night,” as they themselves say. The
      colonists who hire mowers get their sons to follow on their heels (i.e.,
      to speed up the workers!) in shifts, so that the speeders-up,
      replacing one another three times a day, come with renewed energy to drive
      the workers on: “that is why it is so easy to recognise those who
      have worked for the German colonists by their haggard
      appearance. Generally speaking, the farmsteaders and the Germans avoid
      hiring those who have formerly worked on landowners’ estates.
      ‘You’ll not stand the pace with us,’ they say
      quite frankly”

(ibid.).[5]

      Large-scale machine industry, by concentrating large masses of workers,
      transforming the methods of production, and destroying all the
      traditional, patriarchal cloaks and screens that have obscured the
      relations between classes, always leads to the directing of public
      attention towards these relations, to attempts at public control and
      regulation. This phenomenon, which has found particularly striking
      expression in factory inspection, is also beginning to be observed in
      Russian capitalist agriculture, precisely in the region where it is most
      developed. The question of the workers’ sanitary conditions was
      raised in Kherson Gubernia as early as 1875 at the Second Gubernia
      Congress of Doctors of the Kherson Zemstvo, and was dealt with again in
      1888; in 1889 there was drawn up a programme for the study of the
      workers’ conditions. The investigation of sanitary conditions that
      was carried out (on a far from adequate scale) in 1889-1890 slightly
      lifted the veil concealing the conditions of labour in the remote
      villages. It was seen, for instance, that in the majority of cases the
      workers have no living quarters; where barracks are provided, they are
      usually very badly built from a hygienic point of view, and “not

 

      infrequently” dug-outs are met with – they are inhabited,
      for example, by shepherds, who suffer severely from dampness,
      overcrowding, cold, darkness and the stifling atmosphere. The food
      provided is very often unsatisfactory. The working day, as a rule, is from
      12 1/2 to 15 hours, which is much longer than the usual working day in
      large-scale industry (11 to 12 hours). An interval during the hottest part
      of the day is met with only “as an exception” – and cases of
      brain diseases are no rarity. Work at machines gives rise to occupational
      division of labour and occupational diseases. For example, working at
      threshing machines are “drummers” (they put the sheaves into
      the drum; the work is very dangerous and most laborious: thick corn-dust
      beats into their faces), and “pitchers” (they pitch up the
      sheaves; the work is so heavy that the shifts have to be changed every
      hour or two). Women sweep up the straw, which boys carry aside, while from
      3 to 5 labourers stack it in ricks. The number employed on threshing in
      the whole gubernia must exceed 200,000 (Tezyakov,

94).[6]

 Mr. Tezyakov’s
      conclusions regarding the sanitary conditions of agricultural work, are as
      follows: “Generally speaking, the opinion of the ancients that the
      labour of the husbandman is ‘the pleasantest and healthiest of
      occupations’ is hardly sound at the present time, when the
      capitalist spirit reigns in agriculture. With the introduction of
      machinery into agriculture, the sanitary conditions of agricultural labour
      have not improved, but have changed for the worse. Machinery has brought
      into the field of agriculture a specialisation of labour so little known
      here before that it has had the effect of developing among the rural
      population occupational diseases and a host of serious injuries”
      (94).

    
      A result of the investigations into sanitary conditions (after the famine
      year and the cholera) was the attempt to organise medical and food depots,
      at which the labourers were to be registered, placed under sanitary
      supervision and provided with cheap dinners. However modest the scale and
      the results of this organisation may

      be, and  

      however

 

      precarious its

      existence,[7]

 it
      remains an important historical fact, revealing the trends of capitalism
      in agriculture. At the Congress of Doctors of Kherson Gubernia it was
      proposed, on the basis of data gathered by practitioners: to recognise the
      importance of medical and food depots and the need for improving their
      sanitary condition and extending their activities to give them the
      character of labour exchanges providing information on the prices of
      labour and their fluctuations; to extend sanitary inspection to all more
      or less big farms employing considerable numbers of labourers, “as
      is done in industrial establishments” (p. 155); to issue strict
      regulations governing the employment of agricultural machines and the
      registration of accidents; to raise the question of the workers’
      right to compensation and of providing better and cheaper steam
      transport. The Fifth Congress of Russian Doctors passed a resolution
      calling the attention of the Zemstvos concerned to the activities of the
      Kherson Zemstvo in the organisation of medical and sanitary inspection.
    




      In conclusion, let us return to the Narodnik economists.  Above we have
      seen that they idealise labour-service and close their eyes to the
      progressive nature of capitalism as compared with that system. Now we must
      add that they are unfavourably disposed to the “migration” of
      workers, and favour local “employments.” Here, for example, is
      how this usual Narodnik view is expressed by Mr. N.–on: “The
      peasants . . . set off in quest of work. . . .  How far, one may ask, is
      it advantageous from the economic point of view? Not personally for each
      individual peasant, but how far is it advantageous for the peasantry as a
      whole, from the national economic point of view?. . . What we want is to
      point to the purely economic disadvantage of the annual peregrination, God
      knows where to, for the entire summer, when it would seem that one could
      find plenty of occupations at hand. . .” (23-24).

    


      We assert, the Narodnik theory notwithstanding, that the
      “peregrination” of the workers not only yields “purely
      economic” advantages to the workers themselves, but in general
      should be regarded as progressive; that public attention should not be
      directed towards replacing outside employments by local “occupations
      close at hand,” but, on the contrary, towards removing all the
      obstacles in the way of migration, towards facilitating it in every way,
      towards improving and reducing the costs of all conditions of the
      workers’ travel, etc. The grounds for our assertion are as follows:

    
      1) “Purely economic” advantage accrues to the workers from
      “peregrination” in that they go to places where wages are
      higher, where their position as seekers of employment is a more
      advantageous one. Simple as this argument is, it is too often forgotten by
      those who love to rise to a higher, allegedly
      “national-economic” point of view.

    
      2) “Peregrination” destroys bonded forms of hire and
      labour-service.

    
      Let us recall, for example, that formerly, when migration was little
      developed, the southern landowners (and other employers) readily resorted
      to the following system of hiring labourers: they sent their agents to the
      northern gubernias and (through the medium of rural officials) hired
      tax-defaulters on terms extremely disadvantageous to the

latter.[8]

 Those offering
      employment consequently enjoyed the advantage of free competition, but
      those seeking it did not. We have quoted instances of the peasant’s
      readiness to flee from labour-service and bondage even to the mines.

    
      It is not surprising, therefore, that on the question of
      “peregrination” our agrarians go hand in hand with the
      Narodniks. Take Mr. S.  Korolenko, for example. In his book he quotes
      numerous opinions of landlords in opposition to the
      “migration” of workers, and adduces a host of
      “arguments” against “outside employments”:

      “dissipation,”  
 

      “rowdy habits,” “drunkenness,”
      “dishonesty,” “the striving to leave the family in order
      to get rid of it and escape parental supervision,” “the
      craving for amusement and a brighter life,” etc. But here is a
      particularly interesting argument: “Finally, as the proverb says,
      ‘if it stay at one spot, a stone will gather moss,’ and a man
      who stays at one spot will certainly amass property and cherish it”
      (loc. cit., p. 84). The proverb does indeed very
      strikingly indicate what happens to a man who is tied to one
      spot. Mr. S. Korolenko is particularly displeased with the phenomenon we
      referred to above, namely, that “too” many workers leave
      certain gubernias and that the shortage thus created is made good by the
      arrival of workers from other gubernias. In noting this fact as regards,
      for example, Voronezh Gubernia, Mr. S. Korolenko points to one of the
      reasons for this, namely, the large number of peasants possessing
      gift-land allotments.  “Evidently such peasants, who are relatively
      worse off materially and are not worried about their all too meagre
      property, more frequently fail to carry out the obligations they undertake
      and in general more readily leave for other gubernias, even when they
      could find plenty of employment at home.” “Such peasants,
      having little attachment (sic !) to their own inadequate
      allotments, and sometimes not even possessing implements, more readily
      abandon their homes and go to seek their fortunes far from their native
      villages, without troubling about employment locally, and sometimes even
      about obligations undertaken, since they have nothing on which distraint
      can be made” (ibid.).

    
      “Little attachment!” That’s just the term.

    
      It should give food for thought to those who talk about the disadvantages
      of “peregrination” and the preferableness of local
      “occupations close at

      hand”![9]




      3) “Peregrinations” mean creating mobility of the
      population. Peregrinations are one of the most important factors
      preventing the peasants from “gathering moss,” of which more
      than enough has been fastened on them by history. Unless the population
      becomes mobile, it cannot develop, and it would be na\"ive to imagine that a
      village school can teach people what they can learn from an independent
      acquaintance with the different relations and orders of things in the
      South and in the North, in agriculture and in industry, in the capital and
      in the backwoods.
    


Notes
 

[1]
      Money for the journey is obtained by the sale of property, even household
      goods, by mortgaging the allotment, by pawning things, clothes, etc., and
      even by borrowing money, to be repaid in labour, “from priests,
      landlords and local kulaks” (Shakhovskoi, 55).—Lenin

[2]
      Mr. Shakhovskoi refers to another form of the combination of agricultural
      and non-agricultural labour. Thousands of rafts are floated down the
      Dnieper to the towns in the lower reaches of the river.  On every raft
      there are from 15 to 20 workers (raftsmen), mostly Byelorussians and
      Great-Russians from Orel Gubernia. “For the whole voyage they get
      practically nothing”; they count chiefly on getting employment at
      reaping and threshing. These hopes are rewarded only in “good”
      years.—Lenin

[3]
      “At harvest time in a good year the worker triumphs, and it is a
      hard job to get him to give way. He is offered a price, but he won’t
      consider it; he keeps repeating: give me what I ask and it’s a
      go. And that is not because labour is scarce, but because, as the workers
      say, ‘it’s our turn now.’”- (Reported by a volost
      clerk; Shakhovskoi, 125.)
    

      “If the crop is a bad one and the price of labour has dropped, the
      kulak employer takes advantage of this condition to discharge the worker
      before the contract has expired, and the worker loses the season either in
      seeking work in the same district or in tramping the country,” a
      landlord correspondent confesses (ibid., 132).—Lenin

[4]
      Cf. Fr. Engels, Zur Wohnungsfrage. Vorwort. (F. Engels, The
      Housing Question.

Preface.  –Ed.)[11]—Lenin

[5]
      The same characteristics are displayed by the “Cossacks” of
      the Kuban Region: “The Cossack resorts to every possible method to
      force down the price of labour, acting either individually or through the
      community” (sic ! What a pity we lack more detailed
      information about this latest function of the “community”!):
      “cutting down the food, increasing the work quota, docking the pay,
      retaining the workers’ passports, adopting public resolutions
      prohibiting specific farmers from employing workers, on Dain of a fine, at
      above a definite rate, etc.” (“Migrant Workers in the Kuban
      Region” by A. Beloborodov, in Severny Vestnik, February
      1896, p. 5.)—Lenin

[6]
      Let us observe, in passing, that this operation, threshing, is most
      frequently done by hired labourers. One can judge, therefore how large
      must be the number employed on threshing all over Russia!—Lenin

[7]
      Of the six uyezd Zemstvo assemblies in Kherson Gubernia whose views on the
      question of organising supervision over workers are reported by
      Mr. Tezyakov, four declared against this system. The local landowners
      accused the gubernia Zemstvo board of “turning the workers into
      absolute idlers,” etc.—Lenin

[8]
      Shakhovskoi, loc. cit., 98 and foll. The author cites
      even the list of “fees” paid to clerks and village elders for
      the hire of peasants on advantageous terms. – Tezyakov loc.
      cit., 65 – Trirogov The Village Community and the Poll
      Tax; article entitled “Bondage in the National Economy.”—Lenin

[9]
      Here is another example of the pernicious influence of Narodnik
      prejudices. Mr. Tezyakov, whose splendid work we have frequently quoted,
      notes the fact that from Kherson Gubernia many local workers go to that of
      Taurida, although there is a great shortage of labour in the former
      gubernia. He calls this “an extremely queer phenomenon”:
      “it means a loss to the employers and a loss to the workers, who
      abandon jobs at home and risk finding none in Taurida” (33). We, on
      the contrary, think that Mr.  Tezyakov’s statement is extremely
      queer. Do the workers really not understand what is to their advantage,

 

and have they not the right to seek the most advantageous conditions of
      employment they can get?  (In Taurida Gubernia the wages of agricultural
      workers are higher than in Kherson Gubernia.) Are we really to think that
      it is obligatory for the muzhik to live and work where he is
      registered and “provided with an allotment”?—Lenin
 


[10]
Zvegintsev Commission – was established in 1894 under the
      auspices of the Zemstvo Department of the Ministry of Home Affairs to draw
      up measures for “introducing order into employments outside the
      village and regulating the movement of agricultural labourers.”
    


[11]
      Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow,
      1958, p. 546.
    

 
  

IX. Wage-Labour in Agriculture

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 252-330
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: K. Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. General Data on Agricultural Production in Post-Reform Russia and on The Types of Commercial Agriculture
  252



II. The Commercial Grain-Farming Area
  257



III. The Commercial Stock-Farming Area. General Data on the Development of Dairy Farming
  261



IV. Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in the Area Described
  267



V. Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry in the Dairy-Farming Area
  275



VI. The Flax-Growing Area
  282



VII. The Technical Processing of Agricultural Produce
  287



VIII. Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing; Suburban Farming
  304



IX. Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism in Russian Agriculture
  310



X. Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in Agriculture. “The Freeing of Winter Time”
  318



XI. Continuation.—The Village Community.—Marx’s Views on Small-Scale Agriculture.—Engels’s Opinion of the Contemporary Agricultural Crisis
  323

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## General Data on Agricultural Production in Post-Reform Russia and on the Types of Commercial Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: I. General Data on Agricultural Production in Post-Reform Russia and on The Types of Commercial Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture




      Having examined the internal economic structure of peasant and landlord
      economy, we must now take up the question of the changes in agricultural
      production and ask: do these changes express a growth of capitalism and of
      the home market?
    


      I. General Data on Agricultural Production in Post-Reform Russia
      and on The Types of Commercial Agriculture
    

      Let us glance first of all at the general statistics on grain production
      in European Russia. The considerable harvest fluctuations render the data
      for individual periods or for individual years quite

useless.[1]

 It is necessary to
      take different periods and the data for a whole number of years.  We have
      at our disposal the following data: for the period of the 60s, the data
      for 1864-1866 (Military Statistical Abstract, IV, St. Petersburg,
      1871, data of gubernatorial reports). For the 70s, the returns of the
      Department of Agriculture for the entire decade (Historico-Statistical
      Survey of Russian Industry, Vol. I, St. Petersburg, 1883). And
      lastly, for the 1880s, we have data for the five years of 1883-1887
      (Statistics of the Russian Empire, IV); this five-year period can
      represent the whole of the eighties, since the average harvest for the ten
      years, 1880-1889, is even somewhat higher than for the five years
      1883-1887 (see Agriculture

and Forestry in Russia, published for the Chicago Exhibition,
      pp. 132 and 142). Further, in order to judge of the trend of evolution in
      the 90s we take the data for the decade 1885-1894 (Productive
      Forces, I, 4). Lastly, the data for 1905 (Yearbook of
      Russia, 1906) are quite adequate for a judgement of the present
      time. The 1905 harvest was only a little lower than the average for the
      five years 1900-1904.

    
      Let us compare all these

data.[2]





Russia[6]



      We see from this that until the 1890s the post-Reform era is characterised
      by an undoubted increase in the production both of cereals and
      potatoes. The productivity of agricultural labour rises: firstly, the size
      of the net yield grows faster than that of the sown area (with occasional
      exceptions); secondly, we must bear in mind that the proportion of the
      population engaged in agricultural production steadily diminished during
      this period owing to the diversion of the population from agriculture to
      commerce and industry, and also owing to the migration of peasants beyond
      the bounds of European

Russia.[3]

 What is particularly

 

      noteworthy is the fact that it is commercial agriculture that is
      growing: there is an increase in the amount of grain gathered (after
      subtracting seed) per head of the population, while among this population
      there is an ever-growing division of social labour; there is an increase
      in the commercial and industrial population; the agricultural population
      splits up into rural entrepreneurs and a rural proletariat; there is an
      extension of specialisation in agriculture itself, so that the amount of
      grain produced for sale grows far more rapidly than the total amount of
      grain produced in the country. The capitalist character of the process is
      strikingly illustrated by the increased share of potatoes in the total
      agricultural

production.[4]

 The increase in the area under potatoes signifies,
      on the one hand, an improvement in agricultural technique (the
      introduction of root-crops) and increased technical processing of
      agricultural produce (distilling and the manufacture of potato starch). On
      the other hand, it is, from the viewpoint of the rural entrepreneur class,
      the production of relative surplus-value (cheapening of the cost of
      maintaining labour-power, deterioration of the people’s
      nourishment). The data for the decade 1885-1894 show further that the
      crisis of 1891-1892, which tremendously intensified the expropriation of
      the peasantry, led to a considerable reduction in the output of cereals
      and to a reduction in the yield of all crops; but the process of the
      displacement of cereals by potatoes continued with such force that the
      per-capita output of potatoes increased, not withstanding the reduced
      yield. Finally, the last five years (1900-1904) also show an increase in
      agricultural production, an increase in the productivity of agricultural
      labour

 

      and a worsening of the conditions of the working-class (increase in the
      part played by potatoes).
    

      As we have noted above, the growth of commercial agriculture manifests
      itself in the specialisation of agriculture. Mass-scale and gross data on
      the production of all crops can give (and then not always) only the most
      general indications of this process, since the specific features of the
      different areas thereby disappear. Yet it is precisely the segregation of
      the different agricultural areas that is one of the most characteristic
      features of post-Reform agriculture in Russia. Thus, the
      Historico-Statistical Survey of Russian Industry (Vol. I,
      St. Petersburg, 1883), quoted by us, enumerates the following agricultural
      areas: the flax area, “the region where stock farming
      predominates,” and where, in particular, “dairy farming is
      considerably developed”; the region where grain crops predominate,
      particularly the three-field area and the area with the improved fallow or
      multi-field grass system (part of the steppe belt, which “is
      characterised by the production of the most valuable, so-called elite
      grains, mainly intended for the foreign market”); the beet area, and
      the area in which potatoes are cultivated for distilling
      purposes. “The economic areas indicated have arisen in European
      Russia comparatively recently, and with every passing year continue
      increasingly to develop and become more segregated” (loc.
      cit.,

p. 15).[5]

 Our task should now be, consequently, to study
      this process of the specialisation of agriculture, and we should ascertain
      whether a growth of commercial agriculture is to be observed in its
      various forms, whether capitalist agriculture comes into existence in the
      process, and whether agricultural capitalism bears the features we
      indicated above in analysing the general data on peasant and landlord
      farming. It goes without saying that for our purposes it will be
      sufficient if we confine ourselves to describing the principal areas of
      commercial agriculture.
    

 

      But before examining the data for the separate areas, let us note the
      following: the Narodnik economists, as we have seen, do all they can to
      evade the fact that the characteristic feature of the post-Reform period
      is the growth of commercial agriculture. Naturally, in doing so they also
      ignore the circumstance that the drop in grain prices is bound to
      stimulate the specialisation of agriculture and the drawing of
      agricultural produce into the sphere of exchange. Here is an instance. The
      authors of the well-known book The Influence of Harvests and Grain
      Prices all proceed from the postulate that the price of grain is of
      no importance to natural economy, and they repeat this
      “truism” endlessly. One of them, Mr. Kablukov, has observed,
      however, that under the general conditions of commodity
      production this postulate is substantially wrong. “It is
      possible, of course,” he writes, “that the grain placed on the
      market has cost less to produce than that grown on the consumer’s
      farm, in which case it would appear to be in the interest also of the
      consuming farm to change from cultivating cereals to other crops”
      (or to other occupations, we would add), “and, consequently, for it
      too the market price of grain assumes importance as soon as it fails to
      coincide with its cost of production” (I, 98, note,
      author’s italics). “But we cannot take that into
      account,” he says peremptorily. Why is that? Because, it seems: 1) a
      change-over to other crops is possible “only where certain
      conditions exist.” By means of this empty truism (everything on
      earth is possible only under certain conditions!) Mr. Kablukov calmly
      evades the fact that the post-Reform period in Russia has created, and
      continues to create, the very conditions that call for the specialisation
      of agriculture and the diversion of the population from
      agriculture. . . . 2) Because “in our climate it is impossible to
      find a crop equal to cereals in food value”. The argument is highly
      original, expressing a mere evasion of the issue. What has the food value
      of other crops to do with the matter, if we are dealing with the sale of
      these other crops and the purchase of cheap grain? . . . 3) Because
      “grain farms of the consuming type always have a rational basis for
      their existence.” In other words, because Mr. Kablukov “and
      colleagues” regard natural economy as “rational.” The
      argument, as you see, is irrefutable. . . .
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      If only for this reason, Mr. N.–on is absolutely wrong in drawing the
      boldest conclusions from the returns for 8 years of one decade
      (1871-1878)!—Lenin

[2]
      For the period 1883-1887 we have taken the population of 1885; the
      increase is taken at 1.2%. The difference between the data of the
      gubernatorial reports and those of the Department of Agriculture is, as we
      know, inconsiderable. The figures for 1905 have been arrived at by
      converting poods into chetverts (about six bushels each.—Ed.)—Lenin

[3]
      Mr. N.–on is quite wrong when he asserts that “there are no grounds
      whatever for assuming a decline in their number” (the number of
      persons engaged in agricultural production), “quite the
      contrary” (Sketches, 33, note). See Chapter VIII, § II.—Lenin

[4]
      The net per-capita potato crop increased between 1864-1866 and 1870-1879
      in all areas of European Russia without exception.  Between 1870-1879 and
      1883-1887 the increase took place in 7 areas out of 11 (the Baltic,
      Western, Industrial, North-Western, Northern, Southern, Steppe, Lower- and
      Transvolga areas).
    

      Cf.  Agricultural Statistical Information Based on Material Obtained
from Farmers, Vol. VII, St. Petersburg, 1897 (published by Ministry
of

Agriculture).[7]
In 1871, in the 50 gubernias of European Russia, the area under potatoes
was 790,000 dess. in 1881—1,375,000 dess. and in
1895—2,154,000 dess, i.e., an increase during the 15 years of 55%
. Taking the potato crop in 1841 as 100, we get the following figures
for the later years: 1861—120; 1871—162; 1881—297;
1895—530.—Lenin

[5]
      Cf. also Agriculture and Forestry in Russia, pp. 84-88; here a
      tobacco area is added. The maps drawn by Messrs.  D. Semyonov and
      A. Fortunatov show the areas according to the particular crops
      predominating in them; for example the rye, oat and flax area, Pskov and
      Yaroslavl gubernias; the rye, oat and potato area, Grodno and Moscow
      gubernias, and so on.—Lenin
 


[6]
      In the first edition (1899) of The Development of Capitalism in
Russia the table was given as follows:
    







[7]
      Lenin’s notes on this publication and his preliminary calculations
      are published in Lenin Miscellany XXXIII, pp. 165-175.
    

 
  


|

II. The Commercial Grain-Farming Area

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Commercial Grain-Farming Area




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: II. The Commercial Grain-Farming Area








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture




      II. The Commercial Grain-Farming Area
    

      This area covers the outer region in the south and the east of European
      Russia, the steppe gubernias of Novorossia and the Transvolga.
      Agriculture is distinguished here for its extensive character and the
      enormous scale of the production of grain for sale. If we take the eight
      gubernias of Kherson, Bessarabia, Taurida, Don, Ekaterinoslav, Saratov,
      Samara and Orenburg, we shall find that in 1883-1887 the net crop of
      cereals (not including oats) for a population of 13,877,000 amounted to
      41.3 million chetverts, i.e., more than one-fourth of the total net yield
      of the 50 gubernias of European Russia. The crop most commonly sown here
      is wheat—the principal export

grain.[1]

 Agriculture develops here fastest of all (by
      comparison with the other areas of Russia), and these gubernias relegate
      the central black-earth gubernias, formerly in the lead, to the
      background:
    





periods[2]



      Thus there is a shifting of the principal centre of grain
      production: in the 1860s and 1870s the central black-earth gubernias were
      ahead of all the rest, but in the 1880s they yielded priority to the
      steppe and Lower Volga gubernias: their production of grain began to
      diminish.
    

      This interesting fact of the enormous growth of agricultural production in
      the area described is to be explained by the circumstance that in the
      post-Reform period the outer steppe regions have been colonies of
      the central, long-settled part of European Russia. The abundance of free
      land has attracted an enormous stream of settlers, who

 

      have quickly increased the area under

crops.[3]

 The extensive development of
      commercial crops was possible only because of the close economic
      ties of these colonies with central Russia, on the one hand, and the
      European grain importing countries, on the other. The development of
      industry in central Russia and the development of commercial farming in
      the outer regions are inseparably connected and create a market for each
      other. The industrial gubernias received grain from the South, selling
      there the products of their factories and supplying the colonies with
      labour, artisans (see Chapter V, § III on the migration of small
      industrialists to the outer regions), and means of production (timber,
      building materials, tools, etc.). Only because of this social division of
      labour could the settlers in the steppe localities engage exclusively in
      agriculture and sell huge quantities of grain in the home and particularly
      in the foreign market. Only because of their close connection with the
      home and foreign markets could the economic development of these
      localities proceed so rapidly; and it was precisely capitalist
      development, for along with the growth of commercial farming there was an
      equally rapid process of the diversion of the population into industry,
      the process of the growth of towns and of the formation of new centres of
      large-scale industry (see below, Chapters VII and

      VIII).[4]




      As to the question of whether the growth of commercial farming in this
      area is bound up with technical progress in agriculture and with the
      creation of capitalist relations, that has been dealt with above. In
      Chapter II we saw how large the areas cultivated by peasants in these
      localities are and how sharply capitalist relations manifest themselves
      there even within the village community. In the preceding chapter we saw
      that in this area there has been a particularly rapid development in the
      use of machinery, that the capitalist farms in the outer regions attract
      hundreds of thousands and millions of wage-workers, with huge farms
      created on a scale unprecedented in agriculture, on which there is
      extensive co-operation of wage-workers, etc. We have little left now to
      add in completion of this picture.
    

      In the outer steppe regions the privately-owned estates are not only
      distinguished occasionally for their enormous size, but are also the scene
      of farming on a very big scale. Above we made reference to crop areas of
      8, 10 and 15 thousand dessiatines in Samara Gubernia. In Taurida Gubernia,
      Falz-Fein owns 200,000 dess., Mordvinov 80,000 dess.; two individuals own
      60,000 dess. each, “and many proprietors have from 10,000 to 25,000
      dessiatines” (Shakhovskoi, 42). An idea of the scale of farming can
      be obtained, for example, from the fact that in 1893 there were 1,100
      machines (of which 1,000 belonged to the peasantry) haymaking for
      Falz-Fein. In Kherson Gubernia there were 3.3 million dessiatines under
      cultivation in 1893, of which 1.3 million dess. belonged to private
      owners; in five uyezds of the gubernia (without Odessa Uyezd) there were
      1,237 medium-sized farms (250 to 1,000 dess. of land), 405 big farms(1,000
      to 2,500 dess.) and 226 farms each of over 2,500 dess. According to data
      gathered in 1890 on 526 farms, they employed 35,514 workers, i.e., an
      average of 67 workers per farm, of whom from 16 to 30 were annual
      labourers. In 1893, 100 more or less big farms in Elisavetgrad Uyezd
      employed 11,197 workers (an average of 112 per farm!), of whom 17.4% were
      annual,

 

      39.5% seasonal, and 43.1% day

labourers.[5]

Here are data on the distribution of crop area
      among all the agricultural undertakings in the uyezd, both of private
      landowners and of

peasants.[6]






      Thus, a little over 3 per cent of the peasants (and if we count only those
      who cultivated, 4 per cent) concentrate in their hands more than a third
      of the total area under crops, for the tilling and harvesting of which
      masses of seasonal and day labourers are required.
    

      Lastly, here are the data for Novouzensk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia. In
      Chapter II we took only Russian peasants farming community allotments; now
      we add Germans and farmstead peasants (those farming non-community
      holdings). Unfortunately no data are available for the farms of private

      landowners.[7]







      There is no need, apparently, to comment on these data. We have had
      occasion to observe that the area described is the most typical of
      agricultural capitalism in Russia—typical not in the agricultural
      sense, of course, but in the social-economic sense. These colonies, having
      developed with the greatest freedom, show us what relations could and
      should have developed in the rest of Russia, had not the numerous
      survivals of pre-Reform life retarded the development of capitalism. The
      forms, however, of agricultural capitalism, as will be seen from what
      follows, are extremely varied.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Except for Saratov Gubernia, with 14.3% under wheat, in the rest of the
      gubernias mentioned we find 37.6% to 57.8% under wheat.—Lenin

[2]
      Sources given above. Areas of gubernias according to
      Historico-Statistical Survey. The “Lower Volga and
      Transvolga” area is badly constituted, for to the steppe gubernias,
      with their enormous production of grain, have been added that of Astrakhan
      (lacking grain for its food requirements) and of Kazan and of Simbirsk,
      which should more appropriately be included in the central black-earth
      belt.—Lenin

[3]
      See Mr. V. Mikhailovsky’s material (Novoye Slovo, [New
      Word ], June 1897) on the enormous increase in the population of the
      outer regions and on the migration to these parts, from 1885 to 1897, of
      hundreds of thousands of peasants from the interior gubernias. On the
      increase in the area under crops, see the above-mentioned work by V.
      Postnikov, the Zemstvo statistical returns for Samara Gubernia;
      Grigoryev’s Peasant Migration from Ryazan Gubernia. On Ufa
      Gubernia, see Remezov’s Sketches of the Life of Wild
      Bashkiria—a vivid description of how the
      “colonisers” felled timber for shipbuilding and transformed
      the fields “cleared” of “wild” Bashkirs into
      “wheat factories.” This is a sample of colonial policy that
      bears comparison with any of the Germans’ exploits in a place like
      Africa.—Lenin

[4]
      Cf. Marx, Das Kapital, III, 2, 289,—one of the basic
      features of the capitalist colony is abundance of free land easily
      accessible to settlers (the Russian translation of this passage, p.623, is
      quite

wrong).[8] Also
      see III, 2, 210. Russ. trans., p. 553,—the enormous grain surplus in
      the agricultural colonies is to be explained by the fact that their entire
      population is at first “almost exclusively engaged in farming, and
      particularly in producing agricultural mass products,” which

 

are
      exchanged for industrial products “They [the colonial states]
      receive through the world market finished products . . . which they would
      have to produce themselves under other

circumstances.”[9]—Lenin

[5]
      Tezyakov, loc. cit.—Lenin

[6]
Material for Evaluating the Lands of Kherson Gubernia, Vol.  II,
Kherson 1886. The number of dessiatines cultivated by each group was
determined by multiplying the average area under crops by the number of
farms.  The number of groups has been reduced.—Lenin

[7]
      Returns for Novouzensk Uyezd.—All rented land, state,
      privately-owned and allotment, has been taken. Here is a list of the
      improved implements owned by the Russian farmstead peasants: 609 iron
      ploughs, 16 steam threshers, 89 horse-threshers, 110 mowers 64 horse-drawn
      rakes, 61 winnowers and 64 reaping machines. The number of employed
      workers did not include day labourers.—Lenin
 


[8]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 738-39.
    


[9]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 655.
    

 
  

I. General Data on Agricultural Production in Post-Reform Russia and on The Types of Commercial Agriculture

|

III. The Commercial Stock-Farming Area. General Data on the Development of Dairy Farming

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Commercial Stock-Farming Area. General Data on the Development of Dairy Farming.




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: III. The Commercial Stock-Farming Area. General Data on the Development of Dairy Farming








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



III. The Commercial Stock-Farming Area.
      General  Data on the Development of Dairy Farming
    

      We now pass to another very important area of agricultural capitalism in
      Russia, namely, the region in which not cereal, but livestock produce is
      of predominant significance. This region embraces, apart from the Baltic
      and the western gubernias, the northern, the industrial and parts of some
      of the central gubernias (Ryazan, Orel, Tula, and Nizhni Novgorod). Here
      animals are kept for dairy produce, and the whole character of agriculture
      is adapted to obtaining as large a quantity as possible of the more
      valuable market

 

      produce of this

sort.[1]

 “Before our very eyes a marked transition is
      taking place from stock farming for manure to stock farming for dairy
      produce; it has been particularly notice able during the past ten
      years” (work quoted in previous footnote, ibid.). It is
      very difficult by the use of statistics to describe the various regions of
      Russia in this respect, because it is not the total number of horned
      cattle that is here important, but the number of dairy cattle and their
      quality. If we take the total number of animals per hundred inhabitants,
      we shall find that it is biggest in the outer steppe regions of Russia and
      smallest in the non-black-earth belt (Agriculture and Forestry,
      274); we shall find that as time goes on the number diminishes
      (Productive Forces, III, 6. Cf. Historico-Statistical
      Survey, I). Hence, we observe here what Roscher noted in his day,
      namely, that the number of animals per unit of the population is largest
      in districts of “extensive livestock farming” (W. Roscher,
      Nationaloekonomik des Ackerbaues. 7-te Aufl., Stuttg., 1873, S.

      563–564[2]).

We,
      however, are interested in intensive livestock farming, and in dairy
      farming in particular. We are compelled, therefore, to confine ourselves
      to the approximate computation made by the authors of the
      above-mentioned, Sketch, without claiming to make an exact
      estimate of the phenomenon; such a computation clearly illustrates the
      relative positions of the various regions of Russia as to degree of
      dairy-farm development. We quote this computation in extenso,
      supplementing it with some averages arrived at and data on the
      cheese-making industry in 1890 according to “factory”
      statistics.
    






 

      This table clearly illustrates (though the data are very obsolete) the
      emergence of special dairy-farming areas, the development there of
      commercial farming (the sale of milk and milk-processing) and the increase
      in the productivity of dairy cattle.

    
      To judge the development of dairy farming, we can only make use of data on
      butter production and cheese making. This industry arose in Russia at the
      very end of the 18th century (1795); cheese making on landlords’
      estates began to develop in the 19th century, but suffered a severe crisis
      in the 1860s, which opened the period of cheese making by peasants and
      merchants.

    
      The number of cheese-making establishments in the 50 gubernias of European
      Russia was as

follows:[3]






      Thus, in 25 years production increased more than ten-fold; only the
      dynamics of the phenomenon may be judged from these data, which are
      extremely incomplete. Let us quote some more detailed material. In Vologda
      Gubernia an improvement in dairy farming began, properly speaking, in
      1872, when the Yaroslavl-Vologda railway was opened; since then
      “farmers have begun to see to the improvement of their herds, to
      introduce grass cultivation, to acquire improved implements . . . and have
      tried to place dairy farming on a purely commercial basis”
      (Statistical Sketch,

 

      20). In Yaroslavl Gubernia “the ground was prepared” by the
      so-called “cheese-making artels” of the 70s, and “cheese
      making continues to develop on the basis of private enterprise, merely
      retaining the title of ‘artel’” (25); cheese making
      “artels” figure—may we add—in the Directory of
      Factories and Works as establishments employing wage-workers. Instead
      of 295,000 rubles, the authors of the Sketch estimate the output
      of cheese and butter, according to official returns, at 412,000
      rubles (computed from figures scattered throughout the book); correction
      of the figure brings the value of the output of fresh butter and cheese to
      1,600,000 rubles, and if we add clarified butter and soft cheese, to
      4,701,400 rubles, not counting either the Baltic or the western gubernias.

    

      For the later period let us quote the following opinions from the
      above-cited publication of the Department of Agriculture Hired
      Labour, etc. Concerning the industrial gubernias in general
      we read: “A complete revolution in the position of the farms in this
      area has been brought about by the development of dairy farming”; it
      “indirectly has also helped to bring about an improvement in
      agriculture”; “dairy farming in the area is developing with
      every year” (258). In Tver Gubernia “there is to be observed
      the tendency both among private landowners and peasants to improve the
      methods of maintaining cattle”; the income from stock farming is
      estimated at 10 million rubles (274). In Yaroslavl Gubernia “dairy
      farming . . . is developing with every year. . . . Cheese and butter
      making have even begun to assume something of an industrial character
      . . . milk . . . is bought up from neighbours and even from peasants. One
      comes across cheese factories run by a whole company of owners”
      (285). “The general trend of private-landowner farming here,”
      writes a correspondent from Danilov Uyezd, Yaroslavl Gubernia, “is
      marked at the present time by the following: 1) the transition from
      three-field to five- and seven-field crop rotation, with the sowing of
      herbage in the fields; 2) the ploughing up of disused lands; 3) the
      introduction of dairy farming, and as a consequence, the stricter
      selection of cattle and an improvement in their maintenance”
      (292). The same thing is said of Smolensk Gubernia, where the value of the
      output of cheese and butter amounted to

 

      240,000 rubles in 1889—according to a report of the Governor
      (according to statistical returns, 136,000 rubles in 1890). The
      development of dairy farming is noted in the Kaluga, Kovno,
      Nizhni-Novgorod, Pskov, Esthland and Vologda gubernias. The value of the
      output of butter and cheese in the last-mentioned gubernia was estimated
      at 35,000 rubles according to statistics for 1890, to 108,000 rubles
      according to the Governor’s report, and to 500,000
      rubles according to local returns for 1894, which gave a total of
      389 factories. “That is what the statistics say. Actually,
      however, there are far more factories, since, according to investigations
      by the Vologda Zemstvo Board, there are 224 factories in Vologda Uyezd
      alone.” Production is developed in three uyezds, and has partly
      penetrated a

fourth.[4]

 One can judge from this how many times the above
      quoted figures need to be multiplied in order to approach the real
      situation. The plain view of an expert that at the present time the number
      of butter and cheese-making establishments “amounts to several
      thousand” (Agriculture and Forestry in Russia, 299), gives
      a truer picture of the facts than the allegedly exact figure of 265.
    

      Thus the data leave not the slightest doubt about the enormous development
      of this special type of commercial farming. The growth of capitalism was
      accompanied here too by the transformation of routine technique. “In
      the sphere of cheese making,” we read, for example, in
      Agriculture and Forestry, “more has been done in Russia
      during the last 25 years than perhaps in any other country”
      (301). Mr. Blazhin says the same thing in his article “Technical
      Progress in Dairy Farming” (Productive Forces, III,
      38-45). The principal change is that the “age-old” method of
      leaving cream to settle has been replaced by the system of

 

      separating cream in centrifugal machines

(separators).[5]

 The machine has
      enabled the work to be carried on irrespective of atmospheric temperature,
      increased the butter yield from milk by 10%, improved the quality of the
      product, reduced the cost of butter production (the machine requires less
      labour, space, and ice, as well as fewer utensils), and has led to the
      concentration of production. Large peasant butteries have grown up,
      handling “as much as 500 poods of milk a day, which was physically
      impossible . . .  when the milk was left to settle”
      (ibid.). Improvements are being made in the instruments of
      production (permanent boilers, screw presses, improved cellars), and
      production is being assisted by bacteriology, which is providing pure
      cultures of the type of lactic-acid bacilli needed for fermenting cream.
    

      Thus, in the two areas of commercial farming we have described, the
      technical improvements called into being by the requirements of the market
      were effected primarily in those operations that were easiest to change
      and are particularly important for the market: reaping, threshing and
      winnowing in commercial grain farming, and the technical processing of
      animal produce in the area of commercial stock farming. As to the keeping
      of cattle, capital finds it more profitable for the time being to leave
      that to the small producer: let him “diligently” and
      “industriously” tend “his” cattle (and charm
      Mr. V. V. with his diligence—see Progressive Trends,
      p. 73), let him bear the brunt of the hardest and roughest work of tending
      the milk-yielding machine. Capital possesses the latest improvements and
      methods not only of separating the cream from the milk, but also of
      separating the “cream” from this “diligence”, of
      separating the milk from the children of the peasant poor.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      In other parts of Russia stock farming is of a different kind. For
      example, in the extreme South and South-East, the most extensive form of
      stock farming has become established, namely, cattle-fattening for
      beef. Further north, horned cattle are used as draught animals. Lastly, in
      the central black-earth belt cattle are used as “manure-making
      machines.” V. Kovalevsky and I. Levitsky, Statistical Sketch of
      Dairy Farming in the Northern and Central Belts of European Russia
      (St.  Petersburg, 1879). The authors of this work, like the majority of
      agricultural experts, display very little interest in the social-economic
      aspect of the matter or understanding of this aspect It is quite wrong,
      for example, to draw from the fact of farms becoming more profitable the
      direct conclusion that they ensure “the people’s well-being
      and nutriment” (p. 2).—Lenin

[2]
      W. Roscher, Economics of Agriculture, 7th edition, Stuttgart
1873, pp. 563-564.—Lenin

[3]
      Data from Military Statistical Abstract and Mr. Orlov’s
      Directory (1st and 3rd eds.). Concerning these sources, see
      Chapter VII. Let us merely observe that the figures quoted minimise the
      actual rapidity of development, since the term “factory” or
      “works” was employed in a narrower sense in 1879 than in 1866;
      and in 1890 in a still narrower sense than in 1879. The 3rd ed of the
      Directory contains information on the date of establishment of
      230 factories; it appears that only 26 were established before 1870, 68 in
      the 70s, 122 in the 80s and 14 in 1890. This speaks of a rapid increase in
      production. As for the latest List of Factories and Works
      (St. Petersburg, 1897), utter chaos reigns there: cheese making is
      registered for two or three gubernias and for the rest omitted altogether.—Lenin

[4]
Nedelya [Week ], 1896, No. 13.  Dairy farming is so
      profitable that urban traders have rushed into the business and,
      incidentally, have introduced such methods as the settlement of accounts
      in goods. One local landowner, who has a large factory, organised an artel
      “with prompt cash payment for milk” in order to release the
      peasants from bondage to buyers-up and to “capture new
      markets.” A characteristic example, showing the real significance of
      artels and of the celebrated “organisation of sales,” namely,
      “emancipation” from merchant’s capital through
      the development of industrial capital.—Lenin

[5]
      Until 1882 there were hardly any separators in Russia. From 1886 onward
      they spread so rapidly as to displace the old method utterly. In the 1890s
      even butter-extractor separators appeared.—Lenin
 

 
  

II. The Commercial Grain-Farming Area

|

IV. Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in the Area Described

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in the Area Described




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: IV. Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in the Area Described








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 IV. Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in
      the Area Described
    

      We have cited the evidence of agronomists and farmers to the effect that
      dairy farming on the landlord estates leads to the rationalisation of
      agriculture. Let us

 

      add here that the analysis of the Zemstvo statistics on this question made
      by

Mr. Raspopin[1]

      fully confirms this conclusion. We refer the reader to
      Mr. Raspopin’s article for detailed data and give here only his main
      conclusion. “The interdependence of the condition of stock raising
      and dairy farming, on the one hand, and the number of dilapidated estates
      and the intensity of farming, on the other, is beyond question. The uyezds
      (of Moscow Gubernia) where dairy cattle raising, dairy farming, is most
      developed show the smallest percentage of dilapidated farms and the
      highest percentage of estates with highly developed field
      cultivation. Throughout Moscow Gubernia ploughland is being reduced and
      turned into meadow and pastureland, while grain rotations are yielding
      place to multi-field herbage rotations. Fodder grasses and dairy cattle,
      and not grain, are now predominant . . . not only on the farming estates
      in Moscow Gubernia but throughout the Moscow industrial district”
      (loc. cit.).
    

      The scale of butter production and cheese making is particularly important
      precisely because it testifies to a complete revolution in agriculture,
      which becomes entrepreneur farming and breaks with routine.  Capitalism
      subordinates to itself one of the products of agriculture, and all other
      aspects of farming are fitted in with this principal product. The keeping
      of dairy cattle calls forth the cultivation of grasses, the change-over
      from the three-field system to multi-field systems, etc. The waste
      products of cheese making go to fatten cattle for the market. Not only
      milk processing, but the whole of agriculture becomes a commercial

      enterprise.[2]

 The
      influence of cheese production and

 

      butter making is not confined to the farms on which they are carried on,
      since milk is often bought up from the surrounding peasants and
      landlords. By buying up the milk, capital subordinates to itself the small
      agriculturists too, particularly with the organisation of the so-called
      “amalgamated dairies,” the spread of which was noted in the
      70s (see Sketch by Messrs. Kovalevsky and Levitsky). These are
      establishments organised in big towns, or in their vicinity, which process
      very large quantities of milk brought in by rail. As soon as the milk
      arrives the cream is skimmed and sold fresh, while the skimmed milk is
      sold at a low price to poorer purchasers. To ensure that they get produce
      of a certain quality, these establishments sometimes conclude contracts
      with the suppliers, obliging them to adhere to certain rules in feeding
      their cows. One can easily see how great is the significance of large
      establishments of this kind: on the one hand they capture the public
      market (the sale of skimmed milk to the poorer town-dwellers), and on the
      other hand they enormously expand the market for the rural
      entrepreneurs. The latter are given a tremendous impetus to expand and
      improve commercial farming. Large-scale industry brings them into line, as
      it were, by demanding produce of a definite quality and forcing out of the
      market (or placing at the mercy of the usurers) the small producer who
      falls below the “normal” standard. There should also operate
      in the same direction the grading of milk as to quality (fat content, for
      example), on which technicians are so busily engaged, inventing all sorts
      of lacto-densimeters, etc., and of which the experts are so heartily in
      favour (cf. Productive Forces, III, 9 and 38). In this respect
      the role of the amalgamated dairies in the development of capitalism is
      quite analogous to that of elevators in commercial grain farming. By
      sorting grain as to quality the elevators turn it into a product that is
      not individual

 

      but generic

(res fungibilis,[7] as the lawyers say), i.e., for the first time they
      adapt it fully to exchange (cf. M.  Sering’s article on the grain
      trade in the United States of America in the symposium Landownership
      and Agriculture, p. 281 and foll.). Thus, the elevators give a
      powerful impetus to commodity-grain production and spur on its technical
      development by also introducing grading for quality. Such a system strikes
      a double blow at the small producer. Firstly, it sets up as a standard,
      legalises, the higher-quality grain of the big crop sowers and thereby
      greatly depreciates the inferior grain of the peasant poor. Secondly, by
      organising the grading and storing of grain on the lines of large-scale
      capitalist industry, it reduces the big sowers’ expenses on this
      item and facilitates and simplifies the sale of grain for them, thereby
      placing the small producer, with his patriarchal and primitive methods of
      selling from the cart in the market, totally at the mercy of the kulaks
      and the usurers. Hence, the rapid development of elevator construction in
      recent years means as big a victory for capital and degradation of the
      small commodity-producer in the grain business as does the appearance and
      development of capitalist “amalgamated dairies.”
    

      From the foregoing material it is clear that the development of commercial
      stock farming creates a home

market,[3]

 firstly, for means of
      production—milk-processing equipment, premises, cattle sheds,
      improved agricultural implements required for the change-over from the
      routine three-field system to multi-field crop rotations, etc.; and
      secondly, for labour-power. Stock farming placed on an industrial footing
      requires a far larger number of workers

 

      than the old stock farming “for manure.” The dairy farming
      area—the industrial and north-western gubernias—does really
      attract masses of agricultural labourers. Very many people go to seek
      agricultural work in the Moscow, St. Petersburg, Yaroslavl and Vladimir
      gubernias; fewer, but nevertheless a considerable number, go to the
      Novgorod, Nizhni Novgorod and other non-black-earth gubernias. According
      to correspondents of the Department of Agriculture in the Moscow and other
      gubernias private-landowner farming is actually conducted in the main by
      labourers from other areas. This paradox— the migration of
      agricultural workers from the agricultural gubernias (they come mostly
      from the central black-earth gubernias and partly from the northern) to
      the industrial gubernias to do agricultural jobs in place of industrial
      workers who abandon the area en masse—is an extremely characteristic
      phenomenon (see S. A. Korolenko on this point, loc. cit). It proves more
      convincingly than do any calculations or arguments that the standard of
      living and the conditions of the working people in the central black-earth
      gubernias, the least capitalist ones, are incomparably lower and worse
      than in the industrial gubernias, the most capitalist ones; it proves that
      in Russia, too, the following has become a universal fact, namely, the
      phenomenon characteristic of all capitalist countries, that the conditions
      of the workers in industry are better than those of the workers in
      agriculture (because in agriculture oppression by capitalism is
      supplemented by the oppression of pre-capitalist forms of
      exploitation). That explains the flight from agriculture to industry,
      whereas not only is there no flow from the industrial gubernias towards
      agriculture (for example, there is no migration from these gubernias at
      all), but there is even a tendency to look down upon the “raw”
      rural workers, who are called “cowherds” (Yaroslavl Gubernia),
      “cossacks” (Vladimir Gubernia) and “land
      labourers” (Moscow Gubernia).

    
      It is important also to note that cattle herding requires a larger number
      of workers in winter than in summer. For that reason, and also because of
      the development of agricultural processing trades, the demand for labour
      in the area described not only grows, but is more evenly distributed
      over the whole year and over a period of years. The most reliable

 

      material for judging this interesting fact is the data on wages, if taken
      for a number of years. We give these data, confining ourselves to the
      groups of Great-Russian and Little-Russian

gubernias.[8] We omit the western
      gubernias, owing to their specific social conditions and artificial
      congestion of population (the Jewish pale of settlement), and quote the
      Baltic gubernias only to illustrate the relations that arise where
      capitalism is most highly

developed.[4]







      Let us examine this table, in which the three principal columns are
      printed in italics. The first column shows the proportion of summer to
      yearly pay. The lower this proportion is, and the nearer the
      summer pay approximates to half the yearly pay, the more evenly is the
      demand for labour spread over the entire year and the less the winter
      unemployment. The least favourably placed in this respect are the
      central black-earth gubernias—the area where labour-service prevails
      and where capitalism is poorly

developed.[5]

 In the industrial gubernias, in the dairy-farming
      area the demand for labour is higher and winter unemployment is less. Over
      a period of years, too, the pay is most stable here, as may be seen from
      the second column, which shows the difference between the lowest and the
      highest pay in the harvest season.  Lastly, the difference between the pay
      in the sowing season and the pay in the harvest season is also least in
      the non black-earth belt, i.e., the demand for workers is more evenly
      distributed over the spring and summer. In all respects mentioned the
      Baltic gubernias stand even higher than the non-black-earth gubernias,
      while the steppe gubernias, with their immigrant workers and with harvest
      fluctuations of the greatest intensity, are marked by the greatest
      instability of wages. Thus, the data on wages testify that agricultural
      capitalism in the area described not only creates a demand for
      wage-labour, but also distributes this demand more evenly over the whole
      year.

    
      Lastly, reference must be made to one more type of dependence of the small
      agriculturist in the area described upon the big farmer. This is the
      replenishment of landlords’ herds by the purchase of cattle from
      peasants. The landlords find it more profitable to buy cattle from
      peasants driven by need to sell “at a loss” than to breed
      cattle themselves—just as our buyers-up in so-called handicraft
      industry often prefer to buy finished articles from the handicraftsmen at

 

      a ruinously cheap price rather than manufacture them in their own
      workshops. This fact, which testifies to the extreme degradation of the
      small producer, and to his being able to keep going in modern society only
      by endlessly reducing his requirements, is turned by Mr. V. V. into an
      argument in favour of small “people’s” production!
      . . . “We are entitled to draw the conclusion that our big farmers
      . . . do not display a sufficient degree of independence. . . . The
      peasant, however . . . reveals greater ability to effect real farming
      improvements” (Progressive Trends, 77). This lack of
      independence is expressed in the fact that “our dairy farmers
      . . . buy up the peasants’ (cows) at a price rarely amounting to
      half the cost of raising them—usually at not more than a third, and
      often even a quarter of this cost” (ibid., 71). The
      merchant’s capital of the stock farmers has made the small peasants
      completely dependent, it has turned them into its cowherds, who breed
      cattle for a mere song, and has turned their wives into its

milkmaids.[6]

 One would think that
      the conclusion to be drawn from this is that there is no sense in
      retarding the transformation of merchant’s capital into industrial
      capital, no sense in supporting small production, which leads to forcing
      down the producer’s standard of living below that of the farm
      labourer. But

 

      Mr. V. V. thinks otherwise. He is delighted with the “zeal”
      (p. 73, loc. cit.) of the peasant in tending his cattle;
      he is delighted with the “good results from livestock farming”
      obtained by the peasant woman who “spends all her life with her cow
      and sheep” (80). What a blessing, to be sure! To “spend all
      her life with her cow” (the milk of which goes to the improved cream
      separator), and as a reward for this life, to receive “one-fourth of
      the cost” of tending this cow! Now really, how after that can one
      fail to declare in favour of “small people’s
      production”!
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      This problem also has been raised by Mr.  Raspopin (perhaps for the first
      time in our literature) from the correct, theoretically sound point of
      view. At the very outset he observes that “the enhancement of the
      productivity of stock farming”—in particular, the development
      of dairy farming—is proceeding in this country along capitalist
      lines and serves as one of the most important indices of the penetration
      of capital into agriculture.—Lenin

[2]
      Dr. Zhbankov says in his Sanitary Investigation of Factories and Works
of Smolensk Gubernia (Smolensk, 1894, Vol. I, p. 7) that “the
number of workers engaged in cheese making proper . . . is very
inconsiderable. . . . There are far more auxiliary workers, needed both
for cheese making and for agriculture; these are herdsmen, milkmaids,

 

etc.; in all the [cheese] factories these workers outnumber the cheese
makers proper, two, three and even four times over.” Let us note
in passing that according to Dr. Zhbankov’s description, the
conditions of labour here are very insanitary, and the working day is
excessively long (16 to 17 hours), etc. Thus, in the case of this area
of commercial agriculture, too, the traditional notion of the idyllic
occupation of the agriculturist is a false one.—Lenin

[3]
      The market for commercial stock farming is created chiefly by the
      growth of the industrial population, with which we shall deal in detail
      later on (Chapter VIII, § II).  As regards foreign trade, let us confine
      ourselves to the following remarks: cheese exports in the early part of
      the post-Reform period were much below imports; but in the 90s they almost
      equalled them (for the 4 years 1891-1894, the annual average imports
      amounted to 41,800 poods, and exports to 40,600 poods; in the five years
      1886-1890, exports even exceeded imports). The exports of cow and ewe
      butter have always greatly exceeded imports; these exports are rapidly
      increasing: in 1866-1870 the average annual exports amounted to 190,000
      poods and in 1891-1894 to 370,000 poods (Productive Forces, III,
      37).—Lenin

[4]
      Group I (the area of capitalist grain farming) consists of 8 gubernias:
      Bessarabia, Kherson, Taurida, Ekaterinoslav, Don, Samara, Saratov and
      Orenburg. Group II (the area where capitalism is least developed) consists
      of 12 gubernias: Kazan, Simbirsk, Penza, Tambov Ryazan, Tula, Orel, Kursk,
      Voronezh, Kharkov, Poltava and Chernigov. Group III (the area of
      capitalist dairy farming and industrial capitalism) consists of 10
      gubernias: Moscow, Tver, Kaluga, Vladimir, Yaroslavl, Kostroma,
      Nizhni-Novgorod, St. Petersburg, Novgorod and Pskov. The figures showing
      wages are average gubernia figures. Source: Department of Agriculture
      publication Hired Labour, etc.—Lenin

[5]
      A similar conclusion is drawn by Mr. Rudnev: “In those localities
      where the work of labourers hired by the year is given a relatively high
      valuation the wages of the summer worker approximate more closely to half
      the yearly pay. Hence, on the contrary, in the western gubernias, and in
      nearly all the densely-populated central black-earth gubernias, the
      worker’s labour in the summer is given a very low valuation”
      (loc. cit., 455).—Lenin

[6]
      Here are two descriptions of the living standard and living conditions of
      the Russian peasant in general. M. Y. Saltykov, in Petty Things of
      Life, writes about the “enterprising muzhik” as follows:
      “The muzhik needs everything, but what he needs most of all . . . is
      the ability to exhaust himself, not to stint his own labour. . . . The
      enterprising muzhik simply expires at it” (work). “His wife
      and grown up children, too, all toil worse than galley-slaves.”
    

      V. Veresayev, in a story entitled “Lizar” Severny
      Kurier [Northern Courier ], 1899, No. 1), tells the story of
      a muzhik in the Pskov Gubernia named Lizar, who advocates the use of
      drops, etc., “to prevent an increase.”
      “Subsequently,” observes the author, “I heard from many
      Zemstvo doctors, and particularly from midwives, that they frequently have
      similar requests from village husbands and wives.” “Moving in
      a certain direction, life has tried all roads and at last has reached a
      blind alley. There is no escape from it. And so a new solution of the
      problem is naturally arising and increasingly maturing.”
    

      The position of the peasant in capitalist society is indeed hopeless, and
      in Russia with its village communities, as in France with its
      smallholders, leads “naturally” not to an unnatural
      . . . “solution of the problem,” of course, but to an
      unnatural means of postponing the doom of small economy. (Note to 2nd
      edition.)—Lenin
 


[7]
Res fungibilis—replaceable thing—an old juridical
      term.  “Replaceable things” are those which in contracts are
      indicated by simple numerical quantity or measure (“so many bushels
      of rye,” “so many bricks”).  They are distinguished from
      “irreplaceable things”—things that are specifically
      indicated (“such and such a thing,” “article number so
      and so”).
    


[8]
Little Russia, i.e., Malorossia—as the territory of the
      Ukraine was officially called in tsarist Russia.
    

 
  

III. The Commercial Stock-Farming Area. General Data on the Development of Dairy Farming

|

V. Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry in the Dairy-Farming Area

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry in the Dairy-Farming Area




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: V. Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry in the Dairy-Farming Area








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 V. Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry
      in the Dairy-Farming Area
    

      In the literature dealing with the effect of dairy farming on the
      conditions of the peasantry, we constantly come up against contradictions:
      on the one hand reference is made to progress in farming, the enlargement
      of incomes, the improvement of agricultural technique and the acquisition
      of improved implements; on the other hand, we have statements about the
      deterioration of food, the creation of new types of bondage and the ruin
      of the peasants. After what was stated in Chapter II, we should not be
      surprised at these contradictions: we know that these opposite opinions
      relate to opposite groups of the peasantry. For a more precise judgement
      of the subject, let us take the data showing the classification of peasant
      households according to the number of cows per

      household.[1]







      Thus, the distribution of cows among the peasants in the non-black-earth
      belt is found to be very similar to the distribution of draught animals
      among the peasants in the black-earth gubernias (see Chapter
      II). Moreover, the concentration of dairy cattle in the area described
      proves to be greater than the concentration of draught animals. This
      clearly points to the fact that it is with the local form of commercial
      farming that the differentiation of the peasantry is closely
      connected. The same connection is evidently indicated by the following
      data (unfortunately, not sufficiently complete). If we take the aggregate
      Zemstvo statistics (given by Mr. Blagoveshchensky; for 122 uyezds of 21
      gubernias), we get an average of 1.2 cows per household. Hence, in the
      non-black-earth belt the peasantry evidently own more cows than in the
      black-earth belt, and in Petersburg Gubernia they are better off than in
      the non-black earth belt in general. On the other hand, in 123 uyezds of
      22 gubernias the cattleless households constitute 13 %, while in the 18
      uyezds we have taken, they amount to 17%, and in the 6 uyezds of
      Petersburg Gubernia 18.8%. Hence, the differentiation of the peasantry (in
      the respect we are now examining) is most marked in Petersburg Gubernia,
      followed by the non-black-earth belt in general. By this indication,
      commercial farming is the principal factor in the differentiation of the
      peasantry.
    

      The data show that about half the peasant households (those having no
      cows, or one cow) can take only a

 

      negative part in the benefits of dairy farming. The peasant with one cow
      will sell milk only out of need, to the detriment of his children’s
      nourishment. On the other hand, about one-fifth of the households (those
      with 3 cows and more) concentrate in their hands probably more than half
      the total dairy farming since the quality of their cattle and the
      profitableness of their farms should be higher than in the case of the
      “average”

peasant.[2]

 An interesting illustration of this conclusion is
      provided by the data on a locality where dairy farming and capitalism in
      general are highly developed.  We refer to Petersburg

Uyezd.[3]

 Dairy farming is
      particularly widely developed in the summer residential part of the uyezd,
      inhabited mainly by Russians; here the most widely cultivated crops are:
      grasses (23.5% of the allotment arable, as against 13.7% for the uyezd),
      oats (52.3% of the arable) and potatoes (10.1%). Agriculture is directly
      influenced by the St. Petersburg market, which needs oats, potatoes, hay,
      milk and horse traction (loc. cit., 168). The families
      of the registered population are 46.3% engaged “in the milk
      industry.” Of the total number of cows 91% provide milk for the
      market. The income from this industry amounts to 713,470 rubles (203
      rubles per family, 77 rubles per cow). The nearer the locality is to
      St. Petersburg, the higher is the quality of the cattle and the better the
      attention they receive. The milk is sold in two ways: 1) to buyers-up on
      the spot and 2) in St. Petersburg to “dairy farms,” etc. The
      latter type of marketing is much

 

      more profitable, but “the majority of the farms having one or two
      cows, and sometimes more, are not . . . able to deliver their milk to
      St. Petersburg direct”—they have no horses, it does not pay to
      cart small quantities, etc.  The buyers-up of the milk include not only
      specialist merchants, but individuals with dairies of their own. The
      following data are for two volosts in the uyezd:
    





      One can judge from this how the benefits of dairy farming are distributed
      among all the peasants in the non-black earth belt, among whom, as we have
      seen, the concentration of dairy cattle is even greater than among these
      560 families. It remains for us to add that 23.1% of the peasant families
      in St. Petersburg Uyezd hire workers (most of whom, here, as everywhere in
      agriculture, are day labourers). “Bearing in mind that agricultural
      workers are hired almost exclusively by families having fully-operating
      farms” (constituting only 40.4% of the total number of families in
      the uyezd) “the conclusion must be that more than half of such farms
      do not manage without hired labour” (158).

    
      Thus, at opposite ends of Russia, in the most varying localities, in
      St. Petersburg and, say, Taurida gubernias, the social and economic
      relations within the “village community,” prove to be
      absolutely identical. The “muzhik-cultivators”
      (Mr. N.–on’s term) in both places differentiate into a minority of
      rural entrepreneurs and a mass of rural proletarians. The specific feature
      of agriculture is that capitalism subjugates one aspect of rural economy

 

      in one district, and another aspect in another, which is why identical
      economic relations are manifested in the most varied forms of agronomy and
      everyday life.
    

      Having established the fact that in the area described, too, the peasantry
      splits up into opposite classes, we shall easily achieve clarity about the
      contradictory opinions usually expressed as to the role of dairy
      farming. Quite naturally, the well-to-do peasantry receive an incentive to
      develop and improve their farming methods and as a result grass
      cultivation is widespread and becomes an essential part of commercial
      stock-farming. The development of grass cultivation is observed, for
      example, in Tver Gubernia; in Kashin Uyezd, the most progressive in that
      gubernia, as many as one-sixth of all peasant households plant clover
      (Returns, XIII, 2, p. 171). It is interesting, moreover, to note
      that on the purchased lands a larger proportion of arable is occupied by
      herbage than on the allotments: the peasant bourgeoisie naturally prefer
      private ownership of land to communal

tenure.[4]

 In the Survey of Yaroslavl
      Gubernia (Vol. II, 1896) we also find numerous references to the
      increase in grass cultivation, and again mainly on purchased and rented

      lands.[5]

 In the same
      publication we find references to the spread of improved implements: iron
      ploughs, threshing machines, rollers, etc. Butter and cheese making, etc.,
      are developing very considerably. In Novgorod Gubernia it was noted as far
      back as the beginning of the 80s that along with a general deterioration
      and diminution of peasant stock breeding, there was an improvement in
      certain individual localities where there was a profitable market for milk
      and where the milk-feeding of calves was an old-established industry
      (Bychkov: An Essay in the House-to-House Investigation of the Economic
      Position and Farming of the Peasants

in Three Volosts of Novgorod Uyezd, Novgorod, 1882). The
      milk-feeding of calves, which is also a type of commercial livestock
      farming, is, generally speaking, a fairly widespread industry in the
      Novgorod and Tver gubernias and in other places not far from the big
      cities (see Hired Labour, etc., published by the
      Department of Agriculture). “This industry,” says Mr. Bychkov,
      “by its very nature, brings an income to the already well-provided
      peasants possessing considerable numbers of cows, since with one cow, and
      sometimes even with two of poor yield, the milk-feeding of calves is
      unthinkable” (loc. cit.,

101).[6]


      But the most outstanding index of the economic successes of the peasant
      bourgeoisie in the area described is the hiring of labourers by
      peasants. The local landowners feel that they are being confronted by
      competitors, and in their communications to the Department of Agriculture
      they sometimes even attribute the shortage of workers to the fact that
      these are snatched up by the well-to-do peasants (Hired Labour,
      490). The hiring of labourers by peasants is noted in the Yaroslavl,
      Vladimir, St. Petersburg and Novgorod gubernias
      (loc. cit., passim ). A mass of such references
      is also scattered throughout the Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia.

    
      This progress of the well-to-do minority, however, is a heavy burden upon
      the mass of the poor peasants. In Koprin Volost, Rybinsk Uyezd, Yaroslavl
      Gubernia, for example, one finds the spread of cheese making—on the
      initiative of “V. I. Blandov, the well-known founder of
      cheese-making

      artels.”[7]

      “When the poorer peasants, with only one cow each, deliver . . .
      their milk (to the cheese

 

      factory) they do so, of course, to the detriment of their own
      nourishment”; whereas the well-to-do peasants improve their cattle
      (pp. 32-33). Among the types of wage-labour undertaken, one finds
      employment away from home, at cheese-making establishments; from among the
      young peasants a body of skilled cheese makers is arising. In the
      Poshekhonye Uyezd “the number . . . of cheese and butter
      establishments is increasing from year to year,” but “the
      benefits accruing to peasant farming from cheese and butter making hardly
      compensate for the disadvantages to peasant life resulting from our cheese
      and butter establishments.” On the peasants’ own admission
      they are often compelled to starve, for with the opening of a cheese or
      butter factory in some locality, the milk is sent there and the peasants
      usually drink diluted milk. The system of payment in kind is coming into
      vogue (pp.43, 54, 59 and others), so that it is to be regretted that our
      “people’s” petty production is not covered by the law
      prohibiting payment in kind in “capitalist”

factories.[8]

      Thus, the opinions of people directly acquainted with the matter confirm
      our conclusion that the majority of the peasants play a purely negative
      part in the progress of local agriculture. The progress of commercial
      farming worsens the position of the bottom groups of peasants and forces
      them out of the ranks of the cultivators altogether. Be it noted that
      reference has been made in Narodnik literature to this contradiction
      between the progress of dairy

 

      farming and the deterioration of the peasants’ nourishment (for the
      first time, I think, by Engelhardt). But it is precisely this example that
      enables one to see the narrowness of the Narodnik appraisal of the
      phenomena occurring among the peasantry and in agriculture. They note a
      contradiction in one form, in one locality, and do not realise that it is
      typical of the entire social and economic system, manifesting itself
      everywhere in different forms. They note the contradictory significance of
      one “profitable industry,” and strongly urge the
      “implanting” among the peasantry of all sorts of other
      “local industries.” They note the contradictory significance
      of one form of agricultural progress and do not understand that machines,
      for example, have exactly the same political and economic significance in
      agriculture as in industry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Zemstvo statistics taken from Mr.  Blagoveshchensky’s Combined

      Returns.[9]
      About 14,000 households in these 18 uyezds are not classified according to
      the number of cows owned: the total is not 289,079 households, but
      303,262. Mr.  Blagoveshchensky cites similar data for two other uyezds in
      the black-earth gubernias, but these uyezds are evidently not typical. In
      11 uyezds of Tver Gubernia (Statistical Returns, XIII, 2) the
      percentage of allotment households owning no cows is not high (9.8), but
      21.9% of the households, having 3 and more cows, concentrate in their
      hands 48.4% of the total number of cows. Horseless households constitute
      12.2%; households with 3 and more horses constitute only 5.1% and they own
      only 13.9% of the total number of horses. Let us note, in passing, that a
      smaller concentration of horses (as compared with that of cows) is also to
      be observed in other non-black-earth gubernias.—Lenin

[2]
      These data regarding the opposite groups of peasants should be borne in
      mind when one meets sweeping statements like the following: “An
      annual income from dairy stock farming ranging from 20 to 200 rubles per
      household is, over the enormous area of the northern gubernias, not only a
      most considerable means of extending and improving stock farming, but has
      also had the effect of improving field cultivation and even of reducing
      migration in search of employment, by providing the population with work
      at home—both in tending cattle and in bringing hitherto neglected
      land into a properly cultivated condition” (Productive
      Forces, III, 18). On the whole, migration is not decreasing, but
      increasing. In some localities, however, the decrease may be due either to
      the increase in the percentage of well to-do peasants, or to the
      development of “work at home,” i.e., work for local rural
      entrepreneurs.—Lenin

[3]
Material for Statistics on the Economy in St. Petersburg
      Gubernia, Vol. V, Pt. II, St.  Petersburg, 1887.—Lenin

[4]
      A substantial improvement in the maintenance of cattle is observed only
      where there has been a development in the production of milk for sale
      (pp. 219, 224).—Lenin

[5]
      Pp. 39, 65, 136, 150, 154, 167, 170, 177 and others. Our pre-Reform system
      of taxation retards the progress of agriculture here too. “Owing to
      the congestion of the farmsteads,” writes a correspondent,
      “grass cultivation has been introduced all over the volost; the
      clover, however, is sold to cover tax arrears” (91). The taxes in
      this gubernia are sometimes to high that the peasant who leases his land
      has himself to pay a sum to the new holder of the allotment.—Lenin

[6]
      Let us note, by the way, that the variety of “industries” of
      the local peasantry prompted Mr. Bychkov to distinguish two types of
      industrialists, according to the amount of earnings. It appeared that less
      than 100 rubles was earned by 3,251 persons (27.4% of the population);
      their earnings totalled 102,000 rubles, or an average of 31 rubles per
      person.  Over 100 rubles was obtained by 454 (3.8% of the population):
      their earnings totalled 107,000 rubles, or an average of 236 rubles per
      person The first group consisted mainly of wage-workers of every kind, the
      second of traders, hay merchants, timber dealers, etc.—Lenin

[7]
      The “cheese-making artels” of Koprin Volost are mentioned in
      the Directory of Factories and Works, and the Blandovs are the
      largest firm in the cheese-making industry: in 1890 they owned 25
      factories in six gubernias.—Lenin

[8]
      Here is the characteristic view of Mr. Stary Maslodel [Old Butter
      Maker]. “Whoever has seen and knows the countryside today and
      remembers what it was 40 or 50 years ago will be amazed at the difference.
      In the old villages all the houses were the same both outside and inside;
      today, however side by side with hovels stand fine houses, side by side
      with the indigent live the rich, side by side with the downtrodden and
      despised live those who feast and make merry. In former times one often
      came across villages in which there was not a single landless peasant; now
      in every village there are no less than five and sometimes a full
      dozen. And to tell the truth, butter making is much to blame for this
      transformation of the villages. In 30 years butter making has enriched
      many, has beautified their homes; many peasants who supplied milk during
      the period of development of the butter industry have become prosperous,
      acquired more cattle, and purchased land on a community or individual
      basis; but many more have fallen into poverty; landless peasants and
      beggars have appeared in the villages” (Zhizn [Life
      ] 

      1899, No. 8 quoted from Severny Krai [Northern Region
      ], 1899, No 223). (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin
 


[9]
      N. A. Blagoveshchensky’s Peasant Farming. Combined
Zemstvo House-to-House Census Economic Returns, Vol. 1, Moscow,
1893.
    

 
  

IV. Continuation. The Economy of Landlord Farming in the Area Described

|

VI. The Flax-Growing Area

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Flax-Growing Area




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: VI. The Flax-Growing Area








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 VI. The Flax-Growing Area
    

      We have described the first two areas of capitalist agriculture in fairly
      great detail because of their widespread character and of the typical
      nature of the relations observed there. In our further exposition we shall
      confine ourselves to briefer remarks on some highly important areas.
    

      Flax is the chief of the so-called “industrial crops.” The
      very term indicates that we are dealing here with commercial farming. For
      example, in the “flax” gubernia of Pskov, flax has long been
      the peasants’ “first money,” to use a local expression
      (Military Statistical Abstract, 260). Flax growing is simply a
      means of making money. The post-Reform period is marked on the whole by an
      undoubted increase in commercial flax growing. Thus, at the end of the
      60s, the output of flax in Russia was estimated at approximately 12
      million poods of fibre (ibid., 260); at the beginning of the 80s
      at 20 million poods of fibre (Historico-Statistical Survey of Russian
      Industry, Vol. I, St.  Petersburg, 1883, p. 74); at the present time,
      in the 50 gubernias of European Russia over 26 million poods of fibre are

      gathered.[1]

 In the
      flax-growing area proper (19 gubernias of the

 

      non-black-earth belt) the area under flax has changed in recent years as
      follows; 1893—756,600 dess.; 1894—816,500 dess.;
      1895—901,800 dess.; 1896—952,100 dess., and 1897—967,500
      dess. For the whole of European Russia (50 gubernias) the figure for 1896
      was 1,617,000 dess. under flax and for 1897—1,669,000
      dess. (Vestnik Finansov, ibid., and 1898, No. 7), as
      against 1,399,000 dess. at the beginning of the 1890s (Productive
      Forces, I, 36). Similarly, general opinions expressed in publications
      also testify to the growth of commercial flax growing. Thus, regarding the
      first two decades after the Reform, the Historico-Statistical
      Survey states that “the region of flax cultivation for
      industrial purposes has been enlarged by several gubernias”
      (loc. cit., 71), which is due particularly to the
      extension of the railways. Concerning the Yuryev Uyezd, Vladimir Gubernia,
      Mr. V. Prugavin wrote at the beginning of the eighties: “The
      cultivation of flax . . . has become very widespread here during the past
      10 to 15 years.” “Some large family households sell flax to
      the extent of 300 to 500 rubles and more per annum. . . . They buy”
      (flax seed) “in Rostov. . . . The peasants in these parts are very
      careful in selecting seed” (The Village Community,
      Handicraft Industries and Agriculture of Yuryev Uyezd,
      Vladimir Gubernia, Moscow, 1884, pp.  86-89). The Zemstvo
      Statistical Returns for Tver Gubernia (Vol. XIII, Pt. 2) notes that
      “the most important spring grain crops, barley and oats, are
      yielding place to potatoes and flax” (p. 151); in some uyezds flax
      occupies from 1/3 to 3/4 of the area under spring crops, for example, in
      Zubtsov, Kashin and other uyezds, “in which flax growing

 

      has assumed the clearly expressed speculative character of an
      industry” (p.  145), developing particularly on rented virgin and
      disused land. Moreover, it is noted that in some gubernias, where free
      land is still available (virgin soil, wasteland, forest-cleared tracts),
      flax growing is particularly expanding, but in some of the old established
      flax-growing gubernias “the cultivation of flax is either on the old
      scale or is even yielding place, for example, to the newly-introduced
      cultivation of root-crops, vegetables, etc.” (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1898, No. 6, p. 376, and 1897, No. 29), i.e., to other
      types of commercial farming.

    
      As for flax exports, during the first two decades after the Reform they
      increased with remarkable rapidity: from an average of 4.6 million poods
      in the years 1857-1861 to 8.5 million poods in the years 1867-1871 and to
      12.4 million poods in the years 1877-1881; but then exports seemed to
      become stationary, amounting in the years 1894-1897 to an average of 13.3
      million

poods.[2]

 The
      development of commercial flax growing led, naturally, to exchange not
      only between agriculture and industry (sale of flax and purchase of
      manufactured goods), but between different types of commercial agriculture
      (sale of flax and purchase of grain) The following data concerning this
      interesting phenomenon clearly demonstrate that a home market for
      capitalism is created not only by the diversion of population from
      agriculture to industry, but also by the specialisation of commercial

      farming.[3]







      How does this growth of commercial flax growing affect the peasantry, who,
      as we know, are the principal flax

producer?[4]

 “Travelling through Pskov Gubernia
      and observing its economic life, one cannot help noticing that side by
      side with occasional large and rich units, hamlets and villages, there are
      extremely poor units; these extremes are a characteristic feature of
      the economic life of the flax area.” “Flax growing has
      taken a speculative turn,” and “the greater part” of the
      income from flax “is pocketed by buyers-up and by those who lease
      out land for flax growing” (Strokin, 22-23). The ruinous rents
      constitute real “money rent” (see above), and the mass of the
      peasants are in a state of “complete and hopeless dependence”
      (Strokin, ibid.)  upon the buyers-up. The sway of
      merchant’s capital was established in this locality long

ago,[5]

 and what distinguishes
      the post-Reform period is the enormous concentration of this capital, the
      undermining of the monopoly of the former small buyers-up and the
      formation of “flax agencies” which have captured the whole
      flax trade.  The significance of flax growing, says Mr. Strokin about
      Pskov Gubernia, “is expressed . . . in the concentration of capital
      in a few hands” (p. 31).  Turning flax growing into a gamble,
      capital ruined vast numbers of small agriculturists, who worsened the
      quality of the flax, exhausted the land, were reduced to leasing out their
      allotments and finally swelled the ranks of “migratory”
      workers. On the other hand, a slight minority of well-to-do peasants and
      traders were able—and competition made it necessary—to
      introduce technical improvements. Couté scutchers, both
      hand-worked (costing up to 25 rubles) and horse-operated (three times
      dearer), were introduced. In 1869 there were only 557 such machines in
      Pskov Gubernia, in 1881 there were 5,710 (4,521 hand-worked and 1,189

      horse-

 

operated).[6]

      “Today,” we read in the Historico-Statistical Survey,
      “every sound peasant family engaged in flax growing has a
      Couté hand-machine, which has actually come to be called the
      ‘Pskov scutcher’” (loc. cit.,
      82-83). What proportion this minority of “sound” householders
      who acquire machines is to the rest of the peasantry, we have already seen
      in Chapter II. Instead of the primitive contrivances which cleaned the
      seeds very badly, the Pskov Zemstvo began to introduce improved
      seed-cleaners (trieurs ), and “the more prosperous peasant
      industrialists” now find it profitable to buy these machines
      themselves and to hire them out to flax growers (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 29, p. 85). The bigger buyers-up of flax
      establish drying rooms and presses and hire workers to sort and scutch the
      flax (see example given by Mr. V. Prugavin, loc. cit.,
      115). Lastly, it should be added that the processing of flax-fibre
      requires quite a large number of workers: it is estimated that the
      cultivation of one dessiatine of flax requires 26 working days of
      agricultural work proper, and 77 days to extract the fibre from stalks
      (Historico-Statistical Survey, 72). Thus, the development of flax
      growing leads, on the one hand, to the farmer being more fully occupied
      during the winter and, on the other, to the creation of a demand for
      wage-labour on the part of those landlords and well-to-do peasants who
      engage in flax growing (see the example in Chapter III, § VI).
    

      Thus, in the flax-growing area, too, the growth of commercial farming
      leads to the domination of capital and to the differentiation of the
      peasantry. A tremendous obstacle to the latter process is undoubtedly the
      ruinously high renting prices of

land,[7]

 the pressure of merchant’s capital, the
      tying of the peasant to his allotment and the high payments for the
      allotted land. Hence, the wider the development

 

      of land purchase by the

peasants,[8]

 and of migration in search of

employment,[9]

 and the more
      widespread the use of improved implements and methods of cultivation, the
      more rapidly will merchant’s capital be supplanted by industrial
      capital, and the more rapidly will a rural bourgeoisie be formed from
      among the peasantry, and the system of labour-service for the landlord
      replaced by the capitalist system.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      The average for 1893-1897 was 26,291,000 poods, according to the figures
      of the Central Statistical Committee. See Vestnik Finansov, 1897,
      No. 9, and 1898, No. 6. Formerly the statistics for flax production

 

were
      very inexact; that is why we have preferred to take approximate estimates
      based on comparisons of the most varied source made by experts. The amount
      of flax produced fluctuates considerably year by year. For that reason
      Mr. N.–on, for example, who set out to draw the boldest conclusions about
      the “diminution” of flax production and “the reduction
      of the area under flax” (Sketches, p. 236 and foll.) from
      figures for some six years, slipped into the most curious errors (see
      P. B. Struve’s examination of them in Critical Remarks,
      p. 233 and foll.). Let us add to what has been said in the text that
      according to the data cited by Mr. N.–on, the maximum area under flax in
      the 1880s was 1,372,000 dess. and the weight of gathered fibre 19,245,000
      poods, whereas in 1896-1897 the area was 1,617,000- 1,669,000 dess., and
      the weight of gathered fibre 31,713,000-30,139,000 poods.—Lenin

[2]
      The figures are for the exports of flax, flax-combings and tow. See
      Historico-Statistical Survey, P. Struve, Critical
      Remarks and Vestnik Finansov, 1897, No. 26, and 1898,
      No. 36.—Lenin

[3]
      See N. Strokin, Flax Growing in Pskov Gubernia, St. Petersburg,
1882. The author borrowed these data from the Proceedings of
the Commission on Taxation.—Lenin

[4]
      Of 1,399,000 dess. under flax, 745,400 dess. are in the non-black-earth
      belt, where only 13% belongs to private landowners. In the black-earth
      belt, of 609,600 dess. under flax 44.4% belongs to private owners
      (Productive Forces, 1, 36).—Lenin

[5]
      The Military Statistical Abstract in its day pointed to the fact
      that the “flax sown by the peasants very often really belongs to the
      bulinyas ” (local name for small buyers-up), “while
      the peasant is merely a labourer on his field”
      (595). Cf. Historico-Statistical Survey, p, 88.—Lenin

[6]
      Strokin, 12.—Lenin

[7]
      At the present time renting prices of flax land are falling due to the
      drop in the price of flax, but the area of land under flax, in the Pskov
      flax area in 1896, for example, has not diminished (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 29)—Lenin

[8]
      Pskov Gubernia is one of the foremost in Russia in the development of the
      purchase of land by peasants. According to the Combined Statistical
      Material on the Economic Position of the Rural Population (published
      by Chancellery of the Committee of Ministers), the lands purchased by
      peasants amount here to 23% of the total allotment arable, this is the
      maximum for all the 50 gubernias. It works out at an average of 0.7
      dess. of purchased land per head of the male peasant population as of
      January 1, 1892. In this respect only Novgorod and Taurida gubernias
      exceed Pskov Gubernia.—Lenin

[9]
      The number of males leaving Pskov Gubernia in search of employment
      increased, statistics show from 1865-1875 to 1896 nearly fourfold
      (Industries of the Peasant Population of Pskov Gubernia, Pskov,
      1898, p. 3).—Lenin
 

 
  

V. Continuation. The Differentiation of the Peasantry in the Dairy-Farming Area

|

VII. The Technical Processing of Agricultural Produce

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Technical Processing of Agricultural Produce




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: VII. The Technical Processing of Agricultural Produce








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 VII. The Technical Processing of Agricultural
      Produce
    

      Above we have already had occasion to note (Chapter I, § I) that writers
      on agriculture, in classifying systems of farming according to the
      principal market product, assign the industrial or technical system of
      farming to a special category. The essence of this system is that the
      agricultural product, before going into consumption (personal or
      productive), undergoes technical processing. The establishments which
      effect this processing either constitute part of the very farms on which
      the raw material is produced or belong to special industrialists who buy
      up the raw material from the peasant farmers.  From the standpoint of
      political economy the difference between these two types is
      unimportant. The growth of agricultural technical trades is extremely
      important as regards the development of capitalism. Firstly, this growth
      represents one of the forms of the development of commercial farming, and
      is, moreover, the form that shows most vividly the conversion of
      agriculture into a branch of

 

      industry of capitalist society. Secondly, the development of the technical
      processing of agricultural produce is usually connected intimately with
      technical progress in agriculture: on the one hand, the very production of
      the raw material for processing often necessitates agricultural
      improvement (the planting of root-crops, for example); on the other hand,
      the waste products of the processing are frequently utilised in
      agriculture, thus increasing its effectiveness and restoring, at least in
      some measure, the equilibrium, the interdependence, between agriculture
      and industry, the disturbance of which constitutes one of the most
      profound contradictions of capitalism.
    

      We must accordingly now describe the development of technical agricultural
      trades in post-Reform Russia.
    
 1) Distilling 

      Here we regard distilling only from the point of view of
      agriculture. Accordingly, there is no need for us to dwell on the rapid
      concentration of distilling in large plants (partly due to excise
      requirements), on the rapid progress of factory technique, with the
      consequent cheapening of production, and the increase in excise duties
      which has outstripped this cheapening of production and because of its
      excessive amount has retarded the growth of consumption and production.
    

      Here are data for “agricultural” distilling in the whole of
      the Russian

Empire[1]:










      Thus, over 9/10 of the distilleries (accounting for over 4/5 of the total
      output) are directly connected with agriculture. Being large capitalist
      enterprises, these establishments lend the same character to all the
      landlord farms on which they are set up (the distilleries belong almost
      without exception to landlords, mainly to members of the nobility). The
      type of commercial farming under review is particularly developed in the
      central black-earth gubernias, in which are concentrated over

      1/10 of the total number of  distilleries in the Russian Empire
      (239 in 1896-97, of which 225 were  agricultural and mixed),
      producing over a quarter of the total output of  spirits
      (7,785,000 vedros in 1896-97, of which 6,828,000 at agricultural
      and  at mixed distilleries). Thus in the area where
      labour-service predominates,  the commercial character of
      agriculture most frequently (as compared with  other areas)
      manifests itself in the distilling of vodka from grain and
      potatoes. Distilling from potatoes has undergone a particularly
      rapid  development since the Reform, as may be seen from the
      following data relating  to the whole of the Russian

      Empire[2]:

    





      Thus, with a general twofold increase in the quantity of crops distilled,
      the quantity of potatoes used increased about 15-fold. This fact
      strikingly corroborates the proposition established above (§ I in this
      chapter) that the enormous increase in the potato area and crop signifies
      the growth of precisely commercial and capitalist farming, along with
      improvement of agricultural technique, with the replacement of the
      three-field system by multi-field crop rotation,

 

      etc.[3]

 The area of
      the biggest development of distilling is also distinguished for the
      biggest (in the Russian gubernias, i.e., not counting the Baltic and the
      western gubernias) net per-capita harvest of potatoes. Thus in the
      northern black-earth gubernias the figures for 1864-1866, 1870-1879 and
      1883-1887 were 0.44, 0.62 and 0.60 chetverts respectively, whereas for the
      whole of European Russia (50 gubernias) the corresponding figures were
      0.27, 0.43 and 0.44 chetverts. As far back as the beginning of the 80s the
      Historico-Statistical Survey noted that “the region marked
      by the greatest expansion of potato cultivation covers all the gubernias
      of the central and northern parts of the black-earth belt, the Volga and
      Transvolga gubernias and the central non-black-earth gubernias”
      (loc. cit.,

p. 44).[4]

      The expansion of potato cultivation by landlords and well-to-do peasants
      means an increase in the demand for hired labour; the cultivation of a
      dessiatine of potatoes absorbs much more

labour[5]

 than the cultivation of a dessiatine of
      cereals and the use of machinery in, for example,

 

      the central black-earth area is still very slight. Thus, while the number
      of workers engaged in the distilling industry proper has

decreased,[6]

 the elimination of
      labour-service by the capitalist system of farming, with the cultivation
      of root-crops, has increased the demand for rural day labourers.
    
 2) Beet-Sugar Production 

      The processing of sugar-beet is even more highly concentrated in big
      capitalist enterprises than distilling is, and is likewise an adjunct of
      the landlords’ (mainly noblemen’s) estates. The principal area
      of this industry is the south-western gubernias, and then the southern
      black-earth and central black-earth gubernias. The area under sugar-beet
      amounted in the 60s to about 100,000

dess.,[7]

 in the 70s to about 160,000

dess.[8];

in 1886-1895 to
      239,000

dess.,[9]

 in
      1896-1898 to 369,000



dess.,[10]

 in 1900 to 478,778 dess., in 1901 to 528,076
      dess.  (Torgovo-Promyshlennaya Gazeta, 1901, No. 123), in 1905-06
      to 483,272 dess.  (Vestnik Finansov, 1906, No. 12). Hence, in the
      period following the Reform the area cultivated has increased more than
      5-fold. Incomparably more rapid has been the growth of the amount of
      sugar-beet harvested and processed: on an average the weight of sugar-beet
      processed in the Empire in the years

 

      1860-1864 was 4.1 million

      berkovets[11];

in
      1870-1874—9.3 million; in 1875-1879—12.8 million; in
      1890-1894—29.3 million; and in 1895-96 and 1897-98—35

      million.[12]

 The
      amount of processed sugar-beet has grown since the 60s more than 8-fold.
      Hence, there has been an enormous increase in the beet yield, i.e., in
      labour productivity, on the big estates organised on capitalist

lines.[13]

 The introduction of
      a root-plant like beet into the rotation is indissolubly linked with the
      transition to a more advanced system of cultivation, with improved tillage
      and cattle feed, etc. “The tillage of the soil for beetroot,”
      we read in the Historico-Statistical Survey (Vol. I),
      “which, generally speaking, is rather complicated and difficult, has
      been brought to a high degree of perfection on many beet farms, especially
      in the south-western and Vistula gubernias. In different localities,
      various more or less improved implements and ploughs are used for tilling;
      in some cases even steam ploughing has been introduced” (p. 109).
    

      This progress of large-scale capitalist farming gives rise to quite a
      considerable increase in the demand for agricultural wage-workers—
      regular and particularly day labourers—the employment of female and
      child labour being particularly extensive (cf. Historico-Statistical
      Survey, II, 32). Among the peasants of the neighbouring gubernias a
      special type of migration has arisen, known as migration “to
      sugar” (ibid., 42). It is estimated that the complete
      cultivation of a morg (= 2/3

dess.)[14]

 of beet land requires 40 working days (Hired
      Labour, 72).  The Combined Material on the Position of the Rural
      Population (published by Committee of Ministers) estimates that the
      cultivation of one dessiatine of beet land, when done by machine, requires
      12, and when by hand 25, working days of males, not counting women and
      juveniles (pp. X-XI). Thus, the cultivation of the total beet area in
      Russia probably engages not less than 300,000 agricultural day labourers,
      men and women.

 

      But the increase in the number of dessiatines under beet is not enough to
      give a complete idea of the demand for hired labour, since some jobs are
      paid for at so much per berkovets. Here, for example, is what we read in
      Reports and Investigations of Handicraft Industry in Russia
      (published by Ministry of State Properties, Vol. II, St. Petersburg, 1894,
      p. 82).
    

      “The female population both of the town, and of the uyezd”
      (the town of Krolevets, Chernigov Gubernia, is referred to) “think
      highly of work on the beet fields; in the autumn the cleaning of beets is
      paid at 10 kopeks per berkovets, and two women clean from six to ten
      berkovets a day, but some contract to work during the growing season as
      well, weeding and hoeing; in that case, for the full job, including
      digging and cleaning, they get 25 kopeks per berkovets of cleaned
      beets.” The conditions of the workers on the beet plantations are
      extremely bad. For instance, the Vrachebnaya Khronika Kharkovskoi

      Gubernii[15]

      (September 1899, quoted in Russkiye Vedomosti, 1899, No. 254)
      cites “a number of exceedingly deplorable facts about the conditions
      of those working on the red-beet plantations. Thus, the Zemstvo
      physician, Dr.  Podolsky, of the village of Kotelva, Akhtyrka Uyezd,
      writes: ‘In the autumn typhus usually breaks out among
      young people employed on the red-beet plantations of the well-to-do
      peasants. The sheds assigned for the workers’ leisure and
      sleeping quarters are kept by such planters in a very filthy condition; by
      the time the job ends the straw used for sleeping is literally converted
      into dung, for it is never changed: this becomes a breeding ground of
      infection. Typhus has had to be diagnosed immediately in the case of four
      or five patients brought in from one and the same plantation.’ In
      the opinion of this doctor, ‘most of the syphilis cases come from
      the red-beet plantations.’ Mr. Feinberg rightly asserts that
      ‘work on the plantations, which is no less injurious to the workers
      themselves and to the surrounding population than work in the factories,
      has particularly disastrous consequences, because large numbers of women
      and juveniles are engaged in it, and because the workers here are without
      the most elementary protection from society and the State’; in view
      of this, the author wholly

 

      supports the opinion expressed by Dr. Romanenko at the Seventh Congress of
      Doctors of Kharkov Gubernia that ‘in issuing compulsory
      regulations, consideration must also be given to the
      conditions of the workers on the beet plantations. These workers lack
      the most essential things; they live for months under the open sky and eat
      from a common bowl.’”

    
      Thus, the growth of beet cultivation has enormously increased the demand
      for rural workers, converting the neighbouring peasantry into a rural
      proletariat. The increase in the number of rural workers has been but
      slightly checked by the inconsiderable drop in the number of workers
      engaged in the beet-sugar industry

proper.[16]

 3) Potato-Starch Production 

      From branches of technical production conducted exclusively on landlord
      farms let us pass to such as are more or less within the reach of the
      peasantry. These include, primarily, the processing of potatoes (partly
      also wheat and other cereals) into starch and treacle. Starch production
      has developed with particular rapidity in the post-Reform period owing to
      the enormous growth of the textile industry, which raises a demand for
      starch. The area covered by this branch of production is mainly the
      non-black-earth, the industrial, and, partly, the northern black-earth
      gubernias. The Historico-Statistical Survey (Vol. II) estimates
      that in the middle of the 60s, there were about 60 establishments with an
      output valued at about 270,000 rubles, while in 1880 there were 224
      establishments with an output valued at 1,317,000 rubles. In 1890,
      according to the Directory of Factories and Works there were 192
      establishments employing 3,418 workers, with an output valued at 1,760,000

      rubles.[17]

      “In the past 25 years,” we read in the


Historico-Statistical Survey, “the number of establishments
      engaged in starch production has increased 4 1/2 times and the total
      output 10 3/4 times; nevertheless, this productivity is far from covering
      the demand for starch” (p. 116), as evidenced by the increased
      starch imports from abroad. Analysing the data for each gubernia, the
      Historico-Statistical Survey reaches the conclusion that our
      production of potato starch (unlike that of wheat-starch) is of an
      agricultural character, being concentrated in the hands of peasants and
      landlords. “Showing promise of extensive development” in the
      future, “it is even now furnishing our rural population with
      considerable advantages” (126).
    

      We shall see in a moment who enjoys these advantages. But first let us
      note that two processes must be distinguished in the development of starch
      production: on the one hand, the appearance of new small factories and the
      growth of peasant production, and on the other, the concentration of
      production in large steam-powered factories. For instance, in 1890 there
      were 77 steam-powered factories, with 52% of the total number of workers
      and 60% of the total output concentrated in them. Of these works only 11
      were established before 1870, 17 in the 70s, 45 in the 80s, and 2 in 1890
      (Mr. Orlov’s Directory ).
    

      To acquaint ourselves with the economy of peasant starch production, let
      us turn to local investigations. In Moscow Gubernia, in 1880-81, 43
      villages in 4 uyezds engaged in starch

making.[18]

 The number of establishments was

 

      estimated at 130, employing 780 workers and having an output valued at not
      less than 137,000 rubles. The industry spread mainly after the Reform; its
      technique gradually improved and larger establishments were formed
      requiring more fixed capital and showing a higher productivity of
      labour. Hand graters were replaced by improved ones, then horse power
      appeared, and finally the drum was introduced, considerably
      improving and cheapening production.  Here are data we have compiled from
      a house-to-house census of “handicraftsmen,” according to size
      of establishment:
    




establishments[19]



      Thus we have here small capitalist establishments in which, as production
      expands, the employment of hired labour increases and the productivity of
      labour rises. These establishments bring the peasant bourgeoisie
      considerable profit, and also improve agricultural technique. But the
      situation of the workers in these workshops is very unsatisfactory, owing
      to the extremely insanitary working conditions and the long working

      day.[20]


      The peasants who own “grating” establishments farm under very
      favourable conditions. The planting of potatoes (on

 

      allotment, and chiefly on rented land) yields a considerably larger income
      than the planting of rye or oats. To enlarge their business the workshop
      owners rent a considerable amount of allotment land from the poor
      peasants.  For example, in the village of Tsybino (Bronnitsy Uyezd), 18
      owners of starch workshops (out of 105 peasant families in the village)
      rent allotments from peasants who have left in search of employment, and
      also from horseless peasants, thus adding to their own 61 allotments 133
      more, which they have rented; concentrated in their hands are a total of
      194 allotments, i.e., 44.5% of the total number of allotments in the
      village. “Exactly similar things,” we read in the
      Returns, “are met with in other villages where the starch
      industry is more or less developed” (loc. cit.,

      42).[21]

 The owners
      of the starch workshops have twice as much livestock as the other
      peasants: they average 3.5 horses and 3.4 cows per household, as against
      1.5 horses and 1.7 cows among the local peasants in general. Of the 68
      workshop owners (covered by the house-to-house census) 10 own purchased
      land, 22 rent non-allotment land and 23 rent allotment land. In short,
      these are typical representatives of the peasant bourgeoisie.
    

      Exactly analogous relations are to be found in the starch making industry
      in the Yuryev Uyezd, Vladimir Gubernia (V. Prugavin,
      loc. cit., p. 104 and foll.). Here, too, the workshop
      owners carry on production mainly with the aid of wage-labour (out of 128
      workers in 30 workshops, 86 are hired); and here, too, the workshop owners
      are far above the mass of the peasantry as far as stock-breeding and
      agriculture are concerned; they use potato pulp as feed for their
      cattle. Even real capitalist farmers emerge from among the
      peasants. Mr. Prugavin describes the farm of a peasant who owns a starch
      works (valued at about 1,500 rubles) employing 12 wage-workers. This
      peasant grows potatoes on his own farm, which he has enlarged by renting
      land. The crop rotation is seven-field and includes clover. For the farm
      work he employs from 7 to 8 workers, hired from spring to

 

      autumn (“from end to end”). The pulp is used as cattle feed,
      and the owner intends to use the waste water for his fields.
    

      Mr. V. Prugavin assures us that this works enjoys “quite exceptional
      conditions.” Of course, in any capitalist society the rural
      bourgeoisie will always constitute a very small minority of the rural
      population, and in this sense will, if you like, be an
      “exception.” But this term will not eliminate the fact that in
      the starch-making area, as in all the other commercial farming areas in
      Russia, a class of rural entrepreneurs is being formed, who are organising
      capitalist

agriculture.[22]

 4) Vegetable-Oil Production 

      The extraction of oil from linseed, hemp, sunflower and other seeds is
      also frequently an agricultural industry. One can gauge the development of
      vegetable-oil production in the post-Reform period from the fact that in
      1864 the vegetable-oil output had an estimated value of 1,619,000 rubles,
      in 1879 of 6,486,000 rubles, and in 1890 of 12,232,000

rubles.[23]

 In this branch of
      production, too, a double process of development is to be observed: on the
      one hand, small peasant (and sometimes also landlord) oil presses
      producing oil for sale are established in the villages. On the other hand,
      large steam-driven works develop, which concentrate production and oust
      the small

establishments.[24]

 Here

 

      we are interested solely in the agricultural processing of oil-bearing
      plants. “The owners of the hempseed oil presses,” we read in
      the Historico-Statistical Survey (Vol. II), “belong to the
      well-to-do members of the peasantry”; they attach particular value
      to vegetable-oil production because it enables them to obtain excellent
      feed for their cattle (oil cake). Mr. Prugavin
      (loc. cit.), noting the “extensive development of
      the production of linseed oil” in the Yuryev Uyezd, Vladimir
      Gubernia, states that the peasants derive “no little
      advantage” from it (pp.  65-66), that crop and stock raising is
      conducted on a far higher level by peasants who own oil presses than by
      the bulk of the peasantry and that some of the oil millers also resort to
      the hire of rural workers (loc.  cit., tables, pp. 26-27
      and 146-147). The Perm handicraft census for 1894-95 also showed that crop
      raising is conducted on a much higher level by handicraft oil millers than
      by the bulk of the peasants (larger areas under crops, far more animals,
      better harvests, etc.), and that this improvement in cultivation is
      accompanied by the hiring of rural

workers.[25]

 In the post-Reform period in Voronezh
      Gubernia, there has been a particular development of the commercial
      cultivation of sunflower seed, which is crushed for oil in local
      presses. The area under sunflowers in Russia in the 70s was estimated at
      about 80,000 dess. (Historico-Statistical Survey, I), and in the
      80s at about 136,000 dess., of which 2/3 belonged to
      peasants. “Since then, however, judging by certain data, the area
      under this plant has considerably increased, in some places by 100 per
      cent and even more” (Productive Forces, I, 37). “In
      the village of Alexeyevka alone” (Biryuch Uyezd, Voronezh Gubernia),
      we read in the Historico-Statistical

Survey, Vol. II, “there are more than 40 oil presses, and
      Alexeyevka itself, solely owing to sunflowers, has prospered and grown
      from a wretched little hamlet into a rich town ship, with houses and shops
      roofed with sheet iron” (p. 41). How this wealth of the peasant
      bourgeoisie was reflected in the condition of the mass of the peasantry
      may be seen from the fact that in 1890, in the village of Alexeyevka, out
      of 2,273 families registered (13,386 persons of both sexes), 1,761 had no
      draught animals, 1,699 had no implements, 1,480 cultivated no land, and
      only 33 families did not engage in

industries.[26]


      In general, it should be stated that peasant oil presses usually figure,
      in Zemstvo house-to-house censuses, among the “commercial and
      industrial establishments,” of whose distribution and role we have
      already spoken in Chapter II.
    
 5) Tobacco Growing 

      In conclusion, let us make some brief observations on the development of
      tobacco growing. The average crop in Russia for the years 1863-1867 was
      1,923,000 poods from 32,161 dess.; for 1872-1878 it was 2,783,000 poods
      from 46,425 dess.; for the 80s, it was 4 million poods from 50,000

      dess.[27]

 The
      number of plantations in the same periods was estimated at 75,000, 95,000
      and 650,000 respectively, which evidently indicates a very considerable
      increase in the number of small cultivators drawn into this type of
      commercial farming. Tobacco growing requires a considerable number of
      workers. Among the types of agricultural migration note is

 

      therefore made of migration to tobacco plantations (particularly to the
      outer gubernias in the South, where the cultivation of tobacco has
      recently expanded with exceptional rapidity). Reference has already been
      made in publications to the fact that the workers on the tobacco
      plantations lead a very hard

      life.[28]


      In the Survey of Tobacco Growing in Russia (Parts II and III,
      St. Petersburg, 1894, published by order of the Department of
      Agriculture), there are very detailed and interesting data on tobacco
      growing as a branch of commercial farming. Mr. V. S. Shcherbachov,
      describing tobacco growing in Malorossia, gives wonderfully precise
      information on three uyezds of Poltava Gubernia (Priluki, Lokhvitsa and
      Romny). This information, gathered by the author and arranged by the
      Bureau of Statistics, Poltava Gubernia Zemstvo Board, covers 25,089
      peasant farms in the three uyezds that grow tobacco; they have 6,844
      dessiatines under tobacco and 146,774 dessiatines under cereals. The farms
      are distributed as follows:
    





      We see an enormous concentration of both the tobacco and the cereal area
      in the hands of the capitalist farms. Less than one-eighth of the farms
      (3,000 out of 25,000) hold more than half the area under cereals (74,000
      dess. out of 147,000), with an average of nearly 25 dess. per farm.

 

      Almost half the area under tobacco (3,200 dess. out of 6,800) belongs to
      these farms, the average per farm being over 1 dessiatine, whereas for all
      the other groups the area under tobacco does not exceed one- to two-tenths
      of a dessiatine per household.
    

      Mr. Shcherbachov, in addition, gives data showing the same farms grouped
      according to area under tobacco:
    





      From this it can be seen that the concentration of the tobacco area is
      considerably greater than that of the cereal area. The branch of
      specifically commercial agriculture in this locality is concentrated in
      the hands of capitalists to a greater extent than is agriculture in
      general. Out of 25,000 farms, 2,773 account for 4,145 dess. under tobacco
      out of 6,844 dess., or more than three-fifths. The biggest tobacco
      planters, numbering 324 (a little over one-tenth of all the planters),
      have 2,360 dess. under tobacco, or over one-third of the total area. This
      averages over 7 dessiatines under tobacco per farm. To judge of
      the sort of farm it must be, let us recall that tobacco cultivation
      requires at least two workers for a period of 4 to 8 summer
      months, depending on the grade of tobacco.
    

      The owner of 7 dessiatines under tobacco must there fore have at least 14
      workers; in other words, he must undoubtedly base his farm on
      wage-labour. Some grades of tobacco require not two but three seasonal
      workers per dessiatine, and day labourers in addition. In a word, we see
      quite clearly that the greater the degree to which agriculture becomes
      commercial, the more highly developed is its capitalist organisation.
    


      The preponderance of small and tiny farms among the tobacco growers
      (11,997 farms out of 25,089 have up to one-tenth of a dessiatine
      planted) does not in the least refute the fact of the capitalist
      organisation of this branch of commercial agriculture; for this mass of
      tiny farms accounts for an insignificant share of the output (11,997,
      i.e., nearly half the farms, have in all 522 dess. out of 6,844, or less
      than one-tenth).  Nor do “average” figures, to which people so
      often confine themselves, provide a picture of the real situation (the
      average per farm is a little over 114 dessiatine under tobacco).
    

      In some uyezds the development of capitalist agriculture and the
      concentration of production are still more marked. In the Lokhvitsa Uyezd,
      for example, 229 farms out of 5,957 each have 20 dessiatines and more
      under cereals. Their owners have 22,799 dess. under cereals out of a total
      of 44,751, i.e., more than half. Each farmer has about 100 dess. under
      crops. Of the land under tobacco they have 1,126 dess. out of 2,003
      dess. And if the farms are grouped according to area under tobacco, we
      have in this uyezd 132 farmers out of 5,957 with two and more dessiatines
      under tobacco. These 132 farmers have 1,441 dess. under tobacco out of
      2,003, i.e., 72% and more than ten dessiatines under tobacco per
      farm. At the other extreme of the same Lokhvitsa Uyezd we have 4,360 farms
      (out of 5,957) having up to one-tenth of a dessiatine each under tobacco,
      and altogether 133 dessiatines out of 2,003, i.e., 6%.
    

      It goes without saying that the capitalist organisation of
      production is accompanied here by a very considerable development
      of merchant’s capital and by all sorts of exploitation
      outside the sphere of production. The small tobacco growers have no drying
      sheds, are unable to give their tobacco time to ferment and to sell it (in
      3 to 6 weeks) as a finished product. They sell the unfinished product at
      half the price to buyers-up, who very often plant tobacco
      themselves on rented land. The buyers-up “squeeze the small planters
      in every way” (p. 31 of cited publication). Commercial agriculture
      is commercial capitalist production: this relation can be clearly traced
      (if only one is able to select the proper methods) in this branch of
      agriculture too.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      The law of June 4, 1890, laid down the following criteria of agricultural
      distilling: 1) distilling season, from September 1 to June 1, when no
      field-work is done; 2) proportion between the quantity of spirits
      distilled and the number of dessiatines of arable land on the estate.
      Plants carrying on partly agricultural and partly industrial

 

distilling
      are called mixed distilleries (cf. Vestnik Finansov, 1896,
      No. 25, and 1898, No.  10).—Lenin

[2]
      Sources: Military Statistical Abstract, 427; Productive
      Forces, IX, 49, and Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No.  14.—Lenin

[3]
      Cf. Raspopin, loc. cit.,—
      Historico-Statistical Survey, loc. cit.,
      p. 14. The by-products of distilling (wash) are often used (even by
      commercial and not only agricultural establishments) in commercial
      beef-cattle raising.—Cf.  Agricultural Statistical
      Information, Vol. VII, p. 122 and passim.—Lenin

[4]
      The great rapidity with which the use of potatoes for distilling has
      increased in the central agricultural gubernias can be seen from the
      following data. In six gubernias: Kursk, Orel, Tula, Ryazan, Tambov and
      Voronezh, during the period 1864-65 to 1873-74 an average of 407,000 poods
      of potatoes was distilled per annum; during 1874-75 to
      1883-84—7,482,000 poods; during 1884-85 to 1893-94, 20,077,000
      poods. For the whole of European Russia the corresponding figures are:
      10,633,000 poods, 30,599,000 poods and 69,620,000 poods. The number of
      distilleries using potatoes in the above gubernias averaged 29 per annum
      in the period 1867-68 to 1875-76; in the period 1876-77 to 1884-85, 130;
      and in the period 1885-86 to 1893-94, 163. For the whole of European
      Russia the corresponding figures are: 739, 979, 1,195 (see
      Agricultural Statistical Information, Vol. VII).—Lenin

[5]
      For example, according to the Zemstvo statistical returns for Balakhna
      Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, the cultivation of one dess. of potatoes
      requires 77.2 working days, including 59.2 working days of a woman
      occupied in planting, hoeing, weeding and digging. The greatest increase,
      therefore, is in the demand for the day labour of local peasant women.—Lenin

[6]
      In 1867 the number of workers in European Russia employed in distilleries
      was estimated at 52,660 (Military Statistical Abstract. In
      Chapter VII we shall show that this source tremendously overstates the
      number of factory workers), and in 1890 at 26,102 (according to
      Orlov’s Directory ). The workers engaged in distilling
      proper are few in number and, moreover, differ but little from rural
      workers. “All the workers employed in the village
      distilleries,” says Dr. Zhbankov, for example, “which,
      moreover, do not operate regularly, since the workers leave for field-work
      in the summer, differ very distinctly from regular factory workers they
      wear peasant clothes, retain their rural habits, and do not acquire the
      particular polish characteristic of factory workers”
      (loc. cit., II, 121).—Lenin

[7]
The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, Vol.I.—Military
Statistical Abstract.—Historico-Statistical Survey,
Vol. II.—Lenin

[8]
Historico-Statistical Survey, I.—Lenin

[9]
Productive Forces, I, 41.—Lenin

[10]
      Vestnik Finansov [Financial Messenger ], 1897, No. 27, and 1898,
      No 36. In European Russia, without the Kingdom of Poland, there was in
      1896-1898 an area of 327,000 dess, under sugar-beet.—Lenin

[11]
      Berkovets—360 lbs. –Ed.—Lenin

[12]
      In addition to above sources see Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No.  32.—Lenin

[13]
      Taking the average for the period 1890-1894, out of 285,000 dess. under
      beet in the Empire, 118,000 dess. belonged to refineries and 167,000
      dess. to planters (Productive Forces, IX, 44).—Lenin

[14]
      1.8 acres.—Lenin

[15]
Medical Chronicle of Kharkov Gubernia.—Lenin

[16]
      In European Russia 80,919 workers were employed in 1867 at beet-sugar
      factories and refineries (The Ministry of Finance Yearbook,
      I. The Military Statistical Abstract overstated the figure here
      too, giving it as 92,000, evidently counting the same workers twice). The
      figure for 1890 is 77,875 workers (Orlov’s Directory ).—Lenin

[17]
      We take the data given in the Historico-Statistical Survey as
      being the most uniform and comparable. The Returns and Material of the
      Ministry of Finance (1866, No. 4, April), on the basis of

 

official
      data of the Department of Commerce and Manufacture, estimated that in 1864
      there were in Russia 55 starch-making establishments whose output was
      valued at 231,000 rubles. The Military Statistical Abstract
      estimates that in 1866 there were 198 establishments with an output valued
      at 563,000 rubles, but this undoubtedly included small establishments, not
      now reckoned as factories. Generally speaking, the statistics of this
      trade are very unsatisfactory: small factories are some times counted, and
      at others (much more often) are not. Thus, Orlov’s
      Directory gives the number of establishments in Yaroslavl
      Gubernia in 1890 as 25 (the List for 1894-95 gives 20), while
      according to the Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia (Vol. 11, 1896), in
      Rostov Uyezd alone there were 810 starch and treacle
      establishments. Hence, the figures given in the text can indicate only the
      dynamics of the phenomenon, but not the actual development of the
      industry.—Lenin

[18]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt 1, Moscow,
      1882.—Lenin

[19]
      See Appendix to Chapter V, Industry No. 24.—Lenin

[20]
Loc. cit., p. 32. The working day in the peasant workshops is 13
      to 14 hours, while in the big works in the same industry (according to

      Dementyev[29]) a
      12-hour working day prevails.—Lenin

[21]
      Compare with this statement the general view of V. Orlov on Moscow
      Gubernia as a whole (Returns, Vol. IV, Pt. 1, p.  14): the
      prosperous peasants frequently rent the allotments of the peasant poor,
      and sometimes hold from 5 to 10 rented allotments.—Lenin

[22]
      As a matter of interest, let us mention that both Mr. Prugavin
      (loc. cit., 107), the author of the description of the
      Moscow industry (loc. cit., 45), and Mr. V.
      V. (Essays on Handicraft Industry, 127), have discerned the
      “artel principle” in the fact that some grating establishments
      belong to several owners. Our sharp-eyed Narodniks have contrived to
      observe a special “principle” in the association of rural
      entrepreneurs, and have failed to see any new social-economic
      “principles” in the very existence and development of a class
      of rural entrepreneurs.—Lenin

[23]
Returns and Material of the Ministry of Finance 1866, no.4,
      Orlov’s Directory, 1st and 3rd editions. We do not give
      figures for the number of establishments because our factory statistics
      confuse small agricultural oil-pressing establishments with big industrial
      ones, at times including the former, and at others not including them for
      different gubernias at different times. In the 1860s, for example, a host
      of small oil presses were included in the category of “works.”—Lenin

[24]
      For example, in 1890, 11 works out of 383 had an output valued at
      7,170,000 rubles out of 12,232,000 rubles. This victory of the industrial
      over the rural entrepreneurs is causing profound

 

dissatisfaction among our
      agrarians (e.g., Mr. S. Korolenko, loc. cit.) and our
      Narodniks (e.g., Mr. N-on’s Sketches, pp. 241-242). We do
      not share their views. The big works will raise the productivity of labour
      and socialise production. That is one point. Another is that the workers
      the workers conditions in the big works will probably be better, and not
      only from the material angle, than at the small agricultural oil presses.—Lenin

[25]
      V. Ilyin, Economic Studies and Essays, St. Petersburg, 1899,
      pp. 139-140. (See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of
      1894-95 in Perm Gubernia and General Problems of “Handicraft”
      Industry.—Ed)—Lenin

[26]
Statistical Returns for Biryuch Uyezd, Voronesh
Gubernia.—The number of industrial establishments counted in
the village was 153. According to Mr. Orlov’s Directory
for 1890 there were in this village 6 oil presses employing 34 workers,
with output valued at 17,000 rubles, and according to the List of
Factories and Works for 1894-95 there were 8 oil presses employing
60 workers, with an output valued at 151,000 rubles.—Lenin

[27]
The Ministry of Finance Yearbook,
      I.—Historico-Statistical Survey, Vol. I.—
      Productive Forces, IX, 62. The area under tobacco fluctuates
      considerably from year to year: for example, the average for 1889-1894 was
      47,813 dess. (crop—4,180,000 poods), and for 1892-1894 was 52,516
      dess.  with a crop of 4,878,000 poods. See Returns for Russia,
      1896, pp.  208-209.—Lenin

[28]
      Belborodov, above-mentioned article in Severny Vestnik, 1896,
      No. 2. Russkiye Vedomosti, 1897, No. 127 (May 10) reported a
      trial in which 20 working women sued the owner of a tobacco plantation in
      the Crimea, and stated that “numerous facts were revealed in court,
      depicting the impossible hard life of the plantation workers.”—Lenin
 


[29]
      See Y. M. Dementyev’s The Factory, What It Gives and
What It Takes from the Population, Moscow, 1893, pp. 88-97.
    

 
  

VI. The Flax-Growing Area

|

VIII. Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing; Suburban Farming

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing; Suburban Farming.




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: VIII. Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing; Suburban Farming








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 VIII. Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing;
      Suburban  Farming
    

      With the fall of serfdom, “landlord fruit growing,” which had
      been developed on quite a considerable scale, “suddenly and rapidly
      fell into decline almost all over

Russia.”[1]

 The construction of railways changed the
      situation, giving a “tremendous impetus” to the development of
      new, commercial fruit growing, and brought about a “complete change
      for the better” in this branch of commercial

agriculture.[2]

 On the one hand, the
      influx of cheap fruit from the South undermined the industry in the
      centres where it was formerly

conducted[3];

and on the other hand, industrial fruit growing
      developed, for example, in the Kovno, Vilna, Minsk, Grodno, Mogilev and
      Nizhni-Novgorod gubernias, along with the expansion of the fruit

      market.[4]

 Mr.
      V. Pashkevich points out that an investigation into the condition of fruit
      farming in 1893-94 revealed a considerable development of it as an
      industrial branch of agriculture in the previous ten years, an increase in
      the demand for gardeners, undergardeners,

etc.[5]

 Statistics confirm such views: the
      amount of fruit carried by the Russian railways is

increasing,[6]

 fruit imports, which
      increased in the first decade after the Reform, are

declining.[7]


      It stands to reason that commercial vegetable growing, which provides
      articles of consumption for incomparably larger masses of the population
      than fruit growing does, has developed still more rapidly and still more
      extensively. Industrial vegetable growing becomes widespread, firstly,
      near the

towns[8]

;

      secondly, near factory and commercial

 

      and industrial

settlements[9]

 and also along the railways; and thirdly, in
      certain villages, scattered throughout Russia and famous for their

      vegetables.[10]

 It
      should be observed that there is a demand for this type of produce not
      only among the industrial, but also among the agricultural population: let
      us recall that the budgets of the Voronezh peasants show a per-capita
      expenditure on vegetables of 47 kopeks, more than half of this expenditure
      being on purchased produce.

    
      To acquaint ourselves with the social and economic relations that arise in
      this type of commercial agriculture we must turn to the data of local
      investigations in the particularly developed vegetable-growing areas.
      Near St. Petersburg, for example, frame and hot-house vegetable growing is
      widely developed, having been introduced by migratory vegetable growers
      from Rostov. The number of frames owned by big growers runs into
      thousands, and by medium growers, into hundreds. “Some of the big
      vegetable growers supply tens of thousands of poods of pickled cabbage to
      the

army.”[11]

 According to Zemstvo statistics in Petersburg
      Uyezd 474 households of the local population are engaged in vegetable
      growing (about 400 rubles income per household) and 230 in fruit
      growing. Capitalist relations are very extensively developed both in the
      form of merchant’s capital (the industry is “ruthlessly
      exploited by profiteers”) and in the form of hiring workers. Among
      the immigrant population, for example, there are 115 master vegetable
      growers (with an income of over 3,000 rubles each) and 711 worker
      vegetable growers (with an income of 116 rubles

      each.)[12]


 

      The peasant vegetable growers near Moscow are the same sort of typical
      members of the rural bourgeoisie. “According to an approximate
      estimate, over 4 million poods of vegetables and greens reach
      Moscow’s markets every year. Some of the villages do a big trade in
      pickled vegetables: Nogatino Volost sells nearly a million vedros of
      pickled cabbage to factories and barracks, and even sends consignments to
      Kronstadt. . . . Commercial vegetable growing is widespread in all the
      Moscow uyezds, chiefly in the vicinity of towns and

factories.”[13]

 “The cabbage
      is chopped by hired labourers who come from Volokolamsk Uyezd”
      (Historico-Statistical Survey, I, p. 19).

    
      Exactly similar relations exist in the well-known vegetable-growing
      district in Rostov Uyezd, Yaroslavl Gubernia, embracing 55
      vegetable-growing villages—Porechye, Ugodichi and others. All the
      land, except pastures and meadows, has long been turned into vegetable
      fields. The technical processing of vegetables—preserving—is
      highly

developed.[14]

 Together with the product of the land, the land
      itself and labour-power are converted into commodities. Despite the
      “village community,” the inequality of land tenure, for
      example, in the village of Porechye, is very great: in one case a family
      of 4 has 7 “vegetable plots,” in another a family of 3 has 17;
      this is explained by the fact that no periodical land redistribution takes
      place here; only private redivisions take place, and the peasants
      “freely exchange” their “vegetable plots” or
      “patches” (Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia,

97–98).[15]

 “A large part
      of the field-work . . . is done by male and female day labourers, many of
      whom come

 

      to Porechye in the summer season both from neighbouring villages and from
      neighbouring gubernias” (ibid., 99). It is estimated that
      in the whole of Yaroslavl Gubernia 10,322 persons (of whom 7,689 are from
      Rostov) engaged in “agriculture and vegetable growing” are
      migratory workers—i.e., in the majority of cases are
      wage-workers in the given

occupation.[16]

 The above quoted data on the migration of rural
      workers to the metropolitan

gubernias,[25] Yaroslavl Gubernia, etc., should be brought into
      connection with the development not only of dairy farming but also of
      commercial vegetable growing.
    

      Vegetable growing also includes the hot-house cultivation of vegetables,
      an industry that is rapidly developing among the well-to-do peasants of
      Moscow and Tver

gubernias.[17]

 In the first-named gubernia the 1880-81 census
      showed 88 establishments with 3,011 frames; there were 213 workers, of
      whom 47 (22.6%) were hired; the total output was valued at 54,400
      rubles. The average hot-house vegetable grower had to put at least 300
      rubles into the “business.” Of the 74 peasants for whom
      house-to-house returns are given, 41 possess purchased land, and as many
      rent land, there is an average of 2.2 horses per peasant. It is clear from
      this that the hot-house vegetable industry is only within the reach of
      members of the peasant

bourgeoisie.[18]


      In the south of Russia melon growing also comes within the type of
      commercial agriculture under review. Here are some brief observations
      about its development in a district described in an interesting article in
      the Vestnik Finansov
 

      (1897, No. 16) on “industrial melon growing.” This branch of
      production arose in the village of Bykovo (Tsarev Uyezd, Astrakhan
      Gubernia) at the end of the 60s and the beginning of the 70s. The melons,
      which at first went only to the Volga region, were consigned, with the
      coming of the railways, to the capital cities. In the 80s the output
      “increased at least tenfold” owing to the enormous profits
      (150 to 200 rubles per dess.) made by the initiators of the business. Like
      true petty bourgeois, they did all they could to prevent the number of
      growers from increasing and were most careful in guarding from their
      neighbours the “secret” of this new and profitable
      occupation. Of course, all these heroic efforts of the “muzhik

      cultivator”[19]

 to stave off “fatal

competition”[20]

 were in vain, and
      the industry spread much wider—to Saratov Gubernia and the Don
      region. The drop in grain prices in the 90s gave a particularly strong
      impetus to production, compelling “local cultivators to seek a way
      out of their difficulties in crop rotation

systems.”[21]

 The expansion of
      production considerably increased the demand for hired labour (melon
      growing requires a considerable amount of labour, so that the cultivation
      of one dessiatine costs from 30 to 50 rubles), and still more considerably
      increased the profits of the employers and ground-rent. Near
      “Log” Station (Gryazi-Tsaritsyn Railway), the area under
      water-melons in 1884 was 20 dess., in 1890 between 500 and 600 dess., and
      in 1896 between 1,400 and 1,500 dess., while rent rose from 30 kopeks to
      between 1.50 and 2 rubles and to between 4 and 14 rubles per dess. for the
      respective years. The over-rapid expansion of melon planting led at last,
      in 1896, to overproduction and a crisis, which finally confirmed the
      capitalist character of this branch of commercial agriculture. Melon
      prices fell to a point where they did not cover railway charges. The
      melons were left ungathered in the fields. After tasting tremendous
      profits the entrepreneurs now learned what losses were like. But the most
      interesting thing is the means they have chosen for combating the crisis:
      the means chosen is to win new markets, to effect such a cheapening of
      produce

 

      and of railway tariffs as to transform it from an item of luxury into an
      item of consumption for the people (and at points of production, into
      cattle feed). “Industrial melon growing,” the entrepreneurs
      assure us, “is on the road to further development; apart from high
      railway tariffs there is no obstacle to its further growth. On the
      contrary, the Tsaritsyn-Tikhoretskaya Railway now under construction
      . . . opens a new and extensive area for industrial melon growing.”
      Whatever the further destiny of this “industry” may be, at any
      rate the history of the “melon crisis” is very instructive,
      constituting a miniature picture, it is true, but a very vivid one, of the
      capitalist evolution of agriculture.

    
      We still have to say a few words about suburban farming. The
difference between it and the above-described types of commercial
agriculture is that in their case the entire farm is adapted to some one
chief market product. In the case of suburban farming, however, the
small cultivator trades in bits of everything: he trades in his house by
letting it to summer tenants and permanent lodgers, in his yard, in his
horse and in all sorts of produce from his fields and farmyard: grain,
cattle feed, milk, meat, vegetables, berries, fish, timber, etc.; he
trades in his wife’s milk (baby-farming near the capitals), he
makes money by rendering the most diverse (not always even mentionable)
services to visiting

townsfolk,[22]

 etc.,

etc.[23]

 The complete transformation by capitalism of
the ancient type of patriarchal farmer, the complete subjugation of the
latter to the “power of money” is expressed here so vividly
that the suburban peasant is usually put in a separate category by the
Narodnik who says that he is “no longer a peasant.” But the
difference between this type and all preceding types is only one of
form. The political and economic essence of the all-round transformation

 

      effected in the small cultivator by capitalism is everywhere the same. The
      more rapid the increase in the number of towns, the number of factory,
      commercial and industrial townships, and the number of railway stations,
      the more extensive is the area of the transformation of our “village
      community man” into this type of peasant. We should not forget what
      was said in his day by Adam Smith—that improved communications tend
      to convert every village into a

suburb.[24]

 Remote areas cut off from the outside world,
      already an exception, are with every passing day increasingly becoming as
      rare as antiquities, and the cultivator is turning with ever-growing
      rapidity into an industrialist subjected to the general laws of commodity
      production.
    

      In thus concluding the review of the data on the growth of commercial
      agriculture, we think it not superfluous to repeat here that our aim has
      been to examine the main (by no means all) forms of commercial
      agriculture.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Historico-Statistical Survey, I, p.  2.—Lenin

[2]
Ibid.—Lenin

[3]
      For example, in Moscow Gubernia. See S. Korolenko, Hired Labour,
      etc., p.  262.—Lenin

[4]
Ibid., pp. 335, 344, etc.—Lenin

[5]
Productive Forces, IV, 13.—Lenin

[6]
Ibid., p. 31, also Historico-Statistical Survey, p.  31
      and foll.—Lenin

[7]
      In the 60s imports amounted to nearly 1 million poods; in 1878-1880 to 3.8
      million poods; in 1886-1890 to 2.6 million poods; in 1889-1893 to 2
      million poods.—Lenin

[8]
      Anticipating somewhat, let us note here that in 1863 there were in
      European Russia 13 towns with populations of 50,000 and over and in 1897
      there were 44 (See Chapter VIII, § II).—Lenin

[9]
      See examples of settlements of this type in Chapters VI and VII.—Lenin

[10]
      See references to such villages of the Vyatka, Kostroma, Vladimir, Tver,
      Moscow, Kaluga, Penza, Nizhni-Novgorod and many other gubernias, to say
      nothing of Yaroslavl Gubernia, in Historico-Statistical Survey,
      1, p.  13 and foll., and in Productive Forces, IV, 38 and
      foll. Cf. also Zemstvo statistical returns for Semyonov, Nizhni-Novgorod
      and Balakhna uyezds of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia.—Lenin

[11]
Productive Forces, IV, 42.—Lenin

[12]
Material for Statistics on the Economy in St. Petersburg
      Gubernia, Vol. V. Actually there are far more vegetable growers than
      stated in the text, for most of them have been classed under
      private-landowner farming, whereas the data cited refer only to peasant
      farming.—Lenin

[13]
Productive Forces, IV, 49 and foll. It is interesting to note
      that different villages specialise in producing particular kinds of
      vegetables.—Lenin

[14]
Historico-Statistical Survey, I—Mr. Orlov’s
      Directory of Factories—Transactions of the Commission of Inquiry
      into Handicraft Industry, Vol XIV, article by
      Mr. Stolpyansky. —Productive Forces, IV, 46 and
      foll.—Survey of Yarodarvl Gubernia, Vol 2, Yaroslavl,
      1896. A comparison of the data given by Mr.  Stolpyansky (1885) and by the
      Directory (1890) shows a considerable increase in the factory production
      of canned goods in this area.—Lenin

[15]
      Thus the publication mentioned has fully confirmed Mr. Volgin’s
      “doubt” as to whether “the land occupied by vegetable
      plots is often redivided” (op.  cit., 172,
      footnote).—Lenin

[16]
      Here, too, a characteristic specialisation of agriculture is to be
      observed: “It is noteworthy that in places where vegetable growing
      has become the special occupation of part of the peasant population, the
      others grow hardly any vegetables at all, but buy them at local markets
      and fairs” (S. Korolenko, loc. cit., 285)—Lenin

[17]
Productive Forces, IV, 50-51. S. Korolenko,
loc. cit., 273.—Statistical Returns for
Moscow Gubernia, Vol VII, Pt. 1.—Statistical Returns for
Tver Gubernia, Vol. VIII, Pt. 1, Tver Uyezd: the census of
1886-1890 counted here something over 4,426 frames belonging to 174
peasants and 7 private landowners, i.e., an average of about 25 frames
per owner. “In peasant farming it (the industry) is a big help,
but only for the well-to-do peasants. . . . If there are more than 20
frames, workers are hired” (p. 167).—Lenin

[18]
      See data on this industry in appendix to Chapter V, Industry No. 9.—Lenin

[19]
      Mr. N.–on’s term for the Russian peasant.—Lenin

[20]
      Mr. V. Prugavin’s term.—Lenin

[21]
      Better tilth is required to raise water-melons and this renders the soil
      more fertile when sown later to cereals.—Lenin

[22]
      Cf . Uspensky, A Village Diary.—Lenin

[23]
      Let us refer, in illustration, to the above-quoted Material on
      peasant farming in Petersburg Uyezd. The most varied types of petty
      traffic have here assumed the form of “industries”; summer
      letting, boarding, milk-selling, vegetable-selling, berry-selling,
      “horse employments,” baby-farming, crayfish-catching, fishing,
      etc. Exactly similar are the industries of the suburban peasants of Tula
      Uyezd: see article by Mr. Borisov in Vol. IX of Transactions of the
      Commission of Inquiry into Handicraft Industry.—Lenin

[24]
      “Good roads, canals and navigable rivers, by diminishing the expense
      of carriage, put the remote parts of the country more nearly upon a level
      with those in the neighbourhood of the town.” Op.
      cit., Vol. I, pp. 228-229.—Lenin
 


[25]
       “Metropolitan gubernias” here refers to the gubernias of St.
      Petersburg and Moscow.
    

 
  

VII. The Technical Processing of Agricultural Produce

|

IX. Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism in Russian Agriculture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism in Agriculture in Russia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: IX. Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism in Russian Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 IX. Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism
      in Russian  Agriculture
    

      In chapters II-IV the problem of capitalism in Russian agriculture has
      been examined from two angles. First we examined the existing system of
      social and economic relations in peasant and landlord economy, the system
      which has taken shape in the post-Reform period.  It was seen that the
      peasantry have been splitting up at enormous speed into a numerically
      small but economically strong rural bourgeoisie and a rural
      proletariat. Inseparably connected with this “depeasantising”
      process is the landowners’ transition from the labour-service to the
      capitalist system of farming. Then we examined this same process from
      another angle: we took as our starting-point the manner in which
      agriculture is transformed into commodity production, and examined the
      social and economic relations characteristic of each of the principal
      forms of commercial agriculture. It was shown that the very same processes
      were conspicuous in both

 

      peasant and private-landowner farming under a great variety of
      agricultural conditions.
    

      Let us now examine the conclusions that follow from all the data given
      above.
    

      1) The main feature of the post-Reform evolution of agriculture is its
      growing commercial, entrepreneur character. As regards private-landowner
      farming, this fact is so obvious as to require no special explanation. As
      regards peasant farming, however, it is not so easily established,
      firstly, because the employment of hired labour is not an absolutely
      essential feature of the small rural bourgeoisie. As we have observed
      above, this category includes every small commodity-producer who covers
      his expenditure by independent farming, provided the general system of
      economy is based on the capitalist contradictions examined in Chapter
      II. Secondly, the small rural bourgeois (in Russia, as in other capitalist
      countries) is connected by a number of transitional stages with the
      small-holding “peasant,” and with the rural proletarian who
      has been allotted a patch of land. This circumstance is one of the reasons
      for the viability of the theories which do not distinguish the existence
      of a rural bourgeoisie and a rural proletariat among “the

      peasantry.”[1]


      2) From the very nature of agriculture its transformation into commodity
      production proceeds in a special way, unlike the corresponding process in
      industry. Manufacturing industry splits up into separate, quite
      independent branches, each devoted exclusively to the manufacture of one
      product or one part of a product. The agricultural industry, however, does
      not split up into quite separate branches, but merely specialises in one
      market product in one case, and in another market product in another, all
      the other aspects of agriculture being adapted to this principal (i.e.,
      market) product. That is why the forms of commercial agriculture show
      immense diversity, varying not only in

 

      different areas, but also on different farms. That is why, when examining
      the question of the growth of commercial agriculture, we must on no
      account confine ourselves to gross data for agricultural production as a

      whole.[2]


      3) The growth of commercial agriculture creates a home market for
      capitalism. Firstly, the specialisation of agriculture gives rise to
      exchange between the various agricultural areas, between the various
      agricultural undertakings, and between the various agricultural products.
      Secondly, the further agriculture is drawn into the sphere of commodity
      circulation the more rapid is the growth of the demand made by the rural
      population for those products of manufacturing industry that serve for
      personal consumption; and thirdly, the more rapid is the growth of the
      demand for means of production, since neither the small nor the big rural
      entrepreneur is able, with the old-fashioned “peasant”
      implements, buildings, etc., etc., to engage in the new, commercial
      agriculture. Fourthly and lastly, a demand is created for labour-power,
      since the formation of a small rural bourgeoisie and the change-over by
      the landowners to capitalist farming presuppose the formation of a body of
      regular agricultural labourers and day labourers. Only the fact of the
      growth of commercial agriculture can explain the circumstance that the
      post-Reform period is characterised by an expansion of the home market for
      capitalism (development of capitalist agriculture, development of factory
      industry in general, development of the agricultural engineering

 

      industry in particular, development of the so-called peasant
      “agricultural industries,” i.e., work for hire, etc.).
    

      4) Capitalism enormously extends and intensifies among the agricultural
      population the contradictions without which this mode of production cannot
      exist. Notwithstanding this, however, agricultural capitalism in Russia,
      in its historical significance, is a big progressive force. Firstly,
      capitalism has transformed the cultivator from a “lord of the
      manor,” on the one hand, and a patriarchal, dependent peasant, on
      the other, into the same sort of industrialist that every other
      proprietor is in present-day society. Before capitalism appeared,
      agriculture in Russia was the business of the gentry, a lord’s hobby
      for some, and a duty, an obligation for others; consequently, it could not
      be conducted except according to age-old routine, necessarily involving
      the complete isolation of the cultivator from all that went on in the
      world beyond the confines of his village. The labour-service
      system—that living survival of old times in present-day
      economy—strikingly confirms this characterisation. Capitalism for
      the first time broke with the system of social estates in land tenure by
      converting the land into a commodity. The farmer’s product was put
      on sale and began to be subject to social reckoning—first in the
      local, then in the national, and finally in the international market, and
      in this way the former isolation of the uncouth farmer from the rest of
      the world was completely broken down. The farmer was compelled willy
      nilly, on pain of ruin, to take account of the sum-total of social
      relations both in his own country and in other countries, now linked
      together by the world market. Even the labour-service system, which
      formerly guaranteed Oblomov an assured income without any risk on his
      part, without any expenditure of capital, without any changes in the
      age-old routine of production, now proved incapable of saving him from the
      competition of the American farmer. That is why one can fully apply to
      post-Reform Russia what was said half a century ago about Western
      Europe—that agricultural capitalism hag been “the motive force
      which has drawn the idyll into the movement of

      history.”[3]




      Secondly, agricultural capitalism has for the first time undermined the
      age-old stagnation of our agriculture; it has given a tremendous impetus
      to the transformation of its technique, and to the development of the
      productive forces of social labour. A few decades of “destructive
      work” by capitalism have done more in this respect than entire
      centuries of preceding history. The monotony of routine natural economy
      has been replaced by a diversity of forms of commercial agriculture;
      primitive agricultural implements have begun to yield place to improved
      implements and machines; the immobility of the old-fashioned farming
      systems has been undermined by new methods of agriculture. The course of
      all these changes is linked inseparably with the above-mentioned
      phenomenon of the specialisation of agriculture. By its very nature,
      capitalism in agriculture (as in industry) cannot develop evenly: in one
      place (in one country, in one area, on one farm) it pushes forward one
      aspect of agriculture, in another place another aspect, etc. In one case
      it transforms the technique of some, and in other cases of other
      agricultural operations, divorcing them from patriarchal peasant economy
      or from the patriarchal labour-service. Since the whole of this process is
      guided by market requirements that are capricious and not always known to
      the producer, capitalist agriculture, in each separate instance (often in
      each separate area, sometimes even in each separate country), becomes more
      one sided and lopsided than that which preceded it, but, taken as a whole,
      becomes immeasurably more many-sided and rational than patriarchal
      agriculture. The emergence of

 

      separate types of commercial agriculture renders possible and inevitable
      capitalist crises in agriculture and cases of capitalist overproduction,
      but these crises (like all capitalist crises) give a still more powerful
      impetus to the development of world production and of the socialisation
      of

labour.[4]


      Thirdly, capitalism has for the first time created in Russia large-scale
      agricultural production based on the employment of machines and the
      extensive co-operation of workers. Before capitalism appeared, the
      production of agricultural produce was always carried on in an unchanging,
      wretchedly small way—both when the peasant worked for himself and
      when he worked for the landlord—and no “community
      character” of land tenure was capable of destroying this
      tremendously scattered production. Inseparably linked with this scattered
      production was the scattered nature of the farmers

themselves.[5]

 Tied to their
      allotment, to their tiny “village community,” they were
      completely fenced off even from the peasants of the neighbouring village

 

      community by the difference in the categories to which they belonged
      (former landowners’ peasants, former state peasants, etc.), by
      differences in the size of their holdings—by differences in the
      terms on which their emancipation took place (which terms were sometimes
      determined simply by the individual attributes of the landlords and by
      their whims). Capitalism for the first time broke down these purely
      medieval barriers—and it was a very good thing that it did. Now the
      differences between the various grades of peasants, between the various
      categories based on the size of allotment holdings, are far less important
      than the economic differences within each grade, each category and each
      village community. Capitalism destroys local seclusion and insularity, and
      replaces the minute medieval divisions among cultivators by a major
      division, embracing the whole nation, that divides them into classes
      occupying different positions in the general system of capitalist

      economy.[6]

 The mass
      of cultivators were formerly tied to their place of residence by the very
      conditions of production, whereas the creation of diverse forms and
      diverse areas of commercial and capitalist agriculture could not but cause
      the movement of enormous masses of the population throughout the country;
      and unless the population is mobile (as we have said above) there can be
      no question of developing its understanding and initiative.
    

      Fourthly, and lastly, agricultural capitalism in Russia for the first time
      cut at the root of labour-service and the personal dependency of the
      farmer. This system of labour-service has held undivided sway in our
      agriculture from the days of Russkaya

Pravda[7]

 down to the present
      day cultivation of the fields of private landowners with the

 

      peasants’ implements; the wretchedness and uncouthness of the
      farmer, degraded by his labour being “semi-free” if not
      feudal, in character, are inevitable concomitants of this system; if the
      civil rights of the cultivator had not been impaired (by, for example, his
      belonging to the lowest social estate; corporal punishment; assignment to
      public works; attachment to allotment, etc.) the labour-service system
      would have been impossible. That is why agricultural capitalism in Russia
      has performed a great historical service in replacing labour-service by
      hired

labour.[8]

      Summing up what has been said above on the progressive historical role of
      Russian agricultural capitalism, it may be said that it is socialising
      agricultural production. Indeed, the fact that agriculture has been
      transformed from the privileged occupation of the top estate or the duty
      of the bottom estate into an ordinary commercial and industrial
      occupation; that the product of the cultivator’s labour has become
      subject to social reckoning on the market; that routine, uniform
      agriculture is being converted into technically transformed and diverse
      forms of commercial farming; that the local seclusion and scattered nature
      of the small farmers is breaking down; that the diverse forms of bondage
      and personal dependence are being replaced by impersonal transactions in
      the purchase and sale of labour-power, these are all links in a single
      process, which is socialising agricultural labour and is increasingly
      intensifying the contradiction between the anarchy of market fluctuations,
      between the individual character of the separate agricultural enterprises
      and the collective character of large-scale capitalist agriculture.
    

      Thus (we repeat once more), in emphasising the progressive historical role
      of capitalism in Russian agriculture

 

      we do not in the least forget either the historically transient character
      of this economic regime or the profound social contradictions inherent in
      it.  On the contrary, we have shown above that it is precisely the
      Narodniks who, capable only of bewailing the “destructive
      work” of capitalism, give an extremely superficial appraisal of
      these contradictions, glossing over the differentiation of the peasantry,
      ignoring the capitalist character of the employment of machinery in our
      agriculture, and covering up with such expressions as “agricultural
      industries” and “employments” the emergence of a class
      of agricultural wage-workers.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      The favourite proposition of the Narodnik economists that “Russian
      peasant farming is in the majority of cases purely natural economy”
      is, incidentally, built up by ignoring this fact. (The Influence of
      Harvests and Grain Prices, I, 52.) One has but to take
      “average” figures, which lump together both the rural
      bourgeoisie and the rural proletariat—and this proposition will pass
      as proved!—Lenin

[2]
      It is to data of this kind that the authors of the book mentioned in the
      preceding note confine themselves when they speak of “the
      peasantry.” They assume that every peasant sows just those
      cereals that he consumes, that he sows all those types of cereals
      that he consumes, and that he sows them in just that proportion
      in which they are consumed. It does not require much effort to
      “deduce” from such “assumptions” (which contradict
      the facts and ignore the main feature of the post-Reform period) that
      natural economy predominates.
    

      In Narodnik literature one may also encounter the following ingenious
      method of argument: each separate type of commercial agriculture
      is an “exception”—by comparison with agriculture as a
      whole. Hence, all commercial agriculture in general, it is
      averred, must be regarded as an exception, and natural economy must be
      considered the general rule! In college textbooks on logic, in the section
      on sophisms, numerous parallels of such lines of reasoning are to be
      found.—Lenin

[3]
Misère de la philosophie (Paris, 1896), p. 223; the author
      contemptuously describes as reactionary jeremiads, the longings of those

 

      who thirst for a return to the good old patriarchal life, simple manners,
      etc, and who condemn the “subjection of the soil to the laws which
      dominate all other

industries.”[9]


      We are fully aware that to the Narodniks the whole of the argument given
      in the text may appear not only unconvincing but positively
      unintelligible, But it would be too thankless a task to analyse in detail
      such opinions as, for example, that the purchase-and-sale of the land is
      an “abnormal” phenomenon (Mr. Chuprov, in the debate on grain
      prices, p. 39 of the verbatim report), that the inalienability of the
      peasants’ allotments is an institution that can be defended, that
      the labour-service system of farming is better, or at all events no worse,
      than the capitalist system, etc. All that has been said above goes to
      refute the political and economic arguments advanced by the Narodniks in
      support of such views.—Lenin

[4]
      The West-European romanticists and Russian Narodniks strongly emphasise in
      this process the one-sidedness of capitalist agriculture, the instability
      created by capitalism, and crises—and on this basis deny the
      progressive character of capitalist advance as compared with
      pre-capitalist stagnation.—Lenin

[5]
      Accordingly, notwithstanding the difference in the forms of land tenure,
      one can fully apply to the Russian peasant what Marx said of the small
      French peasant: “The small-holding peasants form a vast mass, the
      members of which live in similar conditions but without entering into
      manifold relations with one another. Their mode of production isolates
      them from one another instead of bringing them into mutual
      intercourse. The isolation is increased by France’s bad means of
      communication and by the poverty of the peasants. Their field of
      production (Produktionsfeld ), the small holding, admits of no
      division of labour in its cultivation, no application of science and,
      therefore, no diversity of development, no variety of talent, no wealth of
      social relationships. Each individual peasant family is almost
      self-sufficient, it itself directly produces the major part of its
      consumption and thus acquires its means of life more through exchange with
      nature than in intercourse with society. A small holding, a peasant and
      his family; alongside them another small holding, another peasant and
      another family. A few score of these make up a village, and a few score of
      villages make up a Department. In this way, the great mass of the French
      nation is formed by simple addition of homologous magnitudes, much as
      potatoes in a sack form a sack of potatoes.” (Der achtzehnte
      Brumaire des Louis Bonaparte, Hmb., 1885,

S. 98–99.)[10]—Lenin

[6]
      “The need for association, for organisation in capitalist society,
      has not diminished but, on the contrary, has grown immeasurably. But it is
      utterly absurd to measure this need of the new society with the old
      yardstick. This new society is already demanding firstly, that the
      association shall not be according to locality, social-estate or category;
      secondly, that its starting-point shall be the difference in status and
      interests that has been created by capitalism and by the differentiation
      of the peasantry.” [V. Ilyin, loc. cit., pp. 91-92
      footnote. (See present edition, Vol. 2, “A Characterisation of
      Economic Romanticism.”—Ed.)—Lenin

[7]
      Russian Law.—Lenin

[8]
      One of Mr. N.–on’s innumerable plaints and lamentations over the
      destructive work of capitalism in Russia deserves special attention:
      “. . . Neither the strife among the appanage princes nor the Tartar
      invasion affected the forms of our economic life”
      (Sketches, p. 284); only capitalism has displayed “contempt
      for its own historical past” (p. 283). The sacred truth! Capitalism
      in Russian agriculture is progressive precisely because it has displayed
      “contempt” for the “age-old”,
      “time-hallowed” forms of labour-service and bondage, which,
      indeed, no political storms, the “strife among the appanage
      princes” and the “Tartar invasion” inclusive, were able
      to destroy.—Lenin
 


[9]
      See Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Moscow, p. 180.
    


[10]
      Karl Marx and Frederick Engels, Selected Works, Vol. I, Moscow,
1958, p. 334 (The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte).
    

 
  

VIII. Industrial Vegetable and Fruit Growing; Suburban Farming

|

X. Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in Agriculture. “The Freeing of Winter Time”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in Agriculture. "The Freeing of Winter Time"




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: X. Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in Agriculture. 'The Freeing of Winter Time'








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 X. Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in
      Agriculture.
      “The  Freeing of Winter Time”
    

      The foregoing positive conclusions regarding the significance of
      capitalism must be supplemented by an examination of certain special
      “theories” on this question current in our literature. Our
      Narodniks in most cases have been totally unable to digest Marx’s
      fundamental views on agricultural capitalism. The more candid among them
      have bluntly declared that Marx’s theory does not cover agriculture
      (Mr. V. V. in Our Trends ), while others (like Mr. N.–on) have
      preferred diplomatically to evade the question of the relation between
      their “postulates” and Marx’s theory. One of the
      postulates most widespread among the Narodnik economists is the theory of
      “the freeing of winter time.” The essence of it is as

      follows.[1]


      Under the capitalist system agriculture becomes a separate industry,
      unconnected with the others. However, it is not carried on the whole year
      but only for five or six months. Therefore, the capitalisation of
      agriculture leads to “the freeing of winter time,” to the
      “limitation of the working time of the agricultural class to part of
      the working year,” which is the “fundamental cause of the
      deterioration of the economic conditions of the agricultural
      classes”

 

      (N.–on, 229), of the “diminishing of the home market” and of
      “the wastage of the productive forces” of society (Mr. V. V.).
    

      Here you have the whole of this celebrated theory, which bases the most
      sweeping historical and philosophical conclusions solely on the great
      truth that in agriculture jobs are distributed over the year very
      unevenly! To take this one feature, to reduce it to absurdity by means of
      abstract assumptions, to discard all the other specific features of the
      complex process which transforms patriarchal agriculture into capitalist
      agriculture—such are the simple methods used in this latest attempt
      to restore the romantic theories about pre-capitalist
      “people’s production.”
    

      To show how inordinately narrow this abstract postulate is, let us
      indicate briefly those aspects of the actual process that are either
      entirely lost sight of, or are underrated by our Narodniks. Firstly, the
      further the specialisation of agriculture proceeds, the more the
      agricultural population decreases, becoming an ever-diminishing part of
      the total population. The Narodniks forget this, although in their
      abstractions they raise the specialisation of agriculture to a level it
      hardly ever reaches in actual fact. They assume that only the operations
      of sowing and reaping grain have become a separate industry; the
      cultivation and the manuring of the soil, the processing and the carting
      of produce, stock raising, forestry, the repair of buildings and
      implements, etc., etc.—all these operations have been turned into
      separate capitalist industries. The application of such
      abstractions to present-day realities will not contribute much towards
      explaining them. Secondly, the assumption that agriculture undergoes such
      complete specialisation presupposes a purely capitalist organisation of
      agriculture, a complete division into capitalist farmers and
      wage-workers. To talk under such circumstances about “the
      peasant” (as Mr. N.–on does, p. 215) is the height of
      illogicality. The purely capitalist organisation of agriculture
      presupposes, in its turn, a more even distribution of jobs throughout the
      year (due to crop rotation, rational stock raising, etc.), the combination
      with agriculture, in many cases, of the technical processing of produce,
      the application of a greater quantity of labour to the preparation

 

      of the soil,

etc.[2]

      Thirdly, capitalism presupposes the complete separation of agricultural
      from industrial enterprises. But whence does it follow that this
      separation does not permit the combination of agricultural and industrial
      wage-labour ? We find such a combination in developed capitalist
      society everywhere. Capitalism separates the skilled workers from the
      plain labourers, the unskilled, who pass from one occupation to another,
      now drawn into jobs at some large enterprise, and now thrown into the
      ranks of the

workless.[3]

 The greater the development of capitalism and
      large-scale

 

      industry, the greater, in general, are the fluctuations in the demand for
      workers not only in agriculture, but also in

industry.[4]

 Therefore, if we
      presuppose the maximum development of capitalism, we must also presuppose
      the maximum facility for the transfer of workers from agricultural to
      non-agricultural occupations, we must presuppose the formation of a
      general reserve army from which labour-power is drawn by all sorts of
      employers. Fourthly, if we take the present-day rural employers, it
      cannot, of course, be denied that sometimes they experience difficulty in
      providing their farms with. workers. But it must not be for gotten,
      either, that they have a means of tying the workers to their farms,
      namely, by allotting them patches of land, etc. The allotment-holding farm
      labourer or day labourer is a type common to all capitalist countries. One
      of the chief errors of the Narodniks is that they ignore the formation of
      a similar type in Russia. Fifthly, it is quite wrong to discuss the
      freeing of the farmer’s winter time independently of the general
      question of capitalist surplus-population. The formation of a reserve army
      of unemployed is characteristic of capitalism in general, and the specific
      features of agriculture merely give rise to special forms of this
      phenomenon. That is why the author of Capital, for instance,
      deals with the distribution of employment in agriculture in connection
      with the question of “relative

surplus-population,”[5]

 as well as in a
      special chapter where he

 

      discusses the difference between the “working period” and the
      “time of production” (Das Kapital, II. B., Chapter
      13). The working period is the period in which labour is applied to the
      product; the time of production is the time during which the product is in
      production, including the period in which labour is not applied to it. The
      working period does not coincide with the time of production in very many
      industries, among which agriculture is merely the most typical, but by no
      means the only

one.[6]

 In Russia, as compared with other European
      countries, the difference between the working period in agriculture and
      the time of production is a particularly big one. “When capitalist
      production later accomplishes the separation of manufacture and
      agriculture, the rural labourer becomes ever more dependent on merely
      casual accessory employment and his condition deteriorates thereby. For
      capital . . . all differences in the turnover are evened out. Not so for
      the labourer” (ibid.,

223–224).[8] So then, the only conclusion that
      follows from the specific features of agriculture in the instance under
      review is that the position of the agricultural worker must be even worse
      than that of the industrial worker.  This is still a very long way from
      Mr. N.–on’s “theory” that the freeing of winter time is
      the “fundamental reason” for the deterioration of the
      conditions of the “agricultural classes” (?!). If the working
      period in our agriculture equalled 12 months, the process of the
      development of capitalism would go on exactly as it does now; the entire
      difference would be that the conditions of the agricultural worker would
      come somewhat closer to those of the industrial

      worker.[7]



      Thus the “theory” of Messrs. V. V. and N.–on makes absolutely
      no contribution whatever even to the general problem of the development of
      agricultural capitalism. As for the specific features of Russia, it not
      only does not explain them, but on the contrary obscures them. Winter
      unemployment among our peasantry depends not so much on capitalism as on
      the inadequate development of capitalism. We have shown above (§IV of this
      chapter), from the data on wages, that of the Great-Russian gubernias,
      winter unemployment is most prevalent in those where capitalism is least
      developed and where labour-service prevails. That is quite
      understandable. Labour-service retards the. development of labour
      productivity, retards the development of industry and agriculture, and,
      consequently, the demand for labour-power, and at the same time, while
      tying the peasant to his allotment, provides him neither with employment
      in winter time nor with the possibility of existing by his wretched
      farming.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      V. V., Essay on Theoretical Economics, p.
      108 and foll. N.–on Sketches, p. 214 and foll. The same
      ideas are to be found in Mr. Kablukov’s Lectures on
Agricultural Economics, Moscow, 1897, p. 55 and foll.—Lenin

[2]
      To make no bald assertion, let us give examples
      of our private landowner farms whose organisation approximates
      in the greatest measure to the purely capitalist type. Let us
      take Orel Gubernia (Zemstvo Statistical Returns for Kromy
      Uyezd, Vol. IV, Pt. 2, Orel 1892). The estate of Khlyustin,
      a member of the nobility, covers 1,129 dess., of which 562 are
      under crops, there are 8 buildings, and various improved
      implements.  Artificial grass cultivation. Stud farm. Stock
      raising. Marsh drainage by ditch-cutting and other measures
      (“drainage is mainly done in spare time,” p.  146). The number
      of workers in summer, 50 to 80 per day, in winter, up to 30.  In
      1888 there were 81 workers employed, of whom 25 were for the
      summer. In 1889 there were 19 carpenters employed.—Estate
      of Count Ribopier: 3,000 dess., 1,293 under crops, 898 leased to
      peasants. Twelve-crop rotation system.  Peat-cutting for manure,
      extraction of phosphorites. Since 1889 operation of experimental
      field of 30 dess. Manure carted in winter and spring. Grass
      cultivation. Proper exploitation of forests (200 to 300
      lumbermen employed from October to March) Cattle raising. Dairy
      farming. In 1888 had 90 employees, of whom 34 were for the
      summer.—Menshchikov estate in Moscow Gubernia
      (Returns, Vol. V, Pt. 2), 23,000 dess. Manpower in
      return for “cut-off” lands, and also hired. Forestry. “In the
      summer the horses and the permanent workers are busy round the
      fields; in late autumn and partly in winter they cart potatoes
      and starch to the drying sheds and starch factory, and also cart
      timber from the woods to the . . . station; thanks to all this,
      the work is spread fairly evenly now over the whole year”
      (p. 145), as is evident, incidentally, from the register showing
      the number of days worked monthly: average number of horse days,
      293 per month; fluctuations: from 223 (April) to 362
      (June). Average male days, 216; fluctuations: from 126
      (February) to 279 (November). Average female days 23;
      fluctuations: from 13 (January) to 27 (March). Is this reality
      anything like the abstraction the Narodniks are busying
      themselves with?—Lenin

[3]
      Large-scale capitalist industry creates a nomad
      working class. It is formed from the rural population, but is
      chiefly engaged in industrial occupations.  “They are the light
      infantry of capital, thrown by it, according to its needs, now to
      this point, now to that. . . . Nomad labour is used for various
      operations of building and draining, brick making, lime-burning,
      railway-making, etc.” (Das Kapital,

      I2, 
 

      S. 692[9].)
      “In general such large-scale undertakings as railways
      with draw a definite quantity of labour-power from the
      labour-market, which can come only from certain branches of
      economy, for example, agriculture . . .” (ibid., II. B.,

      S. 303).[10]—Lenin

[4]
      For example the Moscow Medical Statistics placed the
      number of factory workers in this gubernia at 114,381; this was
      the number at work; the highest figure was 146,338 and the lowest,
      94,214 (General Summary, etc., Vol. IV, Pt. I, p. 98); in
      percentages: 128%—100%— 82%. By increasing, in
      general, the fluctuations in the number of workers, capitalism
      evens out, in this respect too, the differences between industry
      and agriculture.—Lenin

[5]
      For example, in regard to the
      agricultural relations of England, Marx says: “There are always
      too many agricultural labourers for the ordinary, and always too
      few for the exceptional or temporary needs of the cultivation of
      the soil” (I2,

      725),[11]
      so that, notwithstanding
      the permanent “relative surplus-population,” the countryside
      seems to be inadequately populated. As capitalist production
      takes possession of agriculture, says Marx in another place, a
      surplus rural

 

population is formed.  “Part of the agricultural
      population is therefore constantly on the point of passing over
      into an urban or manufacturing proletariat” (ibid.,

      668)[12];
      this part of the population suffers chronically from
      unemployment; the work it gets is extremely irregular and is the
      worst paid (e.g., working at home for shops, etc.)—Lenin

[6]
      Particularly noteworthy in this connection is
      Marx’s observation that in agriculture too there are ways of
      distributing the demand for labour “more evenly over the entire
      year,” namely, by raising a greater variety of products, by
      substituting crop rotation for the three-field system, cultivating
      root-crops, grasses, etc. but all these methods “require an
      increase of the circulating capital advanced in production,
      invested in wages, fertilisers, seed, etc.” (ibid.,

      S. 225-226).[13]—Lenin

[7]
      We say “somewhat,” because the deterioration of
      the conditions of the agricultural worker is far from being due to
      irregularity of employment alone.—Lenin
 


[9]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958,
      p. 663.
    


[10]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957,
      p. 316.
    


[11]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958,
      p. 693.
    


[12]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958,
      p. 642.
    


[13]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 242-243.
    


[8]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957,
      p. 241.
    

 
  

IX. Conclusions on the Significance of Capitalism in Russian Agriculture

|

XI. Continuation.—The Village Community.—Marx’s Views on Small-Scale Agriculture.—Engels’s Opinion of the Contemporary Agricultural Crisis

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Continuation.—The Village Community.—Marx’s View on Small-Scale Agriculture.—Engels’s Opinion of the Contemporary Agricultural Crisis




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Four: XI. Continuation.—The Village Community.—Marx's Views on Small-Scale Agriculture.—Engels's Opinion of the Contemporary Agricultural Crisis








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter IV. The Growth of Commercial Agriculture



 XI. Continuation.—The Village
      Community.—Marx’s
      Views on Small-Scale Agriculture.—Engels’ Opinion of the
      Contemporary Agricultural Crisis
    

      “The community principle prevents capital from seizing agricultural
      production,”—that is how Mr. N.—on (p. 72) expresses
      another current Narodnik theory, formulated in just as abstract a fashion
      as the previous one. In Chapter II we quoted a series of facts showing the
      fallacy of this stock premise. Now let us add the following.  It is a
      great mistake to think that the inception of agricultural capitalism
      itself requires some special- form of land tenure. “But the form of
      landed property with which the incipient capitalist mode of production is
      confronted does not suit it. It first creates for itself the form required
      by subordinating agriculture to capital. It thus transforms feudal landed
      property, clan property, small-peasant property in mark

communes[1]

      (Markgemeinschaft)—no matter

 

      how divergent their juristic forms may be—into the economic form
      corresponding to the requirements of this mode of production”
      (Das Kapital, III, 2, 156). Thus, by the very nature of the case,
      no peculiarities in the system of land tenure can serve as an
      insurmountable obstacle to capitalism, which assumes different forms in
      accordance with the different conditions in agriculture, legal
      relationships and manner of life.  One can see from this how wrong is the
      very presentation of the question by our Narodniks, who have
      created a whole literature on the subject of “village community or
      capitalism?” Should some Anglomaniac aristocrat happen to offer a
      prize for the best work on the introduction of capitalist farming in
      Russia, should some learned society come forward with a scheme to settle
      peasants on farmsteads, should some idle government official concoct a
      project for 60-dessiatine holdings, the Narodnik hastens to throw down the
      gauntlet and fling himself into the fray against these “bourgeois
      projects” to “introduce capitalism” and destroy that
      Palladium of “people’s industry,” the village
      community. It has never entered the head of our good Narodnik that
      capitalism has been proceeding on its way while all sorts of projects have
      been drafted and refuted, and the community village has been turning, and
      has actually

turned,[2]

 into the village of small agrarians.
    

      That is why we are very indifferent to the question of the form of peasant
      land tenure. Whatever the form of land tenure may be, the relation between
      the peasant bourgeoisie and the rural proletariat will not undergo any
      essential change. The really important question concerns not the form of
      land tenure at all, but the remnants of the purely

 

      medieval past, which continue to weigh down upon the peasantry—the
      social-estate seclusion of the peasant communities, collective
      responsibility, excessively high taxation of peasant land out of all
      proportion to the taxation of privately-held land, the absence of full
      freedom in the purchase and sale of peasant lands, and in the movement and
      settlement of the

peasantry.[3]

 All these obsolete institutions, while not in the
      least safeguarding the peasantry against break-up, only lead to the
      multiplication of diverse forms of labour-service and bondage, to
      tremendous delay in social development as a whole.
    

      In conclusion we must deal with an original Narodnik attempt to give an
      interpretation to some statements made by Marx and Engels in Volume III of
      Capital, in favour of their views that small-scale agriculture is
      superior to large-scale, and that agricultural capitalism does not play a
      progressive historical role. Quite often, with this end in view, they
      quote the following passage from Volume III of Capital :
    

      “The moral of history, also to be deduced from other observations
      concerning agriculture, is that the capitalist system works against a
      rational agriculture, or that a rational agriculture is incompatible with
      the capitalist system (although the latter promotes technical improvements
      in agriculture), and needs either the hand of the small farmer living by
      his own labour (selbst arbeitenden ) or the control of associated
      producers” (III, 1, 98. Russ. trans.,

83).[8]


      What follows from this assertion (which, let us note in passing, is an
      absolutely isolated fragment that has found its way into a chapter dealing
      with the way changes in the prices of raw materials affect profits, and
      not into Part VI, which deals specifically with agriculture)?  That
      capitalism is incompatible with the rational organisation of agriculture
      (as also of industry) has long been known; nor is that the point at issue
      with the Narodniks. And the progressive historical role of
      capitalism in agriculture is

 

      especially emphasised by Marx here. There remains Marx’s reference
      to the “small peasant living by his own labour.” None of the
      Narodniks who have referred to this point has taken the trouble to explain
      how he understands this, has taken the trouble to connect this point with
      the context, on the one hand, and with Marx’s general theory of
      small-scale agriculture, on the other. —In the passage quoted from
      Capital the point dealt with is how considerably the prices of
      raw materials fluctuate, how these fluctuations disturb the
      proportionality and systematic working of production, how they disturb the
      conformity of agriculture and industry. It is only in this
      respect—in respect of the proportionality, systematic working
      and planned operation of production—that Marx places small peasant
      economy on a par with the economy of “associated producers.”
      In this respect, even small medieval industry (handicraft) is similar to
      the economy of “associated producers” (cf. Misère de la
      philosophie, edition cited, p. 90), whereas capitalism differs from
      both these systems of social economy in its anarchy of production. By what
      logic can one draw the conclusion from this that Marx admitted the
      viability of small-scale

agriculture,[4]

 that he did not acknowledge the progressive
      historical role of capitalism in agriculture? Here is what Marx said about
      this in the special part dealing with agriculture, in the special
      section on small peasant economy (Chapter 47, § V):
    

      “Proprietorship of land parcels by its very nature excludes the
      development of social productive forces of labour, social forms of labour,
      social concentration of capital, large-scale cattle raising, and the
      progressive application of science.
    

      “Usury and a taxation system must impoverish it every where.  The
      expenditure of capital in the price of the land withdraws this capital
      from cultivation. An infinite fragmentation of means of production, and
      isolation of the producers themselves. Monstrous waste of human energy.

 

      Progressive deterioration of conditions of production and increased prices
      of means of production—an inevitable law of proprietorship of
      parcels. Calamity of seasonal abundance for this mode of production”
      (III, 2, 341-342. Russ. trans.,

667).[9]


      “Small landed property presupposes that the overwhelming majority of
      the population is rural, and that not social, but isolated labour
      predominates; and that, therefore, under such conditions wealth and
      development of reproduction, both of its material and spiritual
      prerequisites, are out of the question,  and thereby
      also the prerequisites for rational cultivation” (III, 2,
      347. Russ. trans.,

p. 672).[10]


      The writer of these lines, far from closing his eyes to the contradictions
      inherent in large-scale capitalist agriculture, ruthlessly exposed
      them. But this did not prevent him from appreciating the
      historical role of capitalism:
    

      “...One of the major results of the capitalist mode of production is
      that, on the one hand, it transforms agriculture from a mere empirical and
      mechanical self-perpetuating process employed by the least developed part
      of society into the conscious scientific application of agronomy, in so
      far as this is at all feasible under conditions of private property; that
      it divorces landed property from the relations of dominion and servitude,
      on the one hand, and, on the other, totally separates land as an
      instrument of production from landed property and landowner. . . . The
      rationalising of agriculture, on the one hand, which makes it for the
      first time capable of operating on a social scale, and the reduction
      ad absurdum of property in land, on the other, are the great
      achievements of the capitalist mode of production. Like all of its other
      historical advances,  it also attained these by first
      completely impoverishing the direct producers” (III, 2,
      156-157. Russ. trans.,

509–510).[11]


      One would think that after such categorical statements by Marx there could
      be no two opinions as to how he viewed the question of the progressive
      historical role of agricultural capitalism. Mr. N.–on, however, found one
      more subterfuge: he quoted Engels’s opinion on the present
      agricultural crisis, which should, in his view, refute the

 

      proposition of the progressive role of capitalism in

agriculture.[5]


      Let us see what Engels actually says. After summarising the main
      propositions of Marx’s theory of differential rent, Engels
      establishes the law that “the more capital is invested in the land,
      and the higher the development of agriculture and civilisation in general
      in a given country, the more rents rise per acre as well as in total
      amount, and the more immense becomes the tribute paid by society to the
      big landowners in the form of surplus-profits” (Das
      Kapital, III, 2, 258. Russ. trans.,

597).[12] This law, says Engels, explains
      “the wonderful vitality of the class of big landowners,” who
      accumulate a mass of debts and nevertheless “land on their
      feet” in all crises; for example, the abolition of the Corn Laws in
      England, which caused a drop in grain prices, far from ruining the
      landlords, exceedingly enriched them.
    

      It might thus seem that capitalism is unable to weaken the power of the
      monopoly represented by landed property.
    

      “But everything is transitory,” continues Engels.
      “Trans-oceanic steamships and the railways of North and South
      America and India” called forth new competitors. The North American
      prairies and the Argentine pampas, etc., flooded the world market with
      cheap grain. “And in face of this competition—coming from
      virgin plains as well as from Russian and Indian peasants ground down by
      taxation—the European tenant farmer and peasant could not prevail

 

      at the old rents. A portion of the land in Europe fell decisively out of
      competition as regards grain cultivation, and rents fell everywhere; our
      second case, variant 2—falling prices and falling productivity of
      the additional investment of capital—became the rule for Europe; and
      therefore the lament of landlords from Scotland to Italy and from the
      south of France to the east of Prussia. Fortunately, the plains are far
      from being entirely brought under cultivation; there are enough left to
      ruin all the big landlords of Europe and the small ones into the
      bargain” (ibid., 260. Russ. trans., 598, where the word
      “fortunately” is

omitted.).[13]


      If the reader has read this passage carefully it should be clear to him
      that Engels says the very opposite of what Mr. N.–on wants to foist on
      him. In Engels’s opinion the present agricultural crisis is reducing
      rent and is even tending to abolish it altogether; in other words,
      agricultural capitalism is pursuing its natural tendency to abolish the
      monopoly of landed property. No, Mr. N.–on is positively out of luck with
      his “quotations.” Agricultural capitalism is taking another,
      enormous step forward; it is boundlessly expanding the commercial
      production of agricultural produce and drawing a number of new countries
      into the world arena; it is driving patriarchal agriculture out of its
      last refuges, such as India or Russia; it is creating something hitherto
      unknown to agriculture, namely, the purely industrial production of grain,
      based on the co-operation of masses of workers equipped with the most
      up-to-date machinery; it is tremendously aggravating the position of the
      old European countries, reducing rents, thus undermining what seemed to be
      the most firmly established monopolies and reducing landed property
      “to absurdity” not only in theory, but also in practice; it is
      raising so vividly the need to socialise agricultural production that this
      need is beginning to be realised in the West even by representatives of
      the propertied

classes.[6]

 And Engels, with his characteristic cheerful
      irony, welcomes the latest steps of world

 

      capitalism: fortunately, he says, there is still enough uncultivated
      prairie land left to enable things to continue as they have been
      doing. But our good Mr. N.–on, à propos des

bottes,[7]

 sighs for the
      “muzhik cultivator” of yore, for the
      “time-hallowed” . . . stagnation of our agriculture and of all
      the various forms of agricultural bondage which “neither the strife
      among the appanage princes nor the Tartar invasion” could shake, and
      which now—oh, horror!—are beginning to be most thoroughly
      shaken by this monstrous capitalism!  O, sancta simplicitas!
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      In another place Marx points out that “common lands
      (Gemeineigentum ) constitute the second supplement of the
      management of land parcels.” (Das Kapital, III, 2,

      341).[14]—Lenin

[2]
      If we are told that we are running ahead in making such an assertion, our
      reply will be the following. Whoever wants to depict some living
      phenomenon in its development is inevitably and necessarily confronted
      with the dilemma of either running ahead or lagging behind. There is no
      middle course. And if all the facts show that the character of the social
      evolution is precisely such that this evolution has already gone very far
      (see Chapter II), and if, furthermore, precise reference is made to the
      circumstances and institutions that retard this evolution (excessively
      high taxes, social-estate exclusiveness of the peasantry, lack of full
      freedom in the purchase and sale of land, and in movement and settlement),
      then there is nothing wrong in such running ahead.—Lenin

[3]
      The defence of some of these institutions by the Narodniks very glaringly
      reveals the reactionary character of their views, which is gradually
      bringing them closer and closer to the agrarians.—Lenin

[4]
      Let us recall that Engels, shortly before his death, and at a time when
      the agricultural crisis connected with the drop in prices was fully
      manifest, considered it necessary to protest emphatically against the
      French “disciples,” who had made some concessions to the
      doctrine of the viability of small-scale

agriculture.[15]—Lenin

[5]
      See Novoye Slovo, 1896, No. 5, February, letter to editors by
      Mr. N.–on, pp. 256-261. Here also is the “quotation” on the
      “moral of history.” It is remarkable that neither Mr. N.–on
      nor any other of the numerous Narodnik economists who have tried to use
      the present agricultural crisis to refute the theory of the progressive
      historical role of capitalism in agriculture, has ever once raised the
      question in a straightforward manner, on the basis of a definite economic
      theory; has ever once stated the grounds which induced Marx to admit the
      progressiveness of the historical role of agricultural capitalism, or has
      definitely indicated just which of these grounds he repudiates, and
      why. In this, as in other cases, the Narodnik economists prefer not to
      oppose Marx’s theory outright, but confine themselves to casting
      vague hints at the “Russian disciples.” Confining ourselves in
      this work to the economy of Russia, we have given above the grounds for
      our opinions on this question.—Lenin

[6]
      Are not, indeed, such manifestations as the celebrated Antrag Kanitz
      (Kanitz plan –Ed.) proposed in the German

Reichstag,[16] or the proposal of
      the American farmers that all elevators be made state property typical
      “signs of the times”?—Lenin

[7]
      Without rhyme or reason. –Ed.
 


[14]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 603, 787.
    


[8]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 119.
    


[15]
      This refers to the article by Engels entitled “The Peasant Question
      in France and Germany,” published in Die Neue Zeit, Issue
      No. 10 of the year 1894-95. (See Karl Marx and Frederick Engels,
      Selected Works, Vol.  II, Moscow, 1958, pp. 420-440.) The French
      “disciples”—the name given, with an eye to censorship,
      to Marxists (in the article mentioned Engels calls them “French
      Socialists of the Marxist trend”).
    


[9]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 787.
    


[10]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 792-793.
    


[11]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 603-604.
    


[12]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 709.
    


[13]
       Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 709-710.
    


[16]
      In the years 1894-1895 Count Kanitz, representative of the agrarians,
      introduced into the German Reichstag the proposal known as the
      “Antrag Kanitz” calling on the government to assume control of
      the purchase of grain abroad, and undertake the sale of all such imported
      grain at average prices. The proposal was rejected by the Reichstag.
    

 
  

X. Narodnik Theories on Capitalism in Agriculture. “The Freeing of Winter Time”

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 331-383
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. Domestic Industry And Handicrafts
  331



II. Small Commodity-Producers In Industry. The Craft Spirit In The Small Industries
  334



III. The Growth of Small Industries After the Reform. Two Forces of This Process and its Significance
  338



IV. The Differentiation Of The Small Commodity-Producers. Data On House-To-House Censuses Of Handicraftsmen In Moscow Gubernia
  344



V. Capitalist Simple Co-Operation
  356



VI. Merchant’s Capital in the Small Industries
  360



VII. “Industry And Agriculture”
  369



VIII. “The Combination Of Industry With Agriculture”
  378



IX. Some Remarks on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of Our Countryside
  380

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Domestic Industry and Handicrafts




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: I. Domestic Industry And Handicrafts








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      Let us now pass from agriculture to industry. Here, too, our task is
      formulated as in the case of agriculture: we have to analyse the forms of
      industry in post-Reform Russia, that is, to study the present system of
      social and economic relations in manufacturing industry and the character
      of the evolution of that system. Let us start with the most simple and
      primitive forms of industry and trace their development.
    

 I. Domestic Industry And Handicrafts 

      By domestic industry we mean the processing of raw materials in the
      household (peasant family) that produces them. Domestic industries are a
      necessary adjunct of natural economy, remnants of which are nearly always
      retained where there is a small peasantry. It is natural, therefore, that
      in Russian economic literature one should meet repeated references to this
      type of industry (the domestic production of articles from flax, hemp,
      wood, etc., for consumption in the home). However, the existence of
      domestic industry on any extensive scale is rarely found nowadays and only
      in the most remote localities; until very recently, Siberia, for example,
      was one of them. Industry as a profession does not yet exist in this form:
      industry here is linked inseparably with agriculture, together they
      constitute a single whole.

    
      The first form of industry to be separated from patriarchal agriculture is
      artisan production, i.e., the production

 

      of articles to the order of a

      consumer.[1]

 The raw
      materials may belong either to the customer-consumer or to the artisan,
      and payment for the latter’s work is made either in cash or in kind
      (artisan’s premises and keep, remuneration with part of the product,
      for example, flour, etc.). While constituting an essential part of urban
      life, artisan production is to be met on a considerable scale in the rural
      districts too, where it serves as a supplement to peasant farming. A
      certain percentage of the rural population consists of specialist-artisans
      engaged (sometimes exclusively, sometimes in conjunction with agriculture)
      in tanning, boot-making, tailoring, blacksmithery, dyeing of homespun
      fabrics, finishing of peasant-made woollens, flour-milling, etc. Owing to
      the extremely unsatisfactory state of our economic statistics we have no
      precise data on the degree to which artisan production is spread
      throughout Russia; but isolated references to this form of industry are
      scattered through nearly all descriptions of peasant farming and
      investigations of what is called “handicraft”

industry,[2]

 and are even to be
      found in official factory

statistics.[3]

 The Zemstvo statistical returns, in registering
      peasant industries, sometimes single out a special group,
      “artisans” (cf. Rudnev, loc. cit.), but this
      category (according

 

      to current terminology) includes all building workers. From the viewpoint
      of political economy this is utterly wrong, for the bulk of the building
      workers belong to the category, not of independent industrialists working
      on orders from customers, but of wage-workers employed by contractors. Of
      course, it is not always easy to distinguish the village-artisan from the
      small commodity-producer or from the wage-worker; this requires an
      economic analysis of the data concerning every small industrialist. A
      noteworthy attempt to draw a strict line of demarcation between artisan
      production and the other forms of small industry is the analysis of the
      returns of the Perm handicraft census of

1894–95.[4]

 The number of local village artisans was
      estimated at approximately one per cent of the peasant population, and (as
      might have been expected) the largest percentage of artisans was found in
      the uyezds where industry was least developed. As compared with the small
      commodity-producers, the artisans are more closely connected with the
      land: 80.6 per 100 artisans engage in agriculture (among the other
      “handicraftsmen” the percentage is lower). The employment of
      wage-labour is met with among artisans too, but is less developed among
      industrialists of this type than among the others. The size of
      establishments (taking the number of workers) is also smaller among the
      artisans. The average earnings of the artisan-cultivator are estimated at
      43.9 rubles per year, and of the non-cultivator at 102.9 rubles.

    
      We confine ourselves to these brief remarks, since a detailed examination
      of artisan production does not enter into our task. In this form of
      industry commodity production does not yet exist; here only commodity
      circulation makes its appearance, in the case where the artisan receives
      payment in money, or sells the share of the product he has received for
      work done and buys himself raw materials and instruments of
      production. The product of the artisan’s

 

      labour does not appear in the market, hardly ever leaving the sphere of
      peasant natural

economy.[5]

 It is natural, therefore, that artisan production
      is characterised by the same routine, fragmentation and narrowness as
      small patriarchal agriculture. The only element of development native to
      this form of industry is the migration of artisans to other areas in
      search of employment. Such migration was fairly widely developed,
      particularly in the old days, in our rural districts; usually it led to
      the organisation of independent artisan establishments in the areas of
      attraction.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Kundenproduktion. Cf. Karl Blucher, Die Entstehung der
Volkswirtschaft, Tubingen, 1893. (Work done to order. Cf. Karl
Blucher, The Rise of the National

Economy.—Ed.)[6]—Lenin

[2]
      It would be impossible to cite quotations in support of this; innumerable
      references to artisan production are scattered throughout all
      investigations of handicraft industry, although according to the most
      accepted view, artisans do not come within the category known as
      handicraftsmen. We shall have more than one occasion to see how hopelessly
      indefinite is the term “handicraft.”—Lenin

[3]
      The chaotic condition of these statistics is illustrated particularly
      vividly by the fact that no criteria have yet been decided on for
      distinguishing handicraft from factory establishments. In the 60s, for
      example, village dyeing sheds of a purely handicraft type were classified
      with the latter (The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, Vol. I,
      pp. 172-176), and in 1890, peasant fulling mills were mixed up with
      woollen factories (Orlov’s Directory of Factories and
      Works, 3rd ed., p. 21), etc. Nor is the latest List of
      Factories (St. Petersburg, 1897) free from this confusion. For
      examples, see our Studies, pp. 270-271. [See also present
      edition, Vol, 4, “On the Question of Our Factory
      Statistics.”Ed.]—Lenin

[4]
      We have devoted a special article to this census in our Studies,
      pp. 113-199. (See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of
      1894-95 in Perm Gubernia and General Problems of “Handicraft”
      Industry.—Ed.) All the facts cited in the text
      concerning the Perm “handicraftsmen” are taken from that
      article.—Lenin

[5]
      The closeness of artisan production to the natural economy of the peasants
      sometimes leads to attempts on their part to organise such production for
      the whole village, the peasants providing the artisan with his keep, he
      undertaking to work for all the inhabitants of the village
      concerned. Nowadays this system of industry is to be met with only by way
      of exception, or in the most remote border regions (for example, the
      blacksmith’s trade is organised on these lines in some of the
      villages in Transcaucasia. See Reports and Investigations of
      Handicraft Industry in Russia, Vol. II, p. 321).—Lenin
 


[6]
      Lenin gives an appreciation of the research done by B\"ucher, and of the
      latter’s classification of the stages and forms of industrial
      development, in Chapter VII of The Development of Capitalism in
      Russia, in his footnote on page 550. The most important part of
      Blucher’s work, that devoted to the origin of the national economy,
      was translated into Russian by Lenin apparently when he was in exile, in
      the village of Shushenskoye. Lenin’s translation has not been
      published.  [p.332]
    

 
  


|

II. Small Commodity-Producers In Industry. The Craft Spirit In The Small Industries

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Small Commodity-Producers in Industry. The Craft Spirit in the Small Industries




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: II. Small Commodity-Producers In Industry. The Craft Spirit In The Small Industries








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      II. Small Commodity-Producers In Industry.  The Craft Spirit In
      The Small Industries
    

      We have seen that the artisan appears on the market, although not with the
      wares he produces. Naturally, once he comes into contact with the market,
      he begins in time to produce for the market, i.e., becomes a commodity
      producer. This transition takes place gradually, at first as an
      experiment: goods are sold which are left on his hands by chance, or are
      produced in his spare time. The gradualness of the transition is
      heightened by the fact that the market for wares is at first extremely
      restricted, so that the distance between the producer and the consumer
      increases very slightly, and the product passes as hitherto directly from
      the producer to the consumer, its sale sometimes being preceded by its
      exchange for agricultural

produce.[1]

 The further

 

      development of commodity production is expressed in the expansion of
      commerce in the appearance of specialist merchants, buyers-up; the market
      for wares is not the small village bazaar or the district

fair,[2]

 but the whole region,
      then the whole country, and sometimes even other countries. The production
      of industrial wares in the shape of commodities is the first step to the
      separation of industry from agriculture, and to mutual exchange between
      them. Mr. N.-on, with his characteristically stereotyped and abstract way
      of understanding things, limits himself to declaring that the
      “separation of industry from agriculture” is a quality of
      “capitalism” in general, without taking the trouble to examine
      either the different forms of this separation or the different stages of
      capitalism. It is important to note, therefore, that commodity production
      on the smallest scale in the peasant industries already begins to separate
      industry from agriculture, although at that stage of development the
      industrialist does not, in the majority of cases, separate from the
      agriculturist. Later on we shall show how the more developed stages of
      capitalism lead to the separation of industrial from agricultural
      enterprises, to the separation of industrial workers from agriculturists.

    
      In the rudimentary forms of commodity production, competition among the
      “handicraftsmen” is still very slight, but as the market
      expands and embraces wide areas, this competition grows steadily stronger
      and disturbs the small industrialist’s patriarchal prosperity, the
      basis of which is his virtually monopolist position. The small
      commodity-producer feels that his interests, as opposed to the interests
      of the rest of society, demand the preservation of this monopolist
      position, and he therefore fears competition. He exerts every
      effort, individually and with others, to check competition, “not to
      let” rivals into his district, and to consolidate his assured
      position as a small master possessing a

 

      definite circle of customers. This fear of competition so strikingly
      reveals the true social nature of the small commodity-producer that we
      think it necessary to examine the relative facts in greater detail. In the
      first place, let us quote an example relative to handicraft. The Kaluga
      sheepskin dressers go off to other gubernias to treat sheepskins; this
      industry has declined since the abolition of serfdom; the landlords, when
      they released serfs for “sheepskinning,” in return for a
      sizable tribute, took great care that the sheepskinners knew their
      “definite places” and did not permit other dressers to invade
      their districts. Organised on these lines the industry was so profitable
      that “places” were transferred for as much as 500 and 1,000
      rubles, and if an artisan came to a district other than his own, it
      sometimes led to sanguinary clashes. The abolition of serfdom undermined
      this medieval prosperity: “the convenience of railway travel in this
      case also aids

competition.”[3]

 One of the phenomena of the same type observed in
      a number of industries and bearing fully the character of a general rule,
      is the desire of the small industrialists to keep technical inventions and
      improvements secret, to conceal profitable occupations from others, in
      order to stave off “fatal competition.” Those who establish a
      new industry or introduce some improvement in an old one, do their utmost
      to conceal these profitable occupations from their fellow-villagers and
      resort to all sorts of devices for this purpose (e.g., as a make-believe
      they keep the old arrangements in the establishment), let no one enter
      their workshops, work in garrets and say nothing about their work even to
      their own

children.[4]

 The slow development of the

 

      brush-making industry in Moscow Gubernia “is usually attributed to
      the present producers’ objection to having new competitors. It is
      said that they do all they can to conceal their work from strangers, and
      so only one producer has apprentices from

outside.”[5]

 Concerning the village
      of Bezvodnoye, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, famous for its metalware
      industry, we read the following: “It is remarkable that to this
      day” (the beginning of the 80s; the industry has existed since the
      beginning of the 50s) “the inhabitants of Bezvodnoye carefully
      conceal their craft from the neighbouring peasants. They have made more
      than one attempt to induce the volost administration to issue an
      instruction making it a punishable offence to carry the craft to another
      village; though they have failed to get this formality adopted, each of
      them seems to be morally bound by such an instruction, in virtue of which
      they refrain from giving their daughters in marriage to inhabitants of
      neighbouring villages, and as far as possible avoid taking girls in
      marriage from those

villages.”[6]

      The Narodnik economists have not only tried to obscure the fact that the
      bulk of the small peasant industrialists belong to the category of
      commodity-producers, but have even created quite a legend about some
      profound antagonism allegedly existing between the economic organisation
      of the small peasant industries and large-scale industry. The unsoundness
      of this view is also evident, by the way, from the above-quoted data. If
      the big industrialist stops at nothing to ensure himself a monopoly, the
      peasant engaging in “handicrafts” is in this respect his twin
      brother; the petty bourgeois endeavours with his petty resources to uphold
      substantially the same class interests the big manufacturer seeks to
      protect when he clamours for protection, bonuses, privileges,

      etc.[7]


 

Notes
 

[1]
      E.g., the exchange of earthenware utensils for grain, etc. When grain was
      cheap the equivalent of a pot was sometimes considered to be the amount of
      grain the pot would hold. Cf. Reports and Investigations, I,
      340.—Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, V,
      140.—Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, I, 61.—Lenin

[2]
      An investigation of one of these country fairs showed that 31% of the
      total turnover (about 15,000 rubles out of 50,000 rubles) was accounted
      for by “handicraft” goods. See Transactions of the
      Handicraft Commission, I, 38. How restricted the market is at first
      for the small commodity-producers is seen, for example, from the fact that
      the Poltava boot-makers sell their wares within a radius of some 60 vorsts
      from their village, Reports and Investigations, I, 287.—Lenin

[3]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, I, 35-36.—Lenin

[4]
      See Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, I, 81. V, 460; IX,
      25-26.—Industries of Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. 1,
      6-7; 253; Vol. VI, Pt. 2, 142; Vol. VII, Pt. 1, Sec. 2 about the founder
      of the “printing industry.”Industries of Vladimir
Gubernia, I, 145, 149.—Reports and Investigations,
      1, 89.—Grigoryev: Handicraft Lock- and Cutlery-Making in
Pavlow District (Supplement to Volga publication, Moscow,
      1881), p. 39.—Mr V. V. cited some of these facts in his Essay
on Handicraft Industry (St. Petersburg, 1886), p. 192 and foll.;
      the only conclusion he draws from them is that the handicraftsmen are
      not afraid of innovations; it never enters his head that these facts
      characterise the class position and the class interests of the small
      commodity-producers in contemporary society.—Lenin

[5]
      Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VI, 2, 193.—Lenin

[6]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX, 2404.—Lenin

[7]
      Sensing that competition will be fatal to him, the petty bourgeois strives
      to stave it off, just as his ideologist, the Narodnik, senses that
      capitalism is fatal to the “foundations” so dear to his heart,
      and for that reason strives to “avert,” to prevent, to stave
      off, etc., etc.—Lenin
 

 
  

I. Domestic Industry And Handicrafts

|

III. The Growth of Small Industries After the Reform. Two Forces of This Process and its Significance

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Growth of Small Industries after the Reform. Two Forms of This Process and Its Significance.




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: III. The Growth of Small Industries After the Reform. Two Forces of This Process and its Significance








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      III. The Growth of Small Industries After the Reform. Two Forces of
      This Process and its Significance
    

      From the foregoing there also emerge the following features of small
      production that merit attention. The appearance of a new industry
      signifies, as we have already observed, a process of growing social
      division of labour. Hence, such a process must necessarily take place in
      every capitalist society, to the extent that a peasantry and semi-natural
      agriculture still remain to one degree or other, and to the extent that
      diverse ancient institutions and traditions (due to bad means of
      communication, etc.) prevent large-scale machine industry from directly
      replacing domestic industry. Every step in the development of commodity
      economy inevitably leads to the peasantry producing an ever-increasing
      number of industrialists from their ranks; this process turns up new soil,
      as it were, prepares new regions in the most backward parts of the
      country, or new spheres in the most backward branches of industry, for
      subsequent seizure by capitalism. The very same growth of capitalism
      manifests itself in other parts of the country, or in other branches of
      industry, in an entirely different way; not in an increase but in a
      decrease in the number of small workshops and of home workers absorbed by
      the factory. It is clear that a study of the development of capitalism in
      the industry of a given country requires that the strictest distinction be
      made between these processes; to mix them up is to lead to an utter
      confusion of

      concepts.[1]




      In post-Reform Russia the growth of small industries, expressing the first
      steps in the development of capitalism, has manifested, and manifests,
      itself in two ways: firstly, in the migration of small industrialists and
      handicraftsmen from the central, long-settled and economically most
      advanced gubernias, to the outer regions; secondly, in the formation of
      new small industries and the spread of previously existing industries
      among the local population.

    
      The first of these processes is one of the manifestations of the
      colonisation of the border regions to which we have referred (Chapter IV,
      § II). The peasant industrialist in the Nizhni-Novgorod, Vladimir, Tver,
      Kaluga and other gubernias, sensing the increased competition accompanying
      the growth of the population, and the growth of capitalist manufacture and
      of the factory that constitute a menace to small production, leaves for
      the South, where “artisans” are still few, earnings high and
      the living cost low. In the new locality a small establishment was set up
      which laid the foundations for a new peasant industry that spread later in
      the village concerned and in its environs. The central districts of the
      country, possessing an industrial culture of long standing, thus helped
      the development of the same culture in new parts of the country, where
      settlement was beginning. Capitalist relations (which, as we shall see
      below, are also characteristic of the small peasant industries) were thus
      carried to the entire

country.[2]

      Let us pass to the facts that express the second of the above-mentioned
      processes. We shall first say that although

 

      we note the growth of small peasant establishments and industries, we do
      not as yet deal with their economic organisation: from what follows it
      will be evident that these industries either lead to the formation of
      capitalist simple co-operation and merchant’s capital or constitute
      a component part of capitalist manufacture.

    
      The fur industry in Arzamas Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, began in the
      town of Arzamas and then gradually spread to the surrounding villages,
      embracing an ever larger area. At first there were few furriers in the
      villages and they employed numerous workers; labour was cheap, since
      people hired themselves out in order to learn the trade. After learning it
      they left and opened small establishments of their own, thus preparing a
      wider field for the domination of capital, which now controls a large
      section of the

industrialists.[3]

 Let us note in general that this abundance of
      wage-workers in the first establishments of a rising industry and the
      subsequent transformation of these wage-workers into small masters is a
      very widespread phenomenon, bearing the character of a general

rule.[4]

 Obviously, It would be
      a profound error to deduce from this that “in spite of various
      historical considerations . . . it is not big establishments that absorb
      small ones, but small ones that grow out of big

ones.”[5]

 The large size of the
      first establishments expresses no concentration of the industry; it is
      explained by the solitary character of these establishments and by the
      eagerness of local peasants to learn a profitable trade in them. As to the
      process of the spread of peasant industries from their old centres to the
      surrounding villages, it is observed in many cases. For example, the
      post-Reform period saw the development (as regards the number of villages
      involved in industry, the number of industrialists, and the total output)
      of the following exceptionally important

 

      industries: the lock and cutlery industry of Pavlovo, tanning and
      boot-making in the village of Kimry, the knitting of woollen slippers in
      the town of Arzamas and in its

environs,[15] the metalware industry of the village of
      Burmakino, the cap-making industry of the village and of the district of
      Molvitino, the glass, hat and lace industries of Moscow Gubernia, the
      jewellery industry of Krasnoselskoye District,

etc.[6]

 The author of an article on handicraft
      industries in seven volosts of Tula Uyezd notes as a general phenomenon
      “an increase in the number of artisans since the peasant
      Reform,” “the appearance of artisans and handicraftsmen in
      places where there were none in pre-Reform

times.”[7]

 A similar view is
      expressed by Moscow

statisticians.[8]

 We can support this view with statistics regarding
      the date of origin of 523 handicraft establishments in 10 industries of
      Moscow

Gubernia.[9]








      Similarly, the Perm handicraft census revealed (according to data showing
      the time of origin of 8,884 small artisan and handicraft establishments)
      that the post-Reform period is characterised by a particularly rapid
      growth of small industries. It will be interesting to take a closer glance
      at this process of the rise of new industries. The production of woollen
      and semi-silk fabrics in Vladimir Gubernia began recently, in 1861. At
      first this was a peasant outside occupation, but later
      “subcontractors” made their appearance in the villages, who
      distributed yarn. One of the first “factory owners” at one
      time traded in groats, buying them up in the Tambov and Saratov
      “steppes.” With the building of railways, grain prices were
      levelled out, the grain trade became concentrated in the hands of
      millionaires, and so our merchant decided to invest his capital in an
      industrial weaving enterprise; he went to work in a factory, learnt the
      business and became a

“subcontractor.”[10]

 Thus, the formation of a new
      “industry” in this locality was due to the fact that the
      general economic development of the country was forcing capital out of
      trade and directing it towards

industry.[11]

 The investigator of the industry we have taken
      as an example points out that the case he has described is by no means an
      isolated one: the peasants who earned their living by outside employments
      “were pioneers in all sorts of industries, carried their technical
      knowledge to their native villages, got new labour forces to follow their
      example and migrate, and fired the imagination of the rich muzhiks with
      stories of the fabulous profits which the industry brought the workroom
      owner and the subcontractor. The rich muzhik, who used to store his money
      away in a chest, or traded in grain, paid heed to these stories and put
      his money into industrial undertakings” (ibid.). The boot
      and felt industries in Alexandrov Uyezd, Vladimir Gubernia, arose in some
      places in the following way: the owners of calico

 

      workrooms or of small yarn-distributing shops, seeing that handweaving was
      declining, opened workshops of another kind, sometimes hiring craftsmen so
      as to get to know the trade and to teach their

children.[12]

 To the extent that
      large-scale industry forces small capital out of the branch of production,
      this capital flows into others and stimulates their development in the
      same direction.

    
      The general conditions of the post-Reform period which called forth the
      development of small industries in the rural districts are very vividly
      described by investigators of Moscow industries. “On the one hand,
      the conditions of peasant life have greatly deteriorated during this
      period,” we read in a description of the lace industry, “but
      on the other, the requirements of the population, of that part which lives
      under more favourable conditions, have considerably

increased.[13]

 And the author,
      using the data of the region he has taken, notes an increase in the number
      of those owning no horses and raising no crops, side by side with an
      increase in the number of peasants owning many horses and in the total
      number of cattle belonging to peasants. Thus, on the one hand, there was
      an increase in the number of persons in need of “outside
      earnings” and in search of industrial work, while on the other, a
      minority of prosperous families grew rich, accumulated
      “savings,” and were “able to hire a worker or two, or
      give out work to poor peasants to be done at home.” “Of
      course,” the author explains, “we are not dealing here with
      cases where individuals who are known as kulaks, or blood-suckers, develop
      from among such families; we are merely examining most ordinary phenomena
      among the peasant population.”

    
      So then, local investigators point to a connection between the
      differentiation of the peasantry and the growth of small peasant
      industries. And that is quite natural. From the data given in Chapter II
      it follows that the differentiation of the agricultural peasantry had
      necessarily to be supplemented by a growth of small peasant industries. As
      natural economy declined, one form of raw-material processing after
      another turned into separate branches of industry; the formation of

 

      a peasant bourgeoisie and of a rural proletariat increased the demand for
      the products of the small peasant industries, while at the same time
      supplying free hands for these industries and free

money.[14]

 

Notes
 

[1]
      Here is an interesting example of how these two different processes occur
      in one and the same gubernia, at one and the same time and in one and the
      same industry. The spinning-wheel industry (in Vyatka Gubernia) is
      ancillary to the domestic production of fabrics. The development of this
      industry marks the rise of commodity production, which embraces the making
      of one of the instruments for the production of fabrics. Well, we see that
      in the remote parts of the gubernia, in the north, the spinning wheel is
      almost unknown (Material for a Description of the Industries of Vyatka
      Gubernia, II, 27) and there “the industry might newly
      emerge,” i.e., might make the first breach in the patriarchal
      natural economy of the peasants. Meanwhile, in other parts of the gubernia
      this industry is already declining, and the investigators believe that the
      probable cause of the decline is “the increasingly widespread use
      among the peasantry

 

of factory-made cotton fabrics” (p 26). Here,
      consequently, the growth of commodity production and of capitalism is
      manifested in the elimination of petty industry by the factory.—Lenin

[2]
      See, for example, S. A. Korolenko, loc. cit., on the
      movement of industrial workers to the outer regions, where part of them
      settle. Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. I (on the
      preponderance in Stavropol Gubernia of industrialists from the central
      gubernias), Vol. III, pp. 33-34 (the migration of boot-makers from
      Viyezdnaya, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, to the Lower-Volga towns); Vol. IX
      (tanners from the village of Bogorodskoye in the same gubernia established
      tanneries all over Russia). Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, IV,
      136 (Vladimir potters carried their trade into Astrakhan
      Gubernia). Cf. Reports and Investigations, Vol. I, pp. 125, 210;
      Vol. II, pp. 160-165, 168, 222 for general remarks on the preponderance
      “all over the South” of industrialists from the Great-Russian
      gubernias.—Lenin

[3]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, III.—Lenin

[4]
      For example, the same thing has been noted in the dyeing industry of
      Moscow Gubernia (Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VI, I, 73-99), in
      the hat (ibid., VI, Pt. I), in the fur (ibid., VII,
      Pt. I, Sec. 2), in the Pavlovo lock and cutlery industries (Grigoryev,
      loc. cit., 37-38), and others.—Lenin

[5]
      Mr. V. V. hastened to draw this conclusion from a fact of this kind in his
      Destiny of Capitalism, 78-79.—Lenin

[6]
      A. Smirnov: Pavlovo and Vorsma, Moscow, 1864.—N. Labzin:
      An Investigation of the Cutlery Industry, etc.,
      St. Petersburg, 1870.—Grigoryev,
      loc. cit.—N. Annensky, Report,
      etc., in No. 1 of Nizhegorodsky Vestnik Parokhodstva i
      Promyshlennosti [The Nizhni-Novgorod Steam-Shipping and
      Industrial Journal ] for 1891.—Material of Zemstvo
      statistics for Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod,
      1892.—A. N. Potresov, Report in the St. Petersburg Branch of the
      Loan and Savings Society Committee in 1895.—Statistical
      Chronicle of the Russian Empire, II, Vol. 3, St. Petersburg,
      1872.—Transactions of the Handicraft Commission,
      VIII.—Reports and Investigations, I,
      III.—Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, VI,
      XIII.—Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VI, Pt. I, p. 111,
      ibid., 177; VII, Pt II, p. 8.—Historico-Statistical
      Survey of Russian Industry, II, Col. VI, Industry
      1.—Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No. 42. Cf. also Industries
      of Vladimir Gubernia, III 18-19 and others.—Lenin

[7]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX, 2303-2304.—Lenin

[8]
Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VII, Pt. I, Sec. 2, 196.—Lenin

[9]
      The data on the brush, pin, hook, hat, starch, boot, spectacle frame,
      harness, fringe and furniture industries have been selected from the
      handicraft house-to-house census material quoted

 

in Industries of
      Moscow Gubernia and in Mr. Isayev’s book of the same title.—Lenin

[10]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 242-243.—Lenin

[11]
      In his researches into the historical destiny of the Russian factory,
      M. I. T.-Baranovsky showed that merchant’s capital was a necessary
      historical condition for the formation of large-scale industry. See his
      The Factory, etc., St. Petersburg, 1898.—Lenin

[12]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, II, 25, 270.—Lenin

[13]
Industries of Moscow Gubernia, Vol. II, Pt. II, p. 8 and foll.—Lenin

[14]
      The fundamental theoretical error made by Mr. N.-on in his arguments about
      the “capitalisation of industries” is that he ignores the
      initial steps of commodity production and capitalism in its consecutive
      stages. Mr. N.-on leaps right over from “people’s
      production” to “capitalism,” and then is surprised, with
      amusing naïvety, to find that he has got a capitalism that is without
      basis that is artificial, etc.—Lenin
 


[15]
        In the middle of the 19th century, the knitting of slippers with designs
      in coloured wools was widespread in Arzamas and its outskirts. In the
      1860s ten thousand and more pairs of knitted

 

footwear were made annually
      in the town, the Nikolsky Convent and the village of Viyezdnaya
      Sloboda. The wares were sold at the Nizhni-Novgorod fair, and from there
      were dispatched to Siberia, the Caucasus and other parts of Russia.
      [p. 341]
    

 
  

II. Small Commodity-Producers In Industry. The Craft Spirit In The Small Industries

|

IV. The Differentiation Of The Small Commodity-Producers. Data On House-To-House Censuses Of Handicraftsmen In Moscow Gubernia

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Differentiation of the Small Commodity-Producers. Data on House-to-House Censuses of Handicraftsmen in Moscow Gubernia




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: IV. The Differentiation Of The Small Commodity-Producers. Data On House-To-House Censuses Of Handicraftsmen In Moscow Gubernia








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      IV. The Differentiation Of The Small Commodity-Producers. Data
      On House-To-House Censuses Of Handicraftsmen In Moscow Gubernia
    

      Let us now examine the social and economic relations that develop among
      the small commodity-producers in industry. The task of defining the
      character of these relations is similar to the one outlined above, in
      Chapter II, in relation to the small farmers. Instead of the scale of
      farming, we must now take as our basis the size of the industrial
      establishments; we must classify the small industrialists according to the
      size of their output, ascertain the part wage-labour plays in each group,
      the conditions of technique,

etc.[1]

 The handicraft house-to-house censuses that we
      need for such an analysis are available for Moscow

      Gubernia.[2]

 For

      a number of industries the investigators quote precise statistics on
      output, and sometimes also on the farms of each separate craftsman (date
      of origin of establishment, number of workers, family and hired, total
      annual output, number of horses owned by craftsmen, method of cultivating
      the soil, etc.). The investigators provide no classified tables, however,
      and we have therefore been obliged to compile them ourselves, dividing the
      craftsmen in each industry into grades (I, bottom; II, middle and III,
      top) according to the number of workers (family and hired) per
      establishment, and sometimes according to the volume of output, technical
      organisation, etc. In general, the criteria according to which the
      craftsmen have been divided into grades are based on all the data given in
      the description of the industry; but in different industries we have found
      it necessary to take different criteria for dividing the craftsmen into
      grades. For example, in very small industries we have placed in the bottom
      grade establishments with 1 worker, in the middle grade those with 2, and
      in the top grade those with 3 and more; whereas in the bigger industries
      we have placed in the bottom grade establishments with 1 to 5 workers, in
      the middle grade those with 6 to 10, etc. Had we not employed different
      methods of classification we could not have presented for each industry
      data concerning establishments of different size. The table drawn up on
      these lines is given in the Appendix (see Appendix I); it shows the
      criteria according to which the craftsmen in each industry are divided up
      into grades, gives for each grade in each industry absolute figures of the
      number of establishments, workers (family and hired combined), aggregate
      output, establishments employing wage-workers, number of wage-workers. To
      describe the farms of the handicraftsmen we have calculated the average
      number of horses per peasant household in each grade and the percentage of
      craftsmen who cultivate their land with the aid of “a
      labourer” (i.e.,

 

      resort to the hire of rural workers). The table covers a total of 37
      industries, with 2,278 establishments and 11,833 employed and an aggregate
      output valued at over 5 million rubles; but if we subtract the 4
      industries not included in the general list because of incompleteness of
      data, or because of their exceptional

character,[3]

 there is a total of 33 industries, 2,085
      establishments, 9,427 workers and an aggregate output of 3,466,000 rubles,
      or, with corrections (in the case of 2 industries), about 3 3/4 million
      rubles.

    
      Since there is no need to examine the data for all the 33 industries, and
      as it would be too arduous a task, we have divided these industries into
      four categories: 1) 9 industries with an average of 1.6 to 2.5 workers
      (family and hired combined) per establishment; 2) 9 industries with an
      average of 2.7 to 4.4 workers; 3) 10 industries with an average of 5.1 to
      8.4 workers; and 4) 5 industries with an average of 11.5 to 17.8
      workers. Thus, in each category we have combined industries that are
      fairly similar as regards the number of workers per establishment, and in
      our further exposition we shall limit ourselves to the data for these four
      categories of industries. We give these data in extenso. (See
      Table on p. 347.)
    

      This table combines those principal data on the relations between the top
      and bottom grades of handicrafts men that will serve us for our subsequent
      conclusions. We can illustrate the summarised data for all four categories
      with a chart drawn up in exactly the same way as the one with which, in
      Chapter II, we illustrated the differentiation of the agricultural
      peasantry. We ascertain what percentage each grade constitutes of the
      total number of establishments, of the total number of family workers, of
      the total number of establishments with wage-workers, of the total number
      of workers (family and wage combined), of the aggregate output and of the
      total number of wage-workers, and we indicate these percentages (in the
      manner described in Chapter II) on the chart (see chart on p. 349).
    







      Let us now examine the conclusions to be drawn from these data.
    

      We begin with the role of wage-labour. In the 33 industries wage-labour
      predominates over family labour: 51% of the workers are hired; for the
      “handicraftsmen” of Moscow Gubernia this percentage is even
      lower than the actual one. We have computed the data for 54 industries of
      Moscow Gubernia for which exact figures as to wage-workers employed are
      available, and got the figure of 17,566 wage-workers out of a total of
      29,446 workers, i.e., 59.65%. For Perm Gubernia the percentage of
      wage-workers among all handicraftsmen and artisans combined was
      established as 24.5%, and among commodity-producers alone, as from 29.4 to
      31.2%. But these gross figures, as we shall see below, embrace not only
      small commodity-producers, but also capitalist manufacture. Far more
      interesting, therefore, is the conclusion that the role of wage-labour
      rises parallel to the increase in the size of establishments: this is
      observed both in comparing one category with another and in comparing the
      different grades in the same category. The larger the establishments, the
      higher the percentage of those employing wage-workers and the higher the
      percentage of wage-workers. The Narodnik economists usually limit
      themselves to declaring that among the “handicraftsmen” small
      establishments with exclusively family workers prevail, and in support of
      this often cite “average” figures. As is evident from the data
      given, these “averages” are unsuitable for characterising the
      phenomenon in this regard, and the numerical preponderance of small
      establishments with family workers does not in the least eliminate the
      basic fact that the tendency of small commodity production is towards
      the ever-growing employment of wage-labour, towards the formation
      of capitalist workshops. Moreover, the data cited also refute
      another, no less widespread, Narodnik assertion, namely, that wage-labour
      in “handicraft” production really serves to
      “supplement” family labour, that it is resorted to not for the
      purpose of profit-making,

etc.[4]

 Actually, however, it turns out that among the
      small












      industrialists—just as among the small agriculturists—the
      growing employment of wage-labour runs parallel to the increase in the
      number of family workers. In the majority of industries we see that
      the employment of wage-labour increases as we pass from the bottom grade
      to the top, notwithstanding the fact that the number of family
      workers per establishment also increases. The employment of wage-labour
      does not smooth out differences in the size of the
      “handicraftsmen’s” families, but accentuates them. The
      chart very clearly shows this common feature of the small industries: the
      top grade employs the bulk of the wage-workers, despite the fact that it
      is best provided with family workers. “Family co-operation
      ” is thus the basis of capitalist

co-operation.[5]

 It goes without
      saying, of course, that this “law” applies only to the
      smallest commodity-producers, only to the rudiments of capitalism; this
      law proves that the tendency of the peasantry is to turn into petty
      bourgeois. As soon as workshops with a fairly large number of wage-workers
      arise, the significance of “family co-operation” must
      inevitably decline. And we see, indeed, from our data that this law does
      not apply to the biggest grades of the top categories. When the
      “handicraftsman” turns into a real capitalist employing from
      15 to 30 wage-workers, the part played by family labour in his workshops
      declines and becomes quite insignificant (for example, in the top grade of
      the top category, family workers constitute only 7% of the total number of
      workers). In other words, to the extent that the “handicraft”
      industries are so small that “family co-operation”
      predominates in them, this family co-operation is the surest guarantee of
      the development of capitalist co-operation. Here, consequently, stand out
      in full relief the dialectics of commodity production, which transform
      “working with our own hands” into working with others’
      hands, into exploitation.

    
      Let us pass to the data on productivity of labour. The data on total
      output per worker in each grade show that with the increase in the
      size of the establishment labour productivity improves. This is to be
      observed in the overwhelming

 

      majority of the industries, and in all categories of industries without
      exception; the chart graphically illustrates this law, showing that the
      share of the top grade in total output is greater than is its share in the
      total number of workers; in the bottom grade the reverse is the case. The
      total output per worker in the establishments of the top grades is from 20
      to 40 per cent higher than that in the bottom grade establishments. It is
      true that the big establishments usually have a longer working period and
      sometimes handle more valuable material than do the small ones, but these
      two circumstances cannot eliminate the fact that labour productivity is
      considerably higher in the big workshops than in the small

ones.[6]

 Nor can it be
      otherwise. The big establishments have from 3 to 5 times as many workers
      (family and hired combined) as the small ones, and co-operation on a
      larger scale cannot but increase the productivity of labour. The big
      workshops are always better equipped technically, they have better
      implements, tools, accessories, machines, etc. For example, in the brush
      industry, a “properly organised workshop” must have as many as
      15 workers, and in hook-making 9 to 10 workers. In the toy industry the
      majority of handicraftsmen make shift with ordinary stoves for drying
      their goods; the bigger toy-makers have special drying ovens, and the
      biggest makers have special drying premises. In metal toy-making, 8 makers
      out of 16 have special workshops, divided as follows: I) 6 have none; II)
      5 have 3; and III) 5 have 5. A total of 142 mirror and picture-frame
      makers have 18 special workshops, the figures by grades being: I) 99 have
      3; II) 27 have 4; and III) 16 have 11. In the screen-plaiting industry
      screens are plaited by hand (in grade I), and woven mechanically (in
      grades II and III). In the tailoring industry the number of
      sewing-machines per owner according to grade is as follows: I) 1.3; II)
      2.1; and III) 3.4, etc., etc. In investigating the furniture industry,
      Mr. Isayev notes that the one-man business suffers the following
      disadvantages: 1) lack of a

 

      complete set of tools; 2) limited assortment of articles made, because
      there is no room in the craftsman’s hut for bulky articles; 3) much
      higher cost of materials when bought retail (30 to 35% higher); 4)
      necessity of selling wares cheaper, partly due to lack of confidence in
      the small “handicraftsman” and partly to his need of

      money.[7]

 It is well
      known that exactly the same sort of thing is to be observed not only in
      the furniture industry, but also in the vast majority of small peasant
      industries. Lastly, it must be added that the value of the goods produced
      per worker not only increases from the bottom to the top grade in the
      majority of industries, but also from the small to the big industries. In
      the first category of industries the average output per worker is 202
      rubles, in the second and third about 400 rubles, and in the fourth over
      500 rubles (the figure 381 should, for the reason stated above, be
      increased by about fifty per cent). This circumstance points to the
      connection between the rise in the price of raw materials and the ousting
      of the small establishments by the big ones. Every step in the development
      of capitalist society is inevitably accompanied by a rise in the price of
      such materials as timber, etc., and thus hastens the doom of the small
      establishments.

    
      From the foregoing it follows that the relatively big capitalist
      establishments also play a tremendous part in the small peasant
      industries. While constituting a small minority of the total number of
      establishments, they concentrate, however, quite a big share of the total
      number of workers, and a still bigger share of the total output. Thus, in
      33 industries of Moscow Gubernia, the top-grade establishments,
      constituting 15% of the total, account for 45% of the aggregate output;
      while the bottom-grade establishments, constituting 53% of the total,
      account for only 21% of the aggregate output. It goes without saying that
      the distribution of the net income from the industries must be far more
      uneven. The data of the Perm handicraft census of 1894-95 clearly
      illustrate this. Selecting the largest

 

      establishments in 7 industries we get the following picture of the
      relations between the small and big

      establishments.[8]






      An insignificant number of big establishments (less than 1/10 of the total
      number), which employ about 1/5 of the total number of workers, account
      for almost half the total output and nearly 2/5 of the total income
      (combining the workers’ wages and the employers’ incomes). The
      small proprietors obtain a net income considerably below the wages of the
      hired workers employed in the big establishments; elsewhere we have shown
      in detail that this phenomenon is no exception but is a general rule for
      small peasant

      industries.[9]



      Summing up the conclusions that follow from the data we have analysed, we
      must say that the economic system of the small peasant industries is
      typically petty bourgeois, the same as that which we have seen among the
      small farmers. The expansion, development and improvement of the small
      peasant industries cannot take place in the present social and economic
      atmosphere except by generating a minority of small capitalists on the one
      hand, and a majority of wage-workers, or of “independent
      craftsmen” who lead a harder and worse life than the wage-workers,
      on the other. We observe, consequently, in the smallest peasant industries
      the most pronounced rudiments of capitalism—of that very capitalism
      which various economists of the

Manilov[11] type depict as something divorced from
      “people’s production.” From the viewpoint of the home
      market theory the facts we have examined are also of no little
      importance. The development of small peasant industries leads to an
      expansion of the demand by the more prosperous industrialists for means of
      production and for labour-power, which is drawn from the ranks of the
      rural proletariat. The number of wage-workers employed by village artisans
      and small industrialists all over Russia should be quite impressive, if in
      the Perm Gubernia alone, for example, there are about

      6,500.[10]


 

Notes
 

[1]
      Describing “handicraft” industry in Chernigov Gubernia,
      Mr. Varzer notes “the variety of economic units” (on the one
      hand families with incomes from 500 to 800 rubles, and on the other,
      “almost paupers”) and makes the following observation:
      “Under such circumstances, the only way to present a full picture of
      the economic life of the craftsmen is to make a house-to-house inventory
      and to classify their establishments in a number of average types with all
      their accessories. Anything else will be either a fantasy of casual
      impressions or arm-chair exercises in arithmetical calculations based on a
      diversity of average norms. . . “ (Transactions of the
      Handicraft Commission, Vol. V, p. 354).—Lenin

[2]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vols. VI and
      VII. Industries of Moscow Gubernia, and A. Isayev’s
      Industries of Moscow Gubernia, Moscow, 1876-1877, 2 vols. For a
      small number of industries similar information is given in Industries of
      Vladimir Gubernia. It goes without saying that in the present
      chapter we confine ourselves to an examination of only those industries in
      which the small

 

commodity-producers work for the market and not for
      buyers-up,—at all events, in the overwhelming majority of
      cases. Work for buyers-up is a more complicated phenomenon, one that we
      shall examine separately later on. The house-to-house censuses of
      handicraftsmen who work for buyers-up are unsuitable for judging the
      relations existing among small commodity-producers.—Lenin

[3]
      On these grounds the pottery “industry,” in which 20
      establishments employ 1,817 wage-workers, has been excluded. It is
      characteristic of the confusion of terms prevailing among us that the
      Moscow statisticians included this industry, too, among the
      “handicraft” industries (see combined tables in Part III of
      Vol. VII, loc. cit.).—Lenin

[4]
      See, for example, Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia,
Vol. VI, Pt. 1, p. 21.—Lenin

[5]
      The same conclusion follows from the data regarding the Perm
      “handicraftsmen”, see our Studies, pp. 126-128. (See
      present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia.—Ed.)—Lenin

[6]
      For the starch-making industry, which is included in our tables, data are
      available on the duration of the working period in establishments of
      various sizes. It appears (as we have seen above) that even in an equal
      period the output per worker in a big establishment is higher than that in
      a small one.—Lenin

[7]
      The small producer tries to make up for these unfavourable conditions by
      working longer hours and with greater intensity (loc cit., p 38). Under
      commodity production, the small producer both in agriculture and in
      industry carries on only by cutting down his requirements.—Lenin

[8]
      See our Studies, p. l53 and foll. (see present edition, Vol. 2,
      The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia.—Ed.) where data are given for each industry
      separately. Let us note that all these data refer to handicraftsmen
      cultivators who work for the market.—Lenin

[9]
      From the data given in the text it can be seen that in the small peasant
      industries a tremendous, and even predominant, part is played by
      establishments with an output exceeding 1,000 rubles. Let us recall that
      in our official statistics establishments of this kind have always been,
      and still are, classed among “factories and works”
      [cf. Studies, pp. 267 and 270 (see present edition, Vol, 4,
      “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics.”Ed.) and
      Chapter VII, § II]. Thus, if we thought it permissible for an economist to
      use the current, traditional terminology beyond which our Narodniks have
      never gone, we would be entitled to establish the following
      “law”: among peasant “handicraft” establishments a
      predominant part is played by “factories and works,” not
      included in official statistics because of their unsatisfactory nature.—Lenin

[10]
      Let us add that in other gubernias, besides Moscow and Perm, the sources
      note quite analogous relations among the small commodity producers. See,
      for instance, Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, Vol. II,
      house-to-house censuses of shoemakers and fullers; Transactions of the
      Handicraft Commission, Vol II—on the wheelwrights of Medyn
      Uyezd; Vol. II—on the sheepskin dressers of the same uyezd;
      Vol. III—on the furriers of Arzamas Uyezd, Vol. IV—on the
      fullers of Semyonov Uyezd and on the tanners of Vasil Uyezd,
      etc. Cf. Nizhni-Novgorod Handbook, Vol. IV,
      p. 137,—A. S. Gatsisky’s general remarks about the small
      industries speak of the rise of big workshops. Cf, Annensky’s report
      on the Pavlovo handicraftsmen (mentioned above), on the classification of
      families according to weekly earnings, etc. etc. All these sources differ
      from the house-to-house census data we have examined only in their
      incompleteness and poverty. The essence of the matter, however, is
      identical everywhere.—Lenin
 


[11]
Manilov—a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls,
      typifying the weak willed, hollow dreamer and inert windbag.  [p. 355]
    

 
  

III. The Growth of Small Industries After the Reform. Two Forces of This Process and its Significance

|

V. Capitalist Simple Co-Operation

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Capitalist Simple Co-operation




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: V. Capitalist Simple Co-Operation








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      V. Capitalist Simple Co-Operation
    

      The establishment by small commodity-producers of relatively large
      workshops marks the transition to a higher form of industry. Out of
      scattered small production rises capitalist simple
      co-operation. “Capitalist production only then really begins
      . . . when each individual capital employs simultaneously a comparatively
      large number of labourers; when consequently the labour-process is carried
      on an extensive scale and yields, relatively, large quantities of
      products. A greater number of labourers working together, at the same
      time, in one place (or, if you will, in the same field of labour), in
      order to produce the same sort of commodity under the mastership of one
      capitalist, constitutes, both historically and logically, the
      starting-point of capitalist production. With regard to the mode of
      production itself, manufacture, in its strict meaning, is hardly to be
      distinguished, in its earliest stages, from the artisan trades of the
      guilds, otherwise than by the greater number of workmen simultaneously
      employed by one and the same individual capital. The workshop of the
      medieval master handicraftsman is simply enlarged” (Das
      Kapital,

      I2, 

      S. 329).[4]

      It is this starting-point of capitalism that is to be seen, consequently,
      in our small peasant (“handicraft”) industries. The different
      historical situation (absence or slight development of guild handicrafts)
      merely changes the way in which identical capitalist relations are made
      manifest. The difference between the capitalist workshop and the workshop
      of the small industrialist lies at first only in the number of workers
      simultaneously employed. That is why the first capitalist establishments,
      being numerically in the minority, are submerged, as it were, in the
      general mass of small establishments. However, the employment of a larger
      number of workers inevitably leads to consecutive changes in production
      itself, to the gradual transformation of production. Under primitive hand
      technique differences between the individual workers (in strength,
      dexterity, skill, etc.) are always very considerable; if only for this
      reason the position of the small industrialist is extremely precarious;
      his dependence upon market fluctuations

 

      assumes the most burdensome forms. Where, however, several workers are
      employed in an establishment, the individual differences between them are
      smoothed out in the workshop itself: “the collective working day of
      a large number of workmen simultaneously employed . . . gives one day of
      average social

labour,”[5] and as a consequence, the manufacture and sale of
      the products of the capitalist workshop acquire incomparably greater
      regularity and stability. It becomes possible to make fuller use of
      premises, warehouses, implements, instruments of labour, etc.; and this
      leads to a cheapening of production costs in the larger

workshops.[1]

 The organisation of
      production on a larger scale and the simultaneous employment of many
      workers require the accumulation of a fairly large capital, which is often
      formed, not in the sphere of production, but in the sphere of trade,
      etc. The size of this capital determines the form in which the proprietor
      himself takes part in the enterprise—whether he himself is a worker,
      if his capital is still very small, or whether he gives up working himself
      and specialises in commercial and entrepreneur functions. “One can
      establish a connection between the position of the workshop owner and the
      number of his workers”we read, for example, in a description of the
      furniture industry. “The employment of 2 or 3 workers provides the
      proprietor with such a small surplus that he has to work alongside of
      them. . . . The employment of 5 workers already gives the proprietor
      enough to enable him to give up manual labour in some measure, to

 

      take it easy somewhat, and to engage mainly in the last two business
      functions” (i.e., purchase of materials and sale of
      goods). “As soon as the number of wage-workers reaches 10 or exceeds
      this figure, the proprietor not only gives up manual labour but
      practically ceases to supervise his workers: he appoints a foreman for the
      purpose. . . . He now becomes a small capitalist, a ’born
      master’” (Isayev, Industries of Moscow Gubernia, I,
      52-53). The statistics we have cited graphically confirm this description,
      showing a decline in the number of family workers with the appearance of a
      considerable number of wage-workers.

    
      The general significance of capitalist simple co-operation in the
      development of capitalist forms of industry is described by the author of
      Capital as follows:

    “Historically, however, this form is developed in opposition
      to peasant agriculture and to the carrying on of independent handicrafts
      whether in guilds or not. . . . Just as the social productive power of
      labour that is developed by co-operation, appears to be the productive
      power of capital, so co-operation itself, contrasted with the process of
      production carried on by isolated independent labourers, or even by small
      employers, appears to be a specific form of the capitalist process of
      production. It is the first change experienced by the actual
      labour-process, when subjected to capital. . . . The simultaneous
      employment of a large number of wage-labourers, in one and the same
      process, which is a necessary condition of this change, also forms the
      starting-point of capitalist production. . . . If then, on the one hand,
      the capitalist mode of production presents itself to us historically, as a
      necessary condition to the transformation of the labour-process into a
      social process, so, on the other hand, this social form of the
      labour-process presents itself, as a method employed by capital for the
      more profitable exploitation of labour, by increasing that labour’s
      productiveness.

    
      “In the elementary form, under which we have hitherto viewed it,
      co-operation is a necessary concomitant of all production on a large
      scale, but it does not, in itself, represent a fixed form characteristic
      of a particular epoch in the development of the capitalist mode of
      production. At the most it appears to do so, and that only approximately,

 

      in the handicraft-like beginnings of manufacture. . .” (Das Kapital,
      I2,

344–345).[6]

      We shall see later how closely small “handicraft”
      establishments in Russia which employ wage-workers are connected with
      incomparably more highly developed and more widespread forms of
      capitalism. As for the role of these establishments in the small peasant
      industries, the statistics already given show that these establishments
      create fairly wide capitalist co-operation in place of the previous
      scattered production and considerably raise the productivity of labour.

    
      Our conclusion as to the tremendous role of capitalist co-operation in the
      small peasant industries and as to its progressive significance is in
      sharp contrast to the widespread Narodnik doctrine of the predominance of
      all sorts of manifestations of the “artel principle” in the
      small peasant industries. As a matter of fact, the reverse is the case;
      the distinguishing feature of small industry (and handicrafts) is the
      extremely scattered nature of the individual producers. In support of the
      contrary view Narodnik literature could advance nothing more than a
      collection of individual examples, the overwhelming majority of which do
      not apply to co-operation at all, but to temporary, miniature associations
      of masters, big and small, for the common purchase of raw materials, for
      the building of a common workshop, etc. Such artels do not in the least
      affect the predominant significance of capitalist

co-operation.[2]

 To obtain an exact
      idea of how widely the “artel principle” is actually applied
      it is not enough to cite examples taken at random here and

 

      there; it is necessary to take the data for some area which has been
      thoroughly investigated, and to examine the relative incidence and
      significance of the various forms of co-operation. Such, for example, are
      the data of the Perm “handicrafts” census of 1894-95; and we
      have shown elsewhere (Studies,

pp. 182-187[3])

what an amazing dispersion of small
      industrialists was revealed by the census, and what importance attaches to
      the very few big establishments. The conclusion we have drawn as to the
      role of capitalist co-operation is based not on isolated examples, but on
      the precise data of the house-to-house censuses, which embrace scores of
      the most diverse industries in different localities.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      For example, concerning the

metal-beaters[7] of Vladimir Gubernia, we read: “With the
      employment of a larger number of workers a considerable reduction in
      expenditure may be effected; this concerns expenditure on light, blocks,
      anvil-stone and casing” (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia,
      III, 188). In the copper-beating industry of Perm Gubernia a one-man
      establishment needs a complete set of tools (16 items); for two workers
      “a very small addition” is required. “For workshops
      employing 6 or 8 persons three or four sets of tools are
      required. . . . Only one lathe is kept even in a workshop employing 8
      men” (Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, X,
      2939). The fixed capital of a big workshop is estimated at 466 rubles, of
      a medium workshop at 294 rubles, and of a small one at 80 rubles; and the
      total output at 6,200 rubles, 3,655 rubles, and 871 rubles
      respectively. That is to say, in the small workshops the output is 11
      times the amount of the fixed capital, in the medium ones 12 times, and in
      the big ones 14 times.—Lenin

[2]
      We do not think it worth our while to support the statement made in the
      text with examples, a host of which may be found in Mr V. V.’s
      The Artel in Handicraft Industry (St. Petersburg,
      1895). Mr. Volgin has dealt with the true significance of the examples
      cited by Mr. V. V. (op. cit., p. 182 and foll.) and has
      shown the very negligible part played by the “artel principle”
      in our “handicraft” industry. Let us merely note the following
      assertion by Mr. V. V.: “. . . the amalgamation of several
      independent handicraftsmen into one production unit . . . is not
      imperatively dictated by competition, as is proved by the absence in the
      majority of industries of workshops of any size employing
      wage-workers” (93). To advance such a bald and sweeping thesis is,
      of course, much easier than to analyse the house-to-house census data
      available on this question.—Lenin

[3]
      See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
Gubernia.—Ed.
    
 


[4]
        Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 322.  [p.356]
    


[5]
        Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 323.  [p. 357]
    


[7]
Metal-beaters—workers who beat gold, silver, tin, copper
      and other metals into the foil or leaf formerly used for decorative
      purposes; icons and other church property were among the articles so
      decorated.  [p.357]
    


[6]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 334-335.  [p. 359]
    

 
  

IV. The Differentiation Of The Small Commodity-Producers. Data On House-To-House Censuses Of Handicraftsmen In Moscow Gubernia

|

VI. Merchant’s Capital in the Small Industries

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Merchant’s Capital in the Small Industries




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: VI. Merchant's Capital in the Small Industries








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      VI. Merchant’s Capital in the Small Industries
    

      As we know, the small peasant industries in many cases give rise to
      special buyers-up, who are particularly engaged in the commercial
      operations of marketing products and purchasing raw materials, and who
      usually in one way or another subject the small tradesmen to
      themselves. Let us see what connection this phenomenon has with the
      general system of small peasant industries and what its significance is.

    
      The principal economic operation of the buyer-up is to buy goods (finished
      products or raw materials) in order to resell them. In other words, the
      buyer-up is a representative of merchant’s capital. The
      starting-point of all capital—both industrial and
      merchant’s—is the accumulation of free money in the hands of
      individuals (by free money we mean that money which is not needed for
      personal consumption, etc.). How this property differentiation takes place
      in our rural districts has been shown in detail above by the data on the
      differentiation of the agricultural and the industrial peasantry. These
      data revealed one of the conditions giving rise to the appearance of the
      buyer-up, namely: the scattered nature, the isolation of the small
      producers, the existence of economic conflict and strife among them.

 

      Another condition relates to the character of the functions performed by
      merchant’s capital, i.e., to the marketing of wares and to the
      purchase of raw materials. Where the development of commodity production
      is slight, the small producer limits himself to disposing of his wares in
      the small local market, sometimes even to disposing of them directly to
      the consumer. This is the lowest stage of the development of commodity
      production, hardly to be distinguished from artisan production. As the
      market expands, this petty, scattered marketing (which fully conforms to
      petty, scattered production) becomes impossible. In the big
      market, selling must he on a big, on a mass scale. And so the petty
      character of production proves to be in irreconcilable contradiction with
      the need for big, wholesale marketing. Under the existing social and
      economic conditions, with the isolation of the small producers and their
      differentiation, this contradiction could only be resolved by the
      well-to-do minority taking charge of marketing, concentrating it in their
      hands. By buying-up goods (or raw materials) on a large scale, the
      buyers-up thus cheapened marketing costs and transformed marketing from a
      petty, casual and irregular operation into a large and regular one; and
      this purely economic advantage of large-scale marketing inevitably led to
      the small producer finding himself cut off from the market and defenceless
      in face of the power of merchant’s capital. Thus, under commodity
      economy, the small producer inevitably falls into dependence upon
      merchant’s capital by virtue of the purely economic superiority of
      large, mass-scale marketing over scattered, petty

marketing.[1]

 It goes without saying
      that actually the profits of the buyers-up are often far from limited to
      the difference between the returns of mass sales

 

      and those of petty sales, just as the profits of the industrial
      capitalists often consist of deductions from normal wages. Nevertheless,
      to explain the profits of the industrial capitalists we must assume that
      labour-power is sold at its real value. Similarly, to explain the role of
      the buyer-up we must assume that he buys and sells goods in accordance
      with the general laws of commodity exchange. Only these economic causes of
      the domination of merchant’s capital can provide the key to an
      understanding of the variety of forms which it assumes in real life, and
      among which we constantly meet (there can be no doubt of that) the
      plainest fraud. To proceed otherwise, as the Narodniks usually do, that
      is, to confine oneself to enumerating the various tricks of the
      “kulaks,” and on these grounds completely to brush aside the
      economic nature of the phenomenon would be to adopt the viewpoint of
      vulgar

economics.[2]

      To substantiate our thesis concerning a necessary causal relation between
      small production for the market and the domination of merchant’s
      capital, lot us deal in greater detail with one of the best descriptions
      of how the buyer-up appears and of the part he plays. We have in mind the
      investigation of the lace industry in Moscow Gubernia (Industries of
      Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. II). The “tradeswomen” came
      into being in the following way. In the 1820s, when this industry first
      developed, and later, when the number of lace-makers was still small, the
      principal buyers were the landlords, the “gentry”. The
      consumer was in the neighbourhood of the producer. As the industry spread,
      the peasants began to send their lace to Moscow “as chance
      offered,” for example, through comb-makers. The inconvenience of

 

      this primitive form of marketing very soon made itself felt: “how
      can a muzhik not engaged in this business go from house to house?”
      The sale of the lace was entrusted to one of the lace-makers, who was
      compensated for the time she lost. “She also brought back thread for
      the lace.” Thus the inconveniences of isolated marketing led to
      turning trade into a special function performed by one person who gathered
      the wares from many lace-makers. The patriarchal proximity of these women
      workers one to the other (relatives, neighbours, fellow-villagers, etc.)
      at first gave rise to attempts at the co-operative organisation of sales,
      to attempts at entrusting this function to one of the women workers. But
      money economy at once causes a breach in the age-old patriarchal
      relations, at once gives rise to the phenomena we noted above when
      examining the mass-scale data on the differentiation of the
      peasantry. Production for sale teaches that time is money. It becomes
      necessary to compensate the intermediary for her lost time and labour; she
      becomes accustomed to this occupation and begins to make it her
      profession. “Journeys of this kind, repeated several times, gave
      rise to the tradeswoman type” (loc. cit.,
      30). The woman who has been to Moscow several times establishes the
      permanent connections which are so necessary for proper
      marketing. “Thus the need and habit of living on earnings from
      commission operations develops.” In addition to commission earnings,
      the tradeswoman “does what she can to advance the price of
      materials, paper, thread”; she sells the lace above the set price
      and pockets the difference; the tradeswomen declare that the price
      received was less than the one agreed on: “take it or leave
      it,” they say. “The tradeswomen begin . . . to bring goods
      from the towns and make a considerable profit.” The commission agent
      thus becomes an independent trader who now begins to monopolise sales and
      to take advantage of her monopoly to subjugate the lace-makers
      completely. Usurious operations appear alongside commercial
      operations—the lending of money to the lace-makers, the taking of
      goods from them at reduced prices, etc. “The girls . . . pay 10
      kopeks per ruble as a commission for sales. . . . They know very well that
      the tradeswoman makes even more out of them by selling the lace at a
      higher price. But they simply do not knowhow to arrange things
      differently. When

 

      I suggested that they should take turns in going to Moscow, they replied
      that this would be worse, because they did not know where to sell the
      lace, whereas the tradeswoman already knew all the places. She sells the
      finished lace for them and brings back orders, materials, patterns, etc.;
      she always gives them money in advance, or on loan, and one can even sell
      her a piece of lace outright, should the need arise. Thus, on the one
      hand, the tradeswoman becomes a most needed, indispensable person; on the
      other, she gradually develops into a person who cruelly exploits the
      labour of others—a woman kulak” (32). To this it should be
      added that such types develop from among the small producers themselves:
      “However many enquiries we made, we found that all the tradeswomen
      had formerly been lace-makers themselves, and consequently, were familiar
      with the trade; they came from the ranks of these same lace-makers; they
      had had no capital to start with, and had only gradually begun to trade in
      calico and other goods, as they made money out of their commissions”

(31).[3]

 There can,
      therefore, be no doubt that under commodity economy, not only prosperous
      industrialists in general, but also, and particularly, representatives of
      merchant’s capital emerge from among the small

producers.[4]

 And once they have
      emerged, the elimination of small, scattered marketing by large-scale,
      wholesale marketing becomes

inevitable.[5]

 Here are a few examples of how marketing is
      organised by the bigger “handicraft” proprietors who are at
      the same time buyers-up. The marketing of abacuses by craftsmen of Moscow
      Gubernia (see the statistics

 

      relating to them in our table; Appendix I) is done mainly at fairs all
      over Russia. To do business oneself at a fair one must have, firstly, a
      considerable amount of capital, as only wholesale trade is conducted at
      the fairs; and, secondly, one must have an agent to buy up wares where
      they are made, and to send them on to the merchant. These requirements are
      met “by the one merchant-peasant,” who is also a
      “craftsman,” possesses a considerable amount of capital and
      engages in finishing the abacuses (i.e., fitting the frames and beads) and
      marketing them; his six sons are “engaged exclusively in
      commerce,” so that two persons have to be hired to cultivate the
      allotment. “It is not surprising,” observes the investigator,
      “that he is able to sell his wares . . . at all the fairs, whereas
      the smaller traders usually sell theirs at nearby markets”
      (Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VII, Pt. I, Sec. 2, p. 141). In
      this case the representative of merchant’s capital was still so
      little differentiated from the general mass of “muzhik
      cultivators” that he even continued to retain his allotment farm and
      his large patriarchal family. The spectacle-frame makers of Moscow
      Gubernia are entirely dependent upon the industrialists to whom they sell
      their wares. These buyers-up are at the same time “craftsmen”
      possessing their own workshops; they lend raw materials to the poor on
      condition that the finished articles are delivered to them, the
      “masters,” etc. The small industrialists made an attempt to
      sell their wares in Moscow themselves, but failed; it did not pay to sell
      goods in small quantities amounting to a matter of 10 or 15 rubles
      (ibid., 263). In the lace industry of Ryazan Gubernia the
      tradeswomen make profits amounting to 12 to 50% of the lace-makers’
      earnings. The “substantial” tradeswomen have established
      regular-connections with marketing centres and send goods by mail, which
      saves travelling expenses. How necessary wholesale marketing is can be
      seen from the fact that the traders consider that even sales amounting to
      150 and 200 rubles do not cover marketing expenses (Transactions of
      the Handicraft Commission, VII, 1184). The marketing of Belyov lace
      is organised as follows. In the town of Belyov there are three grades of
      tradeswomen: 1) The distributor, who hands out small orders, makes the
      round of the lace-makers herself and delivers the finished article to the

 

      bigger tradeswomen. 2) The subcontractor, who places orders herself, or
      buys up goods from the distributors and delivers them to the big cities,
      etc. 3) The big tradeswomen (2 or 3 “firms”), who do business
      with commission agents, to whom they send lace and from whom they receive
      big orders. It is “practically impossible” for the provincial
      trades women to sell their goods to the big shops: “the shops prefer
      to do business with the wholesale buyers-up who deliver the wares in big
      quantities . . . of the most diverse patterns”; the tradeswomen are
      obliged to sell to these “suppliers”; “it is from them
      that they learn all the requirements of the market; it is they who fix
      prices; in short, but for them, there is no way out”
      (Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, X,
      pp. 2823-2824). Numerous such examples could be given. But those given are
      quite sufficient to show how utterly impossible is small, scattered
      marketing where production is for big markets. In view of the scattered
      state of the small producers and of
      their complete

      differentiation[6]

      large-scale marketing can only be organised by large capital,
      which, by virtue of this, reduces the handicraftsmen to a position of
      utter helplessness and dependence. One can therefore judge how absurd are
      the current Narodnik theories which recommend helping the
      “handicraftsmen” by “organising marketing.” From
      the purely theoretical aspect such theories belong to the category of
      petty-bourgeois utopias, based on a failure to understand the indissoluble
      connection between commodity production and capitalist

      marketing.[7]

 As for
      the facts of Russian reality, the authors of such theories simply ignore
      them: they ignore the scattered state of the small commodity-producers and

 

      their utter differentiation; they ignore the fact that it is from their
      very midst that “buyers-up” have emerged and continue to
      emerge; that in capitalist society marketing can only be organised by big
      capital. It is natural that if one leaves out of account all these
      features of the unpleasant but undoubted reality, it is not difficult to
      conjure up

      phantasies[8]
ins
Blaue

hinein.[9]

      We are unable here to go into descriptive details showing exactly how
      merchant’s capital manifests itself in our “handicraft”
      industries, and how helpless and wretched is the position in which it
      places the small industrialist. Moreover, in the next chapter we shall
      have to describe the dominance of merchant’s capital at a higher
      stage of development, where (as an adjunct of manufacture) it organises
      capitalist domestic industry on a mass scale. Here let us confine
      ourselves to indicating the main forms assumed by merchant’s

      capital in the small industries. The first and simplest form is the
      purchase of wares by the merchant (or owner of a big workshop) from the
      small commodity producers. Where buying-up is poorly developed, or where
      there are numerous competing buyers-up, the sale of goods to the merchant
      may not differ from any other sale; but in the vast majority of cases the
      local buyer-up is the only person to whom the peasant can regularly
      dispose of his wares, and then the buyer-up takes advantage of his
      monopoly position to force the price he pays to the producer down to rock
      bottom. The second form of merchant’s capital consists in its
      combination with usury: the peasant, who is constantly in need of money,
      borrows it from the buyer-up and repays the debt with his goods. The sale
      of his goods in this case (which is very widespread) always takes place at
      artificially reduced prices, which often do not leave the handicraftsman
      as much as a wage-worker could get. Moreover, the relations of the
      creditor to the debtor inevitably lead to the personal dependence of the
      latter, to bondage, to the creditor taking advantage of specific occasions
      of the debtor’s need, etc. The third form of merchant’s
      capital is payment for wares with goods, a common practice among village
      buyers-up. The specific feature of this form is that it is typical not
      only of the small industries but of absolutely all undeveloped stages of
      commodity production and capitalism. Only large-scale machine industry,
      which has socialised labour and broken radically with all patriarchal
      usages, has eliminated this form of bondage by causing it to be legally
      prohibited in large industrial establishments. The fourth form of
      merchant’s capital is payment by the merchant with the particular
      kinds of goods that are needed by the “handicraftsman” for
      production (raw or auxiliary materials, etc.). The sale of materials of
      production to the small industrialist may also be an independent operation
      of merchant’s capital, quite analogous to the operation of buying-up
      finished goods. When, however, the buyer-up of finished goods begins to
      pay for them with the raw materials needed by the
      “handicraftsman,” this marks a very big step in the
      development of capitalist relations. Having cut off the small
      industrialist from the finished-goods market, the buyer-up now cuts him
      off from the raw-materials market, and thereby

 

      brings him completely under his sway. It is only one step from this form
      to that higher form of merchant’s capital under which the buyer-up
      directly hands out materials to the “handicraftsmen” to be
      worked up for a definite payment. The handicraftsman becomes de
      facto a wage-worker, working at home for the capitalist; the
      merchant’s capital of the buyer-up is here transformed into
      industrial

capital.[10]

 Capitalist domestic industry arises. In the
      small industries it is met with more or less sporadically; its
      introduction on a mass scale, however, relates to the next and higher
      stage of capitalist development.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Regarding the significance of trading, merchant’s capital in the
      development of capitalism in general we would refer the reader to
      Capital, Vol. III. See especially III, I, S. 253-254
      (Russ. trans., 212), on the essence of commodity-trading capital; S. 259
      (Russ. trans., 217), on the cheapening of marketing by merchant’s
      capital, S. 278 279 (Russ. trans., 233-234), on the economic necessity of
      the phenomenon that “concentration appears earlier historically in
      the merchant’s business than in the industrial workshop”;
      S. 308 (Russ. trans., 259) and S. 310-311 (Russ. trans., 260-261), on the
      historical role of merchant’s capital as necessary “premises
      for the development of capitalist

production.”[11]—Lenin

[2]
      The preconceived viewpoint of the Narodniks, who have idealised the
      “handicraft” industries and pictured merchant’s capital
      as a sort of deplorable deviation and not as a necessary accessory to
      small production for the market is unfortunately reflected in statistical
      investigations. Thus, we have a number of house-to-house censuses of
      handicraftsmen (for Moscow, Vladimir and Perm Gubernias) which carefully
      investigated the business of each small industrialist, but ignored the
      business of the buyers-up, did not investigate how his capital is
      built up and what determines its magnitude, what are the sales’
      receipts and purchase costs of the buyer-up etc. Cf. our Studies,
      p. 169 (See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95
      in Perm Gubernia.—Ed.).—Lenin

[3]
      The emergence of buyers-up from among the small producers themselves is a
      common thing noted by investigators almost everywhere as soon as they
      touch upon this question. See, for example, the same remark about
      “distributors” in the kid-glove industry (Industries of
      Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt. II, pp. 175-176), about the buyers-up
      in the Pavlovo industry (Grigoryev, loc. cit., 92), and
      many others.—Lenin

[4]
      Korsak (Forms of Industry ) in his day quite rightly noted the
      connection between the unprofitableness of small-scale marketing (and of
      small-scale buying of raw materials) and the “general character of
      small scattered production” (pp. 23 and 239).—Lenin

[5]
      Very often the big handicraft proprietors whom we discussed in detail
      above are also in some measure buyers-up. For instance, the purchase of
      the wares of small industrialists by big ones is a very widespread
      practice.—Lenin

[6]
      Mr. V. V. asserts that the handicraftsman who is under the sway of
      merchant’s capital “suffers losses that are fundamentally
      quite superfluous” (Essays on Handicraft Industry,
      150). Maybe Mr. V. V. imagines that the differentiation of the small
      producers is “fundamentally” a “quite superfluous”
      phenomenon, i.e., fundamentally as regards the commodity economy under
      which the small producer lives?—Lenin

[7]
      “It is not a matter of the kulak, but of the shortage of capital
      among the handicraftsmen,” say the Perm Narodniks (A Sketch of
      the Condition of Handicraft Industry in Perm Gubernia, p. 8). But
      what is a kulak if not a handicraftsman with capital?  The trouble is just
      that the Narodniks refuse to investigate the process of differentiation of
      the small producers which yields entrepreneurs and “kulaks”
      from their ranks.—Lenin

[8]
      Among the quasi-economic arguments advanced in support of the Narodnik
      theories is the one about the small amount of “fixed” and
      “circulating” capital needed by the “independent
      handicraftsman.” The line of this extremely widespread argument is
      as follows: handicraft industries greatly benefit the peasant and
      therefore should be implanted. (We do not dwell on the amusing notion that
      the mass of the peasantry which is being steadily ruined can be helped by
      turning some of their number into small commodity-producers.)  And in
      order to implant these industries one must know how much
      “capital” the handicraftsman needs to carry on his
      business. Here is one of numerous calculations of this sort. The Pavlovo
      handicraftsman, says Mr. Grigoryev for our edification, needs a fixed
      “capital” of 3 to 5 rubles, 10-13-15 rubles, etc., counting
      cost of implements, and a circulating “capital” of 6 to 8
      rubles, counting weekly expenditure on food and raw
      materials. “Thus, the amount of the fixed and circulating capital
      (sic !) in Pavlovo District is so small that it is very easy to
      acquire the tools and materials needed for independent (sic !!)
      production” (loc. cit., 75). And indeed, what
      could be “easier” than such an argument? With a stroke of the
      pen the Pavlovo proletarian is turned into a “capitalist”; all
      that was needed was to call his weekly keep and miserably cheap tools
      “capital.” But the real capital of the big buyers-up who have
      monopolised sales, who alone are able to be “independent”
      de facto, and who handle capital running into the thousands this
      real capital the author simply passes over! Queer people, indeed, these
      well-to-do Pavlovians: for generations they have used, and continue to
      use, every foul means to pile up thousands of rubles of capital, whereas
      according to the latest discoveries it seems that a “capital”
      of a few dozen rubles is sufficient to make one “independent”!—Lenin

[9]
      at random.—Ed.
    

[10]
      The pure form of merchant’s capital is the purchase of a commodity
      in order to sell this same commodity at a profit. The pure form
      of industrial capital is the purchase of a commodity in order to sell it
      in worked-up form, hence the purchase of raw materials, etc., and
      the purchase of labour-power, which processes the material.—Lenin
 


[11]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 263-264, 270-271,
      290, 319-320, 321-320, 321-322.  [p. 361]
    

 
  

V. Capitalist Simple Co-Operation

|

VII. “Industry And Agriculture”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## "Industry and Agricultural"




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: VII. 'Industry And Agriculture'








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      VII. “Industry And Agriculture”
    

      Such is the usual heading of special sections in descriptions of peasant
      industries. In view of the fact that at the initial stage of capitalism
      which we are examining the industrialist has hardly yet become
      differentiated from the peasant, his connection with the land is something
      indeed highly characteristic and requires special examination.

    
      Let us begin with the data given in our table (see

      Appendix I). To characterise the farms of the “handicraftsmen”
      there are given here, firstly, data on the average number of horses owned
      by the industrialists of each grade. By combining the 19 industries for
      which such data are available we get an all-round average per
      industrialist (master or petty master) of 1.4 horses, and for the grades:
      I) 1.1; II) 1.5 and III) 2.0. Thus the higher the proprietor’s
      position in respect to the size of his industrial establishment, the
      higher his position as an agriculturist. The biggest industrialists have
      almost twice as many draught animals as the small ones. But with regard to
      their farms even the smallest industrialists (grade I) are above the
      middle peasantry, for the general average for Moscow Gubernia in 1877 was
      0.87 horses per peasant

household.[1]

 Thus it is only the relatively

 

      prosperous peasants who become master and petty-master industrialists. The
      poor peasants, on the other hand, do not, in the main, provide master
      industrialists but worker industrialists (wage-workers employed by
      “handicraftsmen,” migratory workers, etc.). Unfortunately, for
      the overwhelming majority of Moscow industries no data are available on
      the farms of the wage-workers engaged in small industries. An exception is
      the hat industry (see general data on it in our table, Appendix I). Here
      are exceedingly instructive data on the farms of master hat-makers and
      worker hat-makers.
    





      Thus, the master industrialists belong to the category of very
      “sound” farmers, i.e., are members of the peasant bourgeoisie,
      whereas the wage-workers are recruited from the mass of ruined

      peasants.[2]

 Still
      more important for characterising the relations described are the data on
      the methods by which the master industrialists cultivate their land. The
      Moscow investigators distinguished three methods of cultivating the soil:
      1) by means of the personal labour

 

      of the householder; 2) by “hiring,” i.e., by hiring some
      neighbour who tills the land of the “distressed” householder
      with his own implements. This method of cultivation is characteristic of
      the poor peasant who is being steadily ruined. Of opposite significance is
      the third method, namely, cultivation with the aid of a
      “labourer,” i.e., the hire of agricultural
      (“land”) labourers by the farmer. These workers are usually
      hired for the whole summer; and, particularly in the busy season, the
      master usually reinforces them with employees from his
      workshop. “Thus, the method of cultivating the soil with the aid of
      the ’land’ labourer is quite a profitable one”
      (Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VI, I, 48). In our table we have
      assembled the data on this method of cultivation for 16 industries, in 7
      of which there are no masters who hire “land labourers.” In
      all these 16 industries the master industrialists who hire rural labourers
      constitute 12% of the total, and by grades: I) 4.5%; II) 16.7% and III)
      27.3%. The better off the industrialists are, the more often we find rural
      entrepreneurs among them. The analysis of the data on the industrial
      peasantry consequently reveals the same picture of parallel
      differentiation in both industry and agriculture that we observed in
      Chapter II on the basis of the data on the agricultural peasantry.

    
      The hiring of “land labourers” by “handicraft”
      masters is very widespread in all the industrial gubernias. We meet, for
      example, with references to the hiring of agricultural labourers by the
      rich bast-matting makers of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia. The furriers of the
      same gubernia hire agricultural labourers, who usually come from the
      purely agricultural surrounding villages. The “village-community
      peasants of Kimry Volost engaged in the boot industry find it profitable
      to hire for the cultivation of their fields men and women labourers who
      come to Kimry in large numbers from Tver Uyezd and neighbouring
      . . . localities.” The pottery decorators of Kostroma Gubernia send
      their wage-workers, when not occupied at their regular jobs, to work in
      the

fields.[3]

      “The independent masters” (metal-beaters of Vladimir Gubernia)
      “keep special field workers”;

 

      that is why their fields are well cultivated, although they themselves
      “quite often can neither plough nor

mow.”[4]

 In Moscow Gubernia,
      the hiring of “land labourers” is resorted to by many
      industrialists apart from those about whom data are given in our table;
      for example, pin-makers, felt-makers and toy-makers send their workers to
      jobs in the fields too; the glass-bead-makers, metal-beaters, button
      makers, cap-makers and harness-makers employ agricultural labourers,

      etc.[5]

 The
      significance of this fact—the hiring of agricultural
      workers by peasant industrialists—is very great. It shows
      that even in the small peasant industries the phenomenon characteristic of
      all capitalist countries is beginning to be manifested, and that goes to
      confirm the progressive historical role of capitalism, namely, a rise in
      the standard of living of the population, an increase in its
      requirements. The industrialist is beginning to look down upon the
      “raw” agriculturist with his coarse patriarchal manners and is
      trying to rid himself of the hardest and worst-paid agricultural jobs. In
      the small industries, in which capitalism is least developed, this is to
      be observed very slightly as yet; the industrial worker is only just
      beginning to be differentiated from the agricultural worker. In the
      succeeding stages of development of capitalist industry this phenomenon,
      as we shall see, is to be observed on a mass scale.

    
      The importance of the “tie between agriculture and industry”
      compels us to review in greater detail the data relating to other
      gubernias besides Moscow.

    
      Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia. Among the mass of bast-matting makers
      agriculture is on the decline, and they are neglecting the land; about 1/3
      of the winter-crop area and 1/2 of the spring-crop area are
      “wasteland.” For the “well to-do muzhiks,”
      however, “the land is no longer a wicked stepmother, but a mother
      bountiful”: they have enough animals, they have manure, they rent
      land, they try to keep their strips out of the periodical redistribution
      and tend them better. “Now the wealthy muzhik has become a landlord
      while the other muzhik, the poor one, is in serf

      dependence name=fnp> 
 

      upon him” (Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, III,
      65). The furriers “are bad farmers,” but here too we must
      single out the bigger proprietors who “rent land from their poor
      fellow-villagers,” etc. The following is a summary of typical
      budgets of furriers of different groups:
    




88[6]


15[7]



      The parallel process of differentiation of the agriculturists and
      industrialists stands out here in bold relief. Concerning the blacksmiths,
      the investigator says that “industry is more important than
      agriculture” for the rich masters, on the one hand, and for the
      “landless” labourers, on the other (ibid., IV, 168).

    
      In Industries of Vladimir Gubernia the question of the relation
      between industry and agriculture is dealt with much more thoroughly than
      in any other work of investigation. For a whole number of industries
      precise data are given on the farms, not only of
      “handicraftsmen” in general (such “average”
      figures, as is clear from all the aforesaid, are quite fictitious), but of
      the various grades and groups of “handicraftsmen,” such as:
      big masters, small masters, wage-workers;

 

      workroom owners and weavers; master industrialists and the rest of the
      peasantry; households engaged in local and in outside industries, etc. The
      general conclusion drawn by Mr. Kharizomenov from these data is that if
      the “handicraftsmen” are divided into three categories,
      viz.—1) big industrialists; 2) small and medium industrialists; 3)
      wage-workers, there is to be observed a deterioration of
      agriculture as from the first category to the third, a diminution in
      the amount of land and animals, an increase in the proportion of
      “distressed” farms,

etc.[8]

 Unfortunately, Mr. Kharizomenov examined these
      data too restrictedly and one-sidedly, and paid no attention to the
      parallel and independent process of the differentiation of the peasant
      agriculturists. That is why he failed to draw from these data the
      conclusion that inevitably follows from them, namely, that the peasantry
      both in agriculture and in industry are splitting up into a petty
      bourgeoisie and a rural

proletariat.[9]

 That is why, in describing the different
      industries, he quite often sinks to the traditional Narodnik arguments
      about the influence of “industry” in general over
      “agriculture” in general

 

      (see, for example, Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, II, 288; III,
      91), i.e., to the ignoring of the profound contradictions in the very
      system of both industry and agriculture, the existence
      of which he himself was obliged to admit. Another investigator of the
      industries of Vladimir Gubernia, Mr. V. Prugavin, is a typical spokesman
      of the Narodnik views on this subject. Here is a sample of his
      reasoning. The cotton-weaving industry in Pokrov Uyezd “cannot be
      regarded at all as a harmful factor (sic !!) in the agricultural
      life of the weavers” (IV, 53). The data testify to the poor farms of
      the mass of weavers, and to the fact that among the workroom owners,
      farming is conducted at a level far above the general (ibid.);
      from the tables it is evident that some workroom owners hire agricultural
      labourers too. Conclusion: “industry and agriculture march hand in
      hand, conditioning each other’s development and prosperity”
      (60). A fine specimen of the phrases used to obscure the fact that the
      development and prosperity of the peasant bourgeoisie go hand in hand both
      in industry and in

agriculture.[10]

      The data of the Perm handicraft census of 1894-95 revealed the same thing:
      it is among the small commodity-producers (masters and petty masters) that
      the level of agriculture is highest and rural labourers are met with;
      among the artisans agriculture is on a lower level, while among the
      craftsmen who work for buyers-up the condition of agriculture is worst (as
      to the agriculture of the wage-workers and of various groups of masters,
      no data, unfortunate]y, have been gathered). The census also revealed that
      the “handicraftsmen” who do not engage in agriculture differ
      from those who do in that 1) their labour productivity is higher, 2) their
      net incomes from industry are incomparably higher, and 3) their level of
      culture and literacy is higher. All these are evidences which confirm the
      conclusion drawn above,

 

      namely, that even the initial stage of capitalism manifests the tendency
      of industry to raise the population’s standard of living (see
      Studies, p. 138 and

foll.).[11]

      Lastly, the following point is connected with the question of the relation
      of industry to agriculture. The larger establishments usually have a
      longer working period. For example, in the furniture industry of Moscow
      Gubernia, the working period of those working in plain wood equals 8
      months (the average workshop staff here is 1.9 workers); for the bent-wood
      establishments it is 10 months (2.9 workers per establishment), and in the
      heavy-furniture trade it is 11 months (4.2 workers per establishment). In
      the shoe industry of Vladimir Gubernia the working period in 14 small
      workshops equals 40 weeks, and that in 8 large ones (9.5 workers per
      establishment, as against 2.4 in the small workshops) 48 weeks,

etc.[12]

 Naturally, this
      fact is connected with the large number of workers (family, hired
      industrial and hired agricultural) in the big establishments and explains
      the great stability of these establishments and their tendency to
      specialise in industrial activities.

    
      Let us now sum up the data given above on “industry and
      agriculture.” It is usual at the lower stage of capitalism which we
      are reviewing for the industrialist still to be scarcely differentiated
      from the peasant. The combination of industry with agriculture plays an
      extremely important part in aggravating and accentuating the
      differentiation of the peasantry: the prosperous and the well-off peasants
      open workshops, hire workers from among the rural proletariat, and
      accumulate money for commercial and usurious transactions. The peasant
      poor, on the other hand, provide the wage-workers, the handicraftsmen who
      work for buyers-up, and the bottom groups of petty-master handicraftsmen,
      those most crushed by the power of merchant’s capital. Thus, the
      combination of industry with agriculture consolidates

 

      and develops capitalist relations, spreading them from industry to
      agriculture and vice

versa.[13]

 That characteristic feature of capitalist
      society, the separation of industry from agriculture, manifests itself at
      this stage in the most rudimentary form, but it does manifest itself
      and—what is particularly important—in a way totally different
      from what the Narodniks imagine. When the Narodnik says that industry does
      no “damage” to agriculture, he discerns damage in the
      abandonment of agriculture for profitable industry. But such a notion is
      an invention (and not a deduction from the facts), and a bad invention at
      that, for it ignores the contradictions which permeate the entire economic
      system of the peasantry. The separation of industry from agriculture takes
      place in connection with the differentiation of the peasantry, and does so
      by different paths at the two poles of the countryside: the well-to-do
      minority open industrial establishments, enlarge them, improve their
      farming methods, hire farm labourers to till the land, devote an
      increasing part of the year to industry, and—at a certain stage of
      the development of the industry—find it more convenient to separate
      their industrial from their agricultural undertakings, i.e., to hand over
      the farm to other members of the family, or to sell farm buildings,
      animals, etc., and adopt the status of burghers, of

merchants.[14]

 The separation of
      industry from agriculture is preceded in this case by the formation of
      entrepreneur relations in agriculture. At the other pole of the
      countryside the separation of industry from agriculture consists in the
      fact that the poor peasants are being ruined and turned into wage-workers
      (industrial and agricultural). At this pole of the countryside

 

      it is not the profitableness of industry, but need and ruin, that compels
      the peasant to abandon the land, and not only the land but also
      independent industrial labour; here the process of the separation of
      industry from agriculture is one of the expropriation of the small
      producer.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      See Combined Statistical Material on the Economic Position of the
      Rural Population, published by the Committee of Ministers, Appendix
      I: Data of Zemstvo house-to-house investigations, pp. 372-373.—Lenin

[2]
      It is characteristic that the author of the description of the hat
      industry “did not observe” even here the differentiation of
      the peasantry both in agriculture and in industry. Like all Narodniks, he
      limited himself in his conclusions to the absolutely vapid banality that
      “industry does not prevent one from engaging in agriculture”
      (Industries of Moscow Gubernia, VI, I, p. 231) The social and
      economic contradictions both in the system of industry and in the system
      of agriculture were thus safely passed over.—Lenin

[3]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, III, 57, 112; VIII,
      1354; IX, 1931, 2093, 2185.—Lenin

[4]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 187, 190.—Lenin

[5]
Industries of Moscow Gubernia, loc. cit.—Lenin

[6]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, III, 38, and
      foll. The figures are approximate and have been arrived at on the
      author’s estimate as to how long the family’s own grain
      suffices.—Lenin

[7]
"*" DUPLICATE (see above footnote).

[8]
      See Yuridichesky Vestnik [The Legal Messenger ], 1883,
Vol. XIV, Nos. 11 and 12.—Lenin

[9]
      How near Mr. Kharizomonov was to drawing such a conclusion may be seen
      from the following description of post-Reform economic development which
      he gives in speaking of the silk trade: “Serfdom evened out the
      economic level of the peasantry: it tied the hands of the rich peasant,
      sustained the poor peasant and prevented the family division of
      property. Natural economy narrowed too much the arena for commercial and
      industrial activity. The local market did not provide sufficiently wide
      scope for enterprise. The peasant merchant or industrialist accumulated
      money—without risk, it is true, but very slowly—accumulated it
      and put it away in his chest. Beginning with the 60s conditions
      change. Serfdom comes to an and, credit and the railways, by creating an
      extensive and distant market, provide scope for the enterprising peasant
      merchant and industrialist. All those who have been above the average
      economic level quickly get on their feet, develop trade and industry and
      extend their exploiting activities quantitatively and qualitatively. All
      those who have been below that level fall, sink, drop into the ranks of
      the landless, the non-farming, the horseless. The peasantry split up into
      the groups of kulaks, semi-prosperous peasants and farmless
      proletariat. The kulak element of the peasantry rapidly copy all the
      habits of a cultured milieu;name=p374> they live in grand style, and from
      them a huge class is formed of the semi-cultured sections of Russian
      society” (III, 20,

21).[15]—Lenin

[10]
      Mr. V. V. confines himself to the same sort of phrases in dealing with
      this subject in Chapter VIII of his Essays on Handicraft
      Industry. “Farming . . . is sustained by industry”
      (205). “Handicraft industries are one of the most reliable mainstays
      of agriculture in the industrial gubernias” (219). Proof? Any
      amount: take, for example, the master tanners, starch-makers,
      oil-millers (ibid., 224), etc, and you will find that their
      farming is on a higher level than that of the masses!—Lenin

[11]
      See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia.—Ed.
    

[12]
      Sources are indicated above. The same thing is revealed by the household
      censuses of the basket-makers, guitar-makers and starch-makers in Moscow
      Gubernia. The Perm handicraft census also mentions the longer working
      period of the large workshops (see Sketch of Handicraft Industry in
      Perm Gubernia, p. 78. No precise data, unfortunately, are given).—Lenin

[13]
      For instance, in the woollen trade of Vladimir Gubernia the big
      “factory owners” and subcontractors are distinguished by the
      fact of their farming being on the highest level. “During periods of
      stagnation in production the subcontractors try to buy estates, to engage
      in farming, and to give up industry altogether” (Industries of
      Vladimir Gubernia, II, 131). This instance is worth noting, since
      facts of this kind sometimes lead the Narodniks to conclude that
      “the peasants are going back to agriculture,” that the
      “exiles from the soil must be restored to the land”
      (Mr. V. V. in Vestnik Yevropy, No. 7, 1884).—Lenin

[14]
      “The peasants explained that latterly some of the prosperous master
      industrialists had moved to Moscow to carry on their business.”
      The Brush Industry According to the Investigation of 1895, p. 5.—Lenin
 


[15]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, Vol. III, an investigation by
      S. Kharizomenov, Moscow, 1882, pp. 20-21.  [p. 374]
    

 
  

VI. Merchant’s Capital in the Small Industries

|

VIII. “The Combination Of Industry With Agriculture”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## "The Combination of Industry with Agriculture"




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: VIII. 'The Combination Of Industry With Agriculture'








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry




      VIII. “The Combination Of Industry With
      Agriculture”
    

      Such is the favourite Narodnik formula with the aid of which
      Messrs. V. V., N.-on and Co. hope to solve the problem of capitalism in
      Russia. “Capitalism” separates industry from agriculture;
      “people’s production” combines them in the typical and
      normal peasant farm—in this ingenuous contra-position lies a good
      part of their theory. We are now in a position to sum up as regards the
      question of how in reality our peasantry “combine industry with
      agriculture,” since a detailed examination has been made above of
      the typical relations existing among the agricultural and among the
      industrial peasantry. Let us enumerate the diverse forms of the
      “combination of industry with agriculture” to be observed in
      the economics of Russian peasant farming.

    
      1) Patriarchal (natural) agriculture is combined with domestic industries
      (i.e., with the working up of raw materials for home consumption) and with
      corvée service for the landowner.

    
      This form of combining peasant “industries” with agriculture
      is most typical of the medieval economic regime, of which it is an
      essential

component.[1]

 In post-Reform Russia all that is left of such
      patriarchal economy—in which there is as yet absolutely no
      capitalism, commodity production, or commodity circulation—is
      vestiges in the shape of the domestic industries of the peasants and
      labour-service.

    
      2) Patriarchal agriculture is combined with industry in the form of
      artisan production.
    


      This form of combination is still very close to the preceding one,
      differing from it only in that here commodity circulation manifests
      itself—when the artisan is paid in money and appears on the market
      to purchase tools, raw materials, etc.

    
      3) Patriarchal agriculture is combined with the small-scale production of
      industrial products for the market, i.e., with commodity production in
      industry. The patriarchal peasant is transformed into a small
      commodity-producer, who, as we have shown, tends to the employment of
      wage-labour, i.e., to capitalist production. A condition for this
      transformation is now a certain degree of differentiation among the
      peasantry: we have seen that the small masters and petty masters in
      industry belong, in the majority of cases, to the prosperous or to the
      well-off group of peasants. In its turn, the development of small
      commodity production in industry gives a further impetus to the
      differentiation of the peasant agriculturists.

    
      4) Patriarchal agriculture is combined with work for hire in industry (and
      also in

agriculture).[2]

      This form is a necessary addition to the preceding one: there it is the
      product that becomes a commodity, here it is labour-power. Small-scale
      commodity production in industry is necessarily accompanied, as we have
      seen, by the appearance of wage-workers and of handicraftsmen who work for
      buyers-up. This form of the “combination of agriculture with
      industry” is characteristic of all capitalist countries,

 

      and one of the most striking features of the post-Reform history of Russia
      is the extremely rapid and extremely wide incidence of this form.

    
      5) Petty-bourgeois (commercial) agriculture is combined with
      petty-bourgeois industries (small commodity production in industry, petty
      trade, etc.).

    
      The difference between this form and the third is that here
      petty-bourgeois relations embrace not only industry but also
      agriculture. Being the most typical form of the combination of industry
      with agriculture in the economy of the small rural bourgeoisie, this form
      is therefore characteristic of all capitalist countries. The honour of
      discovering a capitalism without a petty bourgeoisie fell to the
      Russian Narodnik economists alone.

    
      6) Wage-labour in agriculture is combined with wage-labour in industry. We
      have already discussed how such a combination of industry and
      agriculture manifests itself and what it signifies.

    
      Thus, the forms of the “combination of agriculture with
      industry” among our peasantry are extremely varied: there are those
      which express the most primitive economic system with the dominance of
      natural economy; there are those which express a high development of
      capitalism; there are a whole number of transitional stages between the
      former and the latter. By confining oneself to general formulas such as:
      the “combination of industry with agriculture,” or the
      “separation of industry from agriculture”), one can not
      advance a single step in explaining the actual process of development of
      capitalism.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Korsak, in Chapter IV of the book mentioned above, cites historical
      evidence of the following nature, for example: “the abbot gave out
      (in the village) flax for spinning”; the peasants were bound to
      yield to the landowner “work or wares,”—Lenin

[2]
      As has been shown above, such confusion of terminology prevails in our
      economic literature and economic statistics that the category
      peasants’ “industries” is used to cover domestic
      industry, labour-service, handicrafts, small commodity production,
      trading, work for hire in industry, work for hire in agriculture,
      etc. Here is an example of how the Narodniks take advantage of this
      confusion. Mr. V. V., singing the praises of the “combination of
      industry with agriculture,” points, in illustration, to the
      “timber industry” and “unskilled labour”:
      “He (the peasant) is strong and accustomed to hard work; that is why
      he can do all kinds of unskilled labour” (Essays on Handicraft
      Industry, 26). And this sort of fact figures among a heap of others
      to back the conclusion that: “We observe a protest against the
      splitting-up of occupations,” “the durability of the
      organisation of production that arose when natural economy still
      predominated” (41). Thus, even the conversion of the peasant into a
      lumberworker and unskilled labourer was passed off, among other things, as
      evidence of the durability of natural economy!—Lenin
 

 
  

VII. “Industry And Agriculture”

|

IX. Some Remarks on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of Our Countryside

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Some Remarks on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of Our Countryside




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Five: IX. Some Remarks on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of Our Countryside








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter V. The First Stages of Capitalism in Industry



 IX. Some Remarks on the Pre-Capitalist Economy of
      Our Countryside 

      The essence of the problem of “the destiny of capitalism in
      Russia” is often presented as though prime importance attaches to
      the question: how fast ? (i.e., how fast is capitalism
      developing?). Actually, however, far greater importance attaches to the
      question: how exactly ? and to the question: where from
      ? (i.e., what was the nature of the pre-capitalist economic system in
      Russia?). The

 

      principal errors of Narodnik economics are the false replies given to
      precisely these two questions, i.e., in a wrong presentation of exactly
      how capitalism is developing in Russia, in a false idealisation of the
      pre-capitalist order. In Chapter II (and partly in Chapter III) and in the
      present one we have examined the most primitive stages of capitalism in
      small-scale agriculture and in the small peasant industries; in doing so
      we could not avoid many references to the features of the pre-capitalist
      order. If we now try to summarise these features we shall arrive at the
      conclusion that the pre-capitalist countryside constituted (from the
      economic point of view) a network of small local markets which linked
      up tiny groups of small producers, severed from each other by
      their separate farms, by the innumerable medieval barriers
      between them, and by the remnants of medieval dependence.

    
      As to the scattered nature of the small producers, it stands out in
      boldest relief in their differentiation both in agriculture and in
      industry, which we established above. But their fragmentation is far from
      being confined to this. Although united by the village community into tiny
      administrative, fiscal and land-holding associations, the peasants are
      split up by a mass of diverse divisions into grades, into categories
      according to size of allotment, amount of payments, etc. Let us take, for
      example, the Zemstvo statistical returns for Saratov Gubernia; there the
      peasants are divided into the following grades: gift-land, owner, full
      owner and state peasants, state peasants with community holdings, state
      peasants with quarter

holdings,[1] state peasants that formerly belonged to
      landlords, appanage, state-land tenant, and landless peasants, owners who
      were formerly landlords’ peasants, peasants whose farmsteads have
      been redeemed, owners who are former appanage peasants, colonist
      freeholder, settler, gift-land peasants who formerly belonged to
      landlords, owners who were former state peasants,

      manumitted,

      

      those who did not pay quitrent, free

      tiller,[2]
      temporarily bound, former factory-bound, etc.; further, there are
      registered peasants, migrant, etc. All these grades differ in the history
      of their agrarian relations, in size of allotments, amount of payments,
      etc., etc. And within the grades there are innumerable differences of

 

      a similar kind: sometimes even the peasants of one and the same village
      are divided into two quite distinct categories: “Mr. X’s
      former peasants” and “Mrs. Y’s former peasants.”
      All this diversity was natural and necessary in the Middle Ages, in the
      remote past; at the present time, however, the preservation of the
      social-estate exclusiveness of the peasant communities is a crying
      anachronism and greatly worsens the conditions of the toiling masses,
      while at the same time not in the least safeguarding them against the
      burdens of the new, capitalist era. The Narodniks usually shut their eyes
      to this fragmentation, and when the Marxists express the view that the
      splitting up of the peasantry is progressive, the Narodniks confine
      themselves to hackneyed outcries against “supporters of land
      dispossession,” thereby covering up the utter fallacy of their views
      about the pre-capitalist countryside. One has only to picture to oneself
      the amazing fragmentation of the small producers, an inevitable
      consequence of patriarchal agriculture, to become convinced of the
      progressiveness of capitalism, which is shattering to the very foundations
      the ancient forms of economy and life, with their age-old immobility and
      routine, destroying the settled life of the peasants who vegetated behind
      their medieval partitions, and creating new social classes striving of
      necessity towards contact, unification, and active participation in the
      whole of the economic (and not only economic) life of the country, and of
      the whole world.

    
      If we take the peasants who are handicraftsmen or small industrialists we
      shall find the same thing. Their interests do not transcend the bounds of
      the small area of surrounding villages. Owing to the insignificant area
      covered by the local market they do not come into contact with the
      industrialists of other districts; they are in mortal terror of
      “competition,” which ruthlessly destroys the patriarchal
      paradise of the small handicraftsmen and industrialists, who live lives of
      stagnant routine undisturbed by anybody or anything. With respect to these
      small industrialists, competition and capitalism perform a useful
      historical function by dragging them out of their backwoods and
      confronting them with all the issues that already face the more developed
      strata of the population.
    


      A necessary attribute of the small local markets is, apart from primitive
      forms of artisan production, primitive forms of merchant’s and usury
      capital. The more remote a village is, the further away it is from the
      influence of the new capitalist order, from railways, big factories and
      large-scale capitalist agriculture, the greater the monopoly of the local
      merchants and usurers, the more they subjugate the surrounding peasantry,
      and the cruder the forms of this subjugation. The number of these small
      leeches is enormous (when compared with the meagre produce of the
      peasants), and there is a rich variety of local names to designate
      them. Recall all these “prasols,” “shibais,”
      “shchetinniks,” “mayaks,” “ivashes,”
      “bulinyas,” etc., etc. The predominance of natural economy,
      which accounts for the scarcity and dearness of money in the countryside,
      results in the assumption of an importance by all these
      “kulaks” out of all proportion to the size of their
      capital. The dependence of the peasants on the money owners inevitably
      acquires the form of bondage. Just as one cannot conceive of developed
      capitalism without large-scale merchant’s capital in the form of
      commodities or money so the pre-capitalist village is inconceivable
      without small traders and buyers-up, who are the “masters” of
      the small local markets. Capitalism draws these markets together, combines
      them into a big national market, and then into a world market, destroys
      the primitive forms of bondage and personal dependence, develops in depth
      and in breadth the contradictions which in a rudimentary form are also to
      be observed among the community peasantry—and thus paves the way for
      their resolution.
    

 
Notes
 
 


[1]
State peasants with quarter holdings – the name given in tsarist
      Russia to the category of former state peasants, descendants of lower-rank
      servicemen who in the 16th to 17th centuries were settled in the border
      lands of the state of Muscovy. For their services in guarding the state
      frontiers the settlers (Cossacks musketeers, soldiers) were given the use
      of small plots of land either temporarily or in perpetuity. The area of
      such a plot amounted to a so-called quarter [1.35 acres]. From
      the year 1719 such settlers were called odnodvortsi [i.e., those
      possessing only their own farmsteads and no community land]. Formerly they
      enjoyed various kinds of privileges and had the right to own peasants, but
      during the 19th century were gradually deprived of these rights and
      reduced to the status of ordinary peasants. By a regulation of 1866 the
      quarter lots were recognised as the private property of the former
      quarter-lot peasants and their descendants.  [p.381]
    


[2]
Free tillers – the category of peasants freed from serf
      dependence by the law of February 20, 1803. This law permitted landlords
      themselves to decide the terms on which they freed the peasants from the
      land.  [p.381]
    

 
  

VIII. “The Combination Of Industry With Agriculture”

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 384-453
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. The Rise of Manufacture and its Main Features
  384



II. Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry
  386



III. Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and its Significance
  427



IV. The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of Agriculture From Industry
  431



V. The Economic Structure of Manufacture
  435



VI. Merchant’s and Industrial Capital In Manufacture. The “Buyer-Up” and the “Factory Owner”
  438



VII. Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture
  441



VIII. What Is “Handicraft” Industry?
  448

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Rise of Manufacture and Its Main Features




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: I. The Rise of Manufacture and its Main Features








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry





      I. The Rise of Manufacture and its Main Features
    

      By manufacture is meant, as we know, co-operation based on division of
      labour. In origin, manufacture belongs directly to the above-described
      “first stages of capitalism in industry.” On the one hand,
      workshops with a more or less considerable number of workers gradually
      introduce division of labour, and in this way capitalist simple
      co-operation grows into capitalist manufacture. The statistics on the
      Moscow industries quoted in the preceding chapter clearly show the process
      of this genesis of manufacture: the larger workshops in all fourth
      category industries, in some of the third category, and in individual
      cases of the second category, systematically apply division of labour on a
      wide scale and must therefore be classed as types of capitalist
      manufacture. More detailed data on the technique and the economics of some
      of these industries will be given below.

    

      On the other hand, we have seen how merchant’s capital in the small
      industries, upon reaching its highest stage of development, reduces the
      producer to the position of a wage-worker processing the raw material of
      others for payment by the piece. If further development leads to the
      introduction of systematic division of labour into production

 

      and transforms the technique of the small producer, if the
      “buyer-up” singles out certain detailed operations and gets
      them done by wage-workers in his own workshop, if, parallel with the
      distribution of work to be done in the home, and inseparably connected
      with it, big workshops with division of labour emerge (belonging very
      often to these same buyers-up), we are confronted with a process of the
      genesis of capitalist manufacture of another

kind.[1]


      Manufacture is highly important in the development of capitalist forms of
      industry, as the link between handicrafts and small commodity production
      with primitive forms of capital, and large-scale machine industry (the
      factory). Manufacture is closer to the small industries because it
      continues to be based on hand technique, so that the big establishments
      cannot, therefore, fully displace the small ones, cannot completely
      divorce the industrialist from agriculture. “Manufacture was unable,
      either to seize upon the production of society to its full extent, or to
      revolutionise that production to its very core (in ihrer Tiefe
      ). It towered up as an economic work of art, on the broad foundation
      of the town handicrafts, and of the rural domestic

industries.”[2]

 What brings
      manufacture closer to the factory is the rise of the big market, of big
      establishments with wage-workers, of big capital, which has brought masses
      of propertyless workers under its complete domination.

    

      In Russian literature the prejudice regarding the isolation of so-called
      “factory” production from “handicraft”

 

      production, regarding the “artificiality” of the former and
      the “people’s” character of the latter, is so widespread
      that we think it particularly important to examine the data on all the
      more important branches of manufacturing industry and to show their
      economic organisation after they had grown out of the stage of small
      peasant industries, and before they were transformed by large-scale
      machine industry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      For a description of this process of the genesis of capitalist
      manufacture, see Marx’s Das Kapital, III, 318-320. Russ
      trans.,

267–270.[3]


      “It was not even in the bosom of the old guilds that manufacture was
      born. It was the merchant that became the head of the modern workshop, and
      not the old guild-master.” (Misère de la philosophie,

190.[4] We have had
      occasion elsewhere to enumerate the principal features of the concept
      manufacture according to Marx. [Studies, 179 (See present
      edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.)]—Lenin

[2]
Das Kapital, I2,

      S. 383.[5]—Lenin
 


[3]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, pp. 329-331.  [p.385]
    


[4]
      See Karl Marx, The Poverty of Philosophy, Moscow, p. 154.
      [p.385]
    


[5]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 368.  [p.385]
    

 
  


|

II. Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: II. Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      II. Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry
    

      Let us begin with the industries that process fibres.
    

1) The Weaving Industries
    

      The weaving of linen, wool, cotton and silk fabrics, galloons, etc., was
      organised everywhere in Russia as follows (before the appearance of
      large-scale machine industry). The industry was headed by big capitalist
      workshops employing tens and hundreds of wage-workers; the owners of these
      workshops, possessing sizable capital, undertook the large-scale purchase
      of raw material, partly working it up in their own establishments, 

      and partly giving out yarn and warp to small producers
      (workroom owners,

middlemen,[88],
      peasant-“handicraftsmen” etc.) who wove the cloth at home or
      in small workshops at piece rates. The work itself was done by hand, and
      the following operations were distributed among the workers: 1)
      yarn-dyeing; 2) yarn-winding (very often women and children specialised in
      this operation); 3) yarn-fixing (“fixers”); 4) weaving; 5)
      weft-winding for weavers (bobbin hands, mostly children). Sometimes in the
      big workshops there were special “threaders” (who threaded the
      warp through the eyes of the batten and

      reed.)[1]

 of labour
      is usually applied, not only to single operations, but to wares, that is,
      the

 

      weavers specialise in producing various sorts of cloth. The selection of
      some operations to be done in the home does not, of course, make any
      change whatever to the economic structure of this type of industry. The
      workrooms or homes where the weavers work are simply external departments
      of the manufactory. The technical basis of such industry is hand
      production with extensive and systematic division of labour; from the
      economic point of view we see here the formation of large capital which
      controls the purchase of raw materials and the sale of wares on an
      extremely extensive (national) market, and under whose complete sway are a
      mass of proletarian weavers; a few large establishments (manufactories in
      the narrow sense of the term) dominate a mass of small ones. Division of
      labour leads to the emergence of specialist artisans from among the
      peasantry; non-agricultural centres of manufacture arise, such as the
      village of Ivanovo in Vladimir Gubernia (in 1871 it became the town of
      Ivanovo-Voznesensk and is now a centre of large-scale machine industry),
      the village of Velikoye in Yaroslavl Gubernia, and many other villages in
      Moscow, Kostroma, Vladimir and Yaroslavl gubernias, which have now turned
      into factory

      towns.[2]

 In our
      economic literature and statistics the industry organised in this way is
      usually split up into two parts: peasants who work in their homes, or in
      not particularly big workrooms, workshops, etc., are classed under
      “handicraft” industry, while the bigger workrooms and
      workshops are placed among the “factories and works” (and,
      moreover, quite fortuitously, since no definitely established and
      uniformly applied rules exist as to the separation of small establishments
      from big ones, of workrooms from manufactories, of workers occupied in
      their homes from workers occupied in the workshop of the

      capitalist).[3]

      Naturally, such classification, which places some wage-workers on one
      side, and some masters who hire these very wage-workers (in addition to
      the workers in their establishments) on the other, is nonsense from the
      scientific viewpoint.

    


      Let us illustrate this by detailed data regarding one of the
      “handicraft weaving” industries, namely, silk weaving in
      Vladimir

      Gubernia.[4]

 The
      “silk industry” is a typical specimen of capitalist
      manufacture. Hand labour prevails. Of the total number of establishments
      the small ones constitute the majority (179 out of 313, or 57% of the
      total, have from 1 to 5 workers), but in greater part they are not
      independent and are far behind the big ones in their significance to the
      industry as a whole. Establishments with 20 to 150 workers constitute 8%
      of the total (25), but in them 41.5% of the aggregate number of workers
      are concentrated, and they account for 51% of the total output. Of the
      total number of workers in the industry (2,823) there are 2,092
      wage-workers, i.e., 74.1%. “On the job we meet with division of
      labour both in wares and in individual operations.” Weavers are
      rarely able to make both “velvet” and “satin” (the
      two principal lines in this trade). “The division of labour into
      separate operations within the workshop is most strictly practised only in
      the big factories” (i.e., manufactories) “that employ
      wage-workers.” The fully independent proprietors number only 123,
      who alone buy the raw materials themselves and sell the finished article;
      they have 242 family workers and “employ 2,498 wage-workers, who in
      greater part are paid by the piece,” a total, consequently, of 2,740
      workers, or 97% of the aggregate number of workers. It is thus clear that
      the distribution by these manufactory owners, through the medium of
      “middle-men” (workroom owners), of work to be done in the home
      is no special form of industry at all, but is merely one of the operations
      of capital in manufacture. Mr. Kharizomenov rightly observes that the
      “mass of small establishments (57%) alongside the small number of
      big ones (8%), and the insignificant number of workers employed

 

      per establishment (7 1/2) conceal the true character of the trade”
      (loc. cit., 39). The specialisation characteristic of
      manufacture is seen here clearly in the separation of the industrialists
      from agriculture (the land is abandoned, on the one hand by the
      impoverished weavers, and on the other by the big manufactory owners) and
      in the formation of a special type of industrial population, who live much
      more “decently” than do the agriculturists, and look down upon
      the muzhik (loc. cit., 106). Our factory statistics have
      always registered only a very casually selected fraction of this

      industry.[5]


      The “galloon industry” in Moscow Gubernia is capitalist
      manufacture organised in a quite analogous

      fashion.[6]

 Such
      precisely is the case with regard to the printed calico industry in
      Kamyshin Uyezd, Saratov Gubernia. According to the Directory for
      1890, there were here 31 “factories” with 4,250 workers and
      output totalling 265,000 rubles, while according to the List
      there was one “work distributing office” with 33 workers in
      the establishment and an output totalling 47,000 rubles. (In other words,
      in 1890 workers employed in the establishment and on the side were lumped
      together!) According to local investigators, in 1888 nearly 7,000 looms
      were engaged in producing printed

      calico,[7]

 an output
      totalling 2 million rubles, and “the

 

      whole business is run by a few manufacturers,” who employ
      “handicraftsmen” too, including children of 6 and 7 years of
      age for a payment of 7 to 8 kopeks per day (Reports and
      Investigations,

Vol. I).[8]

 And so
      forth.
    

2) Other Branches of the Textile Industry. The Felt Trade.
    

      To judge by official factory statistics, felt production shows a very poor
      development of “capitalism”: in all European Russia there are
      altogether 55 factories, with 1,212 workers and an output totalling
      454,000 rubles (Directory for 1890). But these figures merely
      show a casually picked fragment of a widely developed capitalist
      industry. Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia occupies first place for the
      development of “factory” felt production, and in that gubernia
      the principal centre of the industry is the town of Arzamas and the suburb
      Viyezdnaya Sloboda (where there are 8 “factories” with 278
      workers and an output totalling 120,000 rubles; in 1897 there were 3,221
      inhabitants; and in the village of Krasnoye, 2,835). It is in the environs
      of these centres that “handicraft” felt-making is developed,
      in some 243 establishments, employing 935 workers, with an output
      totalling 103,847 rubles (Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, V). To illustrate clearly the economic organisation of
      felt-making in this district, let us try the graphic method and indicate
      by specific symbols the producers who occupy special places in the general
      structure of the industry.
    

      It is clear, therefore, that the separation of “factory” and
      “handicraft” industry is purely artificial, that what we have
      before us is a single and integral structure of industry which fully fits
      into the concept of capitalist









(approximately)[9]




      manufacture.[10]

      From the technical aspect it is hand production. The organisation of the
      work is that of co-operation based on division of labour, which is here
      observed in two forms: as to wares (some villages specialise in plain
      felt, others

 

      in boots, hats, socks, etc.), and as to individual operations (for example,
      the whole village of Vasilyev Vrag shapes hats and socks for the
      village of Krasnoye, where the semi-prepared article is finished,
      etc.). This is capitalist co-operation, for it is headed by big capital,
      which has created large manufactories and has brought under its sway (by
      an intricate web of economic relations) a mass of small
      establishments. The overwhelming majority of the producers have been
      transformed into workers performing one operation and producing
      for entrepreneurs under extremely insanitary

      conditions.[11]

 The
      long standing of the industry and the fully established capitalist
      relations result in the separation of the industrialists from agriculture:
      in the village of Krasnoye agriculture is in utter ruin, and the life of
      the inhabitants differs from that of the agricultural

      population.[12]


      Quite analogous is the organisation of the felt industry in a number of
      other districts. In 363 village communities of Semyonov Uyezd in the same
      gubernia, the industry in 1889 was carried on by 3,180 households, with
      4,038 persons working. Of 3,946 workers, only 752 worked for the market,
      576 were wage-workers and 2,618 worked for masters on the basis, in
      greater part, of using the latter’s materials; 189 households gave
      out work to 1,805 households. The big owners have workshops with as many
      as 25 wage-workers,

 

      and buy wool to a value of some 10,000 rubles per

      year.[13]

 The big
      owners are called thousanders ; their turnover runs to from 5,000
      to 100,000 rubles; they have their own wool warehouses, and their own
      booths for the sale of

      wares.[14]

 For
      Kazan Gubernia the List gives 5 felt “factories,”
      with 122 workers and an output totalling 48,000 rubles, as well as 60
      outside workers. Evidently the latter are also included among the
      “handicraftsmen,” concerning whom we read that they often work
      for “buyers-up” and that there are establishments having 60

      workers.[15]

 Of 29
      felt “factories” in Kostroma Gubernia, 28 are concentrated in
      Kineshma Uyezd, and have 593 workers employed in the establishments and
      458 outside (List, pp. 68-70; two of the enterprises have only
      outside workers. Steam-engines already appear). From the Transactions
      of the Handicraft Commission (XV) we learn that out of a total of
      3,908 wool-carders and felt-makers in this gubernia, 2,008 are
      concentrated in Kineshma Uyezd. The Kostroma felt-makers are in greater
      part dependent or work for wages in extremely insanitary

      workshops.[16]

 In
      Kalyazin Uyezd, Tver Gubernia, we find, on the one hand, that home work is
      done for “factory owners” (List, 113), and, on the
      other, that precisely this uyezd is a centre of “handicraft”
      felt-makers; as many as 3,000 of them come from this uyezd, passing
      through the wasteland called “Zimnyak” (in the 60s it was the
      site of Alexeyev’s cloth mill), and forming “an enormous
      labour market of wool-carders and

      felt-makers.”[17]

 In Yaroslavl Gubernia outside work for
      “factory owners is a]so done” (List, 115) and there
      are “handicraftsmen” who work for merchant proprietors, using
      the latter’s wool, etc.
    

3) The Hat-and-Cap and Hemp-and-Rope Trades
    

      Above we gave statistics for the hat industry of Moscow

      Gubernia.[18]

 They
      show that two-thirds of the total output and of the total number of
      workers are concentrated

 

      in 18 establishments, which have an average of 15.6

      wage-workers.[19]

      The “handicraft” hat-makers perform only part of the
      hat-making operations: they make the shapes, which are sold to Moscow
      merchants who have their own “finishing establishments”; on
      the other hand, “clippers” (women who clip the down) work at
      home for the “handicraft” hat-makers. Thus, all in all, we
      find here capitalist co-operation based on division of labour and
      entangled in a whole network of diverse forms of economic dependence. In
      the centre of the industry (the village of Klenovo, Podolsk Uyezd) the
      separation of the industrialists (mainly wage-workers) from

      agriculture[20]

 is
      clearly to be seen, together with a rise in the level of the
      population’s requirements: they live “more decently,”
      dress in calico and even in cloth, buy samovars, abandon ancient customs,
      etc., thereby evoking the bitter complaints of the local admirers of old

      times.[21]

 The new
      era even occasioned the appearance of migratory hat-makers.

    

      A typical example of capitalist manufacture is the cap industry in the
      village of Molvitino, Bui Uyezd, Kostroma

      Gubernia.[22]

      “The principal . . . occupation in the village of Molvitino and in
      . . . 36 hamlets is the cap industry.” Agriculture is being
      abandoned. Since 1861 the industry has greatly developed; sewing-machines
      have become widely used. In Molvitino 10 workshops are busy all year round
      with 5 to 25 male and 1 to 5 female workers each. “The best workshop
      . . . has a turnover of about 100,000 rubles per

      annum.”[23]

      Work is also distributed to homes (for example, materials for the crowns
      are made by women in their homes). Division of labour cripples the
      workers, who work under the most insanitary conditions and usually
      contract tuberculosis. The lengthy existence of the industry (for over 200
      years) has produced highly skilled craftsmen; the Molvitino craftsmen are
      known in the big cities and in the remote outer regions.
    


      The centre of the hemp industry in the Medyn Uyezd, Kaluga Gubernia, is
      the village of Polotnyani Zavod. This is a large village (according to the
      census of 1897 it had 3,685 inhabitants) with a population that is
      landless and highly industrial (over 1,000 “handicraftsmen”);
      it is the centre of the “handicraft” industries of Medyn

      Uyezd.[24]

 The hemp
      industry is organised in the following way: the big proprietors (of whom
      there are three, the biggest being Yerokhin) have workshops employing
      wage-workers and circulating capital of more or less considerable
      dimensions for purchasing raw materials. The hemp is combed in the
      “factory,” spun by spinners in their homes, and twisted both
      in the factory and in the home. It is warped in the factory and woven both
      in the factory and in the home. In 1878 a total of 841
      “handicraftsmen” was counted in the hemp industry; Yerokhin is
      considered to be both a “handicraftsman” and a “factory
      owner,” employing 94-64 workers in 1890 and in 1894-1895; according
      to Reports and Investigations (Vol. II, p.187), “hundreds
      of peasants” work for him.

    

      In Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, the rope industry is also centred in
      non-agricultural industrial villages, Nizhni Izbylets and Verkhni Izbylets
      in the Gorbatov

      Uyezd.[25]

      According to Mr. Karpov (Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, Vol. VIII), the Gorbatov-Izbylets district is one large
      rope-making area; part of the inhabitants of the town of Gorbatov are also
      engaged in the industry, and the villages of Verkhni Izbylets and Nizhni
      Izbylets are, in fact, “almost part of the town of Gorbatov”;
      the inhabitants live like townspeople, drink tea every day, wear clothing
      bought in the shops, and eat white bread. Altogether, as many as
      two-thirds of the inhabitants of 32 villages are engaged in the industry,
      a total of 4,701 working (2,096 men and 2,605 women) with an output of
      about 1 1/2 million rubles. The industry has been in existence

 

      for nearly 200 years, and is now declining. It is organised as follows:
      all work for 29 proprietors, using the latter’s materials, are paid
      by the piece, are “totally dependent upon the proprietors” and
      work from 14 to 15 hours a day. According to Zemstvo statistics (1889) the
      industry employs 1,699 male workers (plus 558 females and males of
      non-working age). Of 1,648 working only 197 work for sale, 1,340 work for

      proprietors[26]

      and 111 are wage-workers employed in the workshops of 58
      proprietors. Of 1,288 allotment households, only 727,
      or a little over half, cultivate all their land themselves. Of
      1,573 allotment-holding working persons, 306, or 19.4%, do not
      engage in agriculture at all. Turning to the question as to who
      these “proprietors” are, we must pass from the sphere of
      “handicraft” industry to that of
      “factory” industry. According
      to the List for 1894-95 there were two rope factories
      there, with 231 workers employed on the premises and 1,155
      working outside, with an output totalling 423,000 rubles. Both
      these establishments have installed motors (which they did not
      have either in 1879 or in 1890), and we therefore clearly see
      here the transition from capitalist manufacture to capitalist
      machine industry, and the transformation of “handicraft” work
      distributors and buyers-up into real factory owners.

    

      In Perm Gubernia the handicraft census of 1894-95 registered 68 peasant
      rope-and-string yards, with 343 workers (of whom 143 were hired) and an
      output totalling 115,000

      rubles.[27]

      These small establishments are headed by big manufactories,
      which are reckoned together, viz.: 6 owners employ 101 workers
      (91 hired) and have an output totalling 81,000

      rubles.[28]

 The
      system of production in these big establishments may serve as the most
      striking example of “serial manufacture” (as Marx calls

      it[89]), i.e., the
      sort of manufacture in which different workers perform different


consecutive operations in working up the raw material: 1) hemp
      scutching; 2) combing; 3) spinning; 4) coiling; 5) tarring; 6) winding on
      drum; 7) passing threads through perforated board; 8) passing threads
      through iron bush; 9) stranding of plaits, twisting and gathering of

      ropes.[29]


      The organisation of the hemp industry in Orel Gubernia is evidently
      similar: from among the considerable number of small peasant
      establishments big manufactories emerge, principally in the towns, and are
      included among the “factories and works” (according to the
      Directory for 1890 there were in Orel Gubernia 100 hemp-scutching
      factories, with 1,671 workers and an output totalling 795,000 rubles). The
      peasants work in the hemp industry “for merchants” (probably
      for the very same manufacturers), using the latter’s materials, at
      piece rates, the work being divided up into special operations:
      “scutchers” scutch the hemp; “spinners” spin it;
      “bearders” trim it, “wheelmen” turn the wheel. The
      work is very hard; many contract consumption and “rupture.”
      The dust is so thick that “unless accustomed you will not stay in it
      for a quarter of an hour.” The work is done in ordinary sheds from
      dawn to dusk, from May to

      September.[30]


4) The Wood-Working Trades
    

      The most typical example of capitalist manufacture in this sphere is the
      chest-making industry. According to the data, for instance, of the Perm
      investigators, “this industry is organised as follows: a few big
      proprietors, owning workshops that employ wage-workers, purchase
      materials, partly make the wares on their own premises, but mainly give
      out material to small workshops making parts, and in their own shops
      assemble them and, after finishing, send the ready article to
      market. Division of labour . . . is employed

 

      on the job extensively: the making of the entire chest is divided into ten
      or twelve operations, each separately performed by handicraftsmen. The
      organisation of the industry consists in the combination of workers
      performing one operation (Teilarbeiter, as they are called in
      Das Kapital ) under the command of

      capital.”[31]

 This is heterogeneous manufacture
      (heterogene Manufaktur, as Marx calls

      it[90]), in which
      the different workers do not perform consecutive operations in turning the
      raw material into the product, but make the various parts of the product,
      which are afterwards assembled. The preference of the capitalists for the
      domestic work of “handicraftsmen” is to be explained partly by
      the above mentioned character of manufacture, and partly (and mainly) by
      the cheaper labour of the home

      workers.[32]

 Let us
      observe that the relatively big workshops in this industry are sometimes
      also included among “factories and

      works.”[33]


      In all probability, the chest-making industry is organised similarly in
      Vladimir Gubernia, in Murom Uyezd where, according to the List,
      there are 9 “factories” (all hand-operated), with 89 workers
      on the premises and 11 outside, and an output totalling 69,810
      rubles.

    

      The carriage industry, in Perm Gubernia, for example, is organised on
      similar lines: from among the mass of small establishments there emerge
      assembly workshops employing wage-workers; the small handicraftsmen are
      workers who make parts of the carriages both out of their own materials,
      and out of materials supplied by the “buyers-up” (i.e., owners
      of the assembly

      workshops.)[34]

 We
      read about the Poltava “handicraft” carriage builders that in
      the suburb of Ardon there are workshops that employ wage-workers and also
      distribute work to homes (the bigger masters having as many as 20 outside

      workers).[35]

 In
      Kazan Gubernia, division

 

      of labour as to wares is to be observed in the building of town carriages:
      some villages specialise in sleighs, others in wheeled vehicles,
      etc. “The town carriages, completely assembled in the villages (but
      without the metal work, wheels or shafts), are sent to Kazan merchant
      customers, who in turn send them to blacksmiths for the metal work. The
      carriages are then sent back again to the shops and workshops in the town,
      where they are finished off, i.e., are upholstered and
      painted. . . . Kazan, where town carriages were formerly iron-mounted,
      gradually passed this work on to handicraftsmen, who work at home for a
      smaller payment than do the town

      craftsmen....”[36]

 Hence, capital prefers to distribute work to
      home workers because this reduces the cost of labour-power. The
      organisation of the carriage industry, as is evident from the data quoted,
      constitutes, in the majority of cases, a system of handicraftsmen making
      parts, who are under the sway of capital.

    

      The large industrial village of Vorontsovka, Pavlovsk Uyezd, Voronezh
      Gubernia (9,541 inhabitants in 1897), constitutes, as it were, a single
      manufactory of wooden articles (Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, etc., Vol. IX, article by Rev. M. Popov). Over 800 houses
      are engaged in the industry (as well as some households in the suburb of
      Alexandrovka, which has over 5,000 inhabitants). They make carts,
      tarantasses, wheels, chests, etc., to a total of about 267,000
      rubles. Less than one-third are independent masters; hired workers in
      masters’ workshops are

      rare.[37]

 The
      majority work to order for peasant merchants at piece rates. The workers
      are in debt to the proprietors and are worn out by arduous toil: the
      people are growing feebler. The inhabitants of the suburb are industrial,
      not of the rural type, and scarcely engage in agriculture at all (except
      to work vegetable plots), since their allotments are miserably small. The
      industry has been long in existence,

 

      diverting the population from agriculture and increasingly widening the
      rift between the rich and the poor. The people subsist on meagre food;
      they dress “more smartly than before,” “but beyond their
      means,” in clothing that is entirely bought. “The population
      has succumbed to the spirit of industry and trade.” “Nearly
      all who have no craft carry on some trading. . . . Under the influence of
      industry and trade, the peasant has, generally speaking, become more
      unreserved, and this has made him more developed and

      resourceful.”[38]


      The celebrated wooden-spoon industry of the Semyonov Uyezd,
      Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, is close to capitalist manufacture in its
      organisation. True, there are no big workshops standing out from among the
      mass of small workshops and dominating them, but we find a deeply-rooted
      division of labour and the complete subjection of the mass of part-job
      workers to capital. Before it is ready, the spoon passes through no less
      than 10 hands, the buyers-up getting some of the operations done by
      specially hired workers or giving them out to specialist workers (for
      example, for varnishing); some of the villages specialise in particular
      operations (for example, the village of Dyakovo specialises in spoon
      finishing to the order of the buyer-up, at piece rates; the villages of
      Khvostikovo, Dianovo and Zhuzhelka specialise in varnishing, etc.). The
      buyers-up purchase the timber wholesale in the Samara and other gubernias,
      where they send parties of hired workers; they own warehouses for raw
      material and manufactured goods, supply the most valuable material to
      handicraftsmen for processing, etc. The mass of workers doing part jobs
      merge into a single, complex mechanism of production, entirely under the
      sway of capital. “It is all the same to the spoon-makers whether
      they work for hire at the master’s cost and on his premises, or are
      occupied in their own cottages, for in this industry, as in others,
      everything has been weighed, measured and counted. The spoon-maker never
      earns more than

 

      just enough to keep body and soul

      together.”[39]

 It is quite natural that under such conditions
      the capitalists who dominate the whole trade are in no hurry to open their
      own workshops, and the industry, based on hand skill and traditional
      division of labour, stagnates in its seclusion and immobility. Tied to the
      land, the “handicraftsmen” seem to have become petrified in
      their routine: as in 1879, so in 1889, they still count money in the old
      style, in banknotes and not in silver.

    

      The toy industry in Moscow Gubernia is headed similarly by establishments
      of the capitalist-manufactory

      type.[40]

 Of 481
      workshops, 20 have over 10 workers each. Division of labour, both as to
      wares and as to individual operations, is practised on a very wide scale,
      enormously raising the productivity of labour (at the cost of crippling
      the worker). For example, it is estimated that a small workshop yields a
      return of 26% of the selling price, and a big workshop, one of

      58%.[41]

 Of course,
      the fixed capital of the big proprietors is also much larger; technical
      devices are met with (for example, drying sheds). The centre of the
      industry is a non-agricultural township, the suburb of Sergiyevsky (where
      there are 1,055 workers out of a total of 1,398, with an output to the
      amount of 311,000 rubles out of a total of 405,000 rubles; the population,
      according to the 1897 census, numbers 15,155). The author of the article
      on this industry, referring to the prevalence of small workshops, etc.,
      considers it more, but still not very, likely that the industry will
      develop into manufacture rather than into factory industry. “In the
      future, too,” he says, “the small producers will always be
      able to compete more or less successfully with large-scale
      production” (loc. cit., 93). The author forgets
      that in manufacture the technical basis is always the same hand-production
      that obtains in the small industries; that the division of labour can
      never be such a

 

      decisive advantage that it will entirely eliminate the small producers,
      particularly if the latter resort to such means as lengthening the working
      day, etc.; and that manufacture is never in a position to embrace the
      whole of production, but remains a mere superstructure over the mass of
      small establishments.
    

5) The Processing of Livestock Produce. [The Leather and Fur Trades]
    

      The most extensive areas of the leather industry present particularly
      striking examples of the complete merging of “handicraft” and
      factory industry, examples of capitalist manufacture highly developed (in
      depth and in breadth). What is characteristic is the fact that the
      gubernias which are conspicuous for the size of their
      “factory” leather industry (Vyatka, Nizhni-Novgorod, Perm and
      Tver) are marked by a particular development of “handicraft”
      industries in this sphere.

    

      In the village of Bogorodskoye, Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia,
      there were, according to the Directory for 1890, 58
      “factories” with 392 workers and an output totalling 547,000
      rubles; according to the List for 1894-95 there were 119
      “works,” with 1,499 workers on the premises and 205 outside,
      and with an output totalling 934,000 rubles (the latter figures covering
      only the processing of livestock produce, the principal local
      industry). But these data deal only with the top levels of
      capitalist manufacture. Mr. Karpov in 1879 computed in this village and
      its environs over 296 establishments, with 5,669 workers (a large number
      of whom worked at home for capitalists), and with an output totalling
      about 1,490,000

      rubles[42]

 in the
      following industries: tanning, shingle-gluing, basket-weaving (for packing
      goods), harness-making, horse-collar-making, mitten-making and, standing
      by itself, pottery. The Zemstvo census of 1889 listed 4,401 industrialists
      for this district, and of 1,842 workers for whom detailed information is
      given, 1,119 work for hire in other people’s workshops and 405 work
      at home for

      masters.[43]

      “Bogorodskoye,

 

      with its population of 8,000, is a huge tannery in continuous

      operation.”[44]

 To be more precise, it is a “serial”
      manufactory controlled by a few big capitalists who buy the raw materials,
      tan the hides, and turn them into a variety of articles, hiring several
      thousand absolutely propertyless workers for the job and ruling over the
      small

      establishments.[45]

      This industry has had a very long existence, since the 17th century;
      particularly memorable in the industry’s history are the Sheremetevs
      (beginning of the 19th century), landlords who helped considerably to
      develop the industry and, incidentally, protected the proletariat, which
      came into existence here long ago, from the local rich. After 1861 the
      industry greatly developed, and particularly did big establishments grow
      at the expense of the small ones; centuries of industrial activity
      produced from among the population remarkably skilled craftsmen who have
      carried the trade all over Russia. The firmly-rooted capitalist relations
      have led to the separation of industry from agriculture: hardly any
      farming is done in Bogorodskoye village itself, which, on the contrary,
      divorces neighbouring peasants who move into this “town” from
      the

      land.[46]

      Mr. Karpov notes in this village “a complete absence of peasant
      characteristics among the inhabitants,” so that “you would
      never think you were in a village and not a town.” This village
      leaves Gorbatov and all the other uyezd towns of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia
      far behind, with the exception, perhaps, of Arzamas. It is “one of
      the considerable

 

      commercial and industrial centres in the gubernia, and its industry and
      commerce run into the millions.” “The radius of the industrial
      and commercial influence of Bogorodskoye is very wide; but most closely
      connected with the industry of Bogorodskoye is that of its environs within
      a radius of 10 to 12 versts. These industrial environs are, as it were, a
      continuation of Bogorodskoye itself.” “The inhabitants of
      Bogorodskoye do not in the least resemble the ordinary, raw muzhiks: they
      are artisans of the burgher type, shrewd, experienced people, who look
      down on the peasants. The manner of life and the ethical standards of the
      Bogorodskoye inhabitants are completely urban.” To this we must add
      that the industrial villages of Gorbatov Uyezd are marked by a relatively
      high level of literacy among the population. Thus, the percentage of
      literate and student men and women is, in the villages of Pavlovo,
      Bogorodskoye and Vorsma, 37.8% and 20% respectively, as against 21.5% and
      4.4% in the rest of the uyezd (see Zemstvo statistical Material
      ).

    

      Quite analogous (only on a smaller scale) are the relations in the
      leather-processing industries of the villages of Katunki and Gorodets
      (Balakhna Uyezd), Bolshoye Murashkino (Knyaginin Uyezd), Yurino (Vasil
      Uyezd), and Tubanayevka, Spasskoye, Vatras and Latyshikha in the same
      uyezd. These are similar non-agricultural centres with a
      “ring” of surrounding agricultural villages, and with similar
      diverse industries and numerous small establishments (and also workers in
      the home) subordinated to big entrepreneurs, whose capitalist workshops
      are occasionally included among “factories and

      works.”[47]

      Without going into statistical details, which will provide nothing new
      compared with what has already been said, let us merely quote the
      following extremely interesting description of the village of

      Katunki:[48]







      “A certain patriarchal simplicity in the relations between masters
      and workmen, which, however, is not so noticeable at first sight

 

      and is, unfortunately (?), disappearing increasingly every year
      . . . testifies to the handicraft character of the industries (?). It is
      only recently that the factory character both of the industries and of the
      population has begun to be observed, under the influence, in particular,
      of the town, intercourse with which has been facilitated by the
      inauguration of the steamboat service. Today the village looks like a
      regular industrial township: there is no sign of agriculture whatever, the
      houses are built close together as in the towns; the fine brick houses of
      the rich, and alongside of them the miserable hovels of the poor; the long
      wooden and brick buildings of the factories crowded in the middle of the
      village — all this sharply distinguishes Katunki from the neighbouring
      villages and clearly points to the industrial character of the local
      population. The inhabitants themselves possess features of character that
      also call to mind the type of “factory hand” who has already
      taken shape in Russia: a certain showiness in house furniture, in clothes
      and manners, spendthrift habits of life in most cases, and little care for
      the morrow, a forwardness and often affectation in speech, a certain
      superciliousness towards the country yokel — all these features are
      possessed by them in common with all Russian factory

      people.”[49]



      In the town of Arzamas, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, the
      “factory” statistics listed in 1890 a total of 6 tanneries,
      employing 64 workers (Directory ); this is only a small fraction
      of the capitalist manufacture which embraces the fur, boot-making and
      other industries. The same factories employ workers in the home, both in
      the town of Arzamas (in 1878, estimated at 400) and in 5 suburban
      villages, where out of the 360 furrier households, 330 work for Arzamas
      merchants, using their materials and working 14 hours a day for 6 to 9
      rubles per

      month[50];

that is
      why the furriers are pallid, feeble and degenerating folk. In the suburb

 

      of Viyezdnaya Sloboda, of the 600 boot-maker households, 500 work for
      masters, from whom they receive the cut-out leather. The industry is of
      long standing, being about 200 years old, and is still growing and
      developing. The inhabitants hardly engage in agriculture at all; their
      whole manner of life is purely urban, and they live “in grand
      style.” The same applies to the furrier villages mentioned above,
      the inhabitants of which “look down with disdain upon the peasant
      and call him a ‘country

      bumpkin’.”[51]


      We find exactly the same thing in Vyatka Gubernia. The Vyatka and
      Slobodskoi uyezds are centres both of “factory” and of
      “handicraft” leather and fur trades. In the Vyatka Uyezd, the
      handicraft tanneries are concentrated on the outskirts of the town and
      “supplement” the industrial activities of the big

      works,[52]

 for
      example, by working for the big owners; working for the latter also, in
      the majority of cases, are the handicraft harness-makers and glue
      makers. The fur factory owners have hundreds working for them in the home,
      sewing sheepskins, etc. This is just a single capitalist manufactory with
      branches: sheepskin dressing and sheepskin-coat-making, leather and
      harness, etc. Still more striking are the relations existing in the
      Slobodskoi Uyezd (the centre of the industries is the suburb of Demyanka);
      here we see a small number of big factory

      owners[53]

 at the
      head of handicraft tanners (numbering 870), boot- and mitten-makers (855),
      sheepskin-dressers (940), and tailors (309 make short sheepskin coats to
      order from capitalists). Generally speaking, such organisation of the
      production of leather goods is evidently very widespread: thus, in the
      town of Sarapul, Vyatka Gubernia, the List gives 6 tanneries,
      also making footwear, which employ, in addition to 214 workers on the
      premises, 1,080 outside workers (p. 495). What would become of our
      “handicrafts men,” those representatives of
      “people’s” industry who are

 

      depicted in such bright hues by all sorts of Manilovs, if all the Russian
      merchants and factory owners were to compute with equal detail and
      precision the outside workers employed by

      them?[54]


      Reference should be made here to the industrial village of Rasskazovo,
      Tambov Uyezd, Tambov Gubernia (population in 1897 was 8,283), a centre
      both of “factory” industry (cloth mills, soap-works, tanneries
      and distilleries) and of “handicraft” industry, the latter
      being closely connected with the former; and to the industries: tanning,
      felt-making (as many as 70 masters, and establishments employing from 20
      to 30 workers), glue-making, boot-making, stocking knitting (there is not
      a household where stockings are not knit from wool that
      “buyers-up” give out by weight), etc. Near this village is the
      suburb of Belaya Polyana (300 households), celebrated for industries of
      the same kind. In Morshansk Uyezd, the centre of the handicraft industries
      is the village of Pokrovskoye-Vasilyevskoye, which is also the centre of
      factory industry (see Directory and Reports and
      Investigations, Vol. III). In Kursk Gubernia, noteworthy as
      industrial villages and centres of “handicraft” industries are
      the suburbs: Veliko-Mikhailovka (Novy Oskol Uyezd; population in 1897 was
      11,853), Borisovka (Graivoron Uyezd — 18,071 inhabitants), Tomarovka
      (Belgorod Uyezd, 8,716 inhabitants), Miropolye (Sudzha Uyezd, over 10,000
      inhabitants. See Reports and Investigations, Vol. I, Information
      for 1888-1889). In the same villages you will also find leather
      “works” (see Directory for 1890). The principal
      “handicraft” industry is leather and boot-making. It arose as

 

      far back as the first half of the 18th century and reached the peak of its
      development in the 60s of the 19th century having become “a stable
      organisation of a purely commercial character.” The whole business
      was monopolised by contractors, who bought the leather and gave it out to
      be processed by handicraftsmen. The railways destroyed this monopoly
      character of capital, and the capitalist contractors transferred their
      capital to more profitable undertakings. Today it is organised as follows:
      there are about 120 big entrepreneurs; they own workshops where
      wage-workers are employed, and also distribute work to homes; there are as
      many as 3,000 small independent masters (who, however, buy their leather
      from the big ones); there are 400 people who work at home (for the big
      masters), and as many wage-workers; then there are the apprentices. The
      total number of boot-makers is over 4,000. In addition, there are
      handicraft potters, icon-case makers, icon painters, table-cloth weavers,
      etc.

    

      A highly characteristic and typical example of capitalist manufacture is
      the squirrel-fur industry in Kargopol Uyezd, Olonets Gubernia, described
      with such knowledge of the facts, and with truthful and artless
      presentation of the whole life of the industrial population by a craftsman
      and teacher in the Transactions of the Handicraft Commission
      (Vol. IV). According to his description (in 1878), the industry has
      existed since the beginning of the 19th century: 8 masters employ 175
      workers, in addition to which they have as many as 1,000 seamstresses and
      some 35 families of furriers working for them at home (in different
      villages), 1,300 to 1,500 persons in all, with an output totalling 336,000
      rubles. As a point of interest, it should be noted that when this was a
      flourishing industry it was not included in the “factory”
      statistics. The Directory for 1879 makes no mention of it. But
      when it began to decline the statistics included it. The
      Directory for 1890 listed for the town and the uyezd of Kargopol
      7 works, with 121 workers and an output totalling 50,000 rubles, whereas
      the List gave 5 works, with 79 workers (plus 57 outside) and an
      output totalling 49,000

      rubles.[55]

 The
      order of things prevailing in this branch of

 

      capitalist manufacture is very instructive as a specimen of what goes on
      in our age-old, purely native “handicraft industries,” that
      have been left stranded in one of Russia’s numerous rural
      backwoods. The craftsmen work 15 hours a day in a very unhealthy
      atmosphere and earn 8 rubles per month, less than 60 or 70 rubles per
      year. The masters’ incomes amount to about 5,000 rubles per
      annum. The relations between masters and workers are
      “patriarchal”: according to ancient custom, the master gives
      the workers kvass and salt gratis, which they have to beg from his
      cook. As a mark of gratitude to the master (for “giving” them
      work) the workers come, without pay, to pull squirrel tails, and also
      clean furs after work. The workers live in the workshop all the week, and
      the masters knock them about, seemingly in a joke (p. 218,
      loc. cit.), make them do all sorts of jobs, such as
      raking hay, shovelling snow, fetching water, rinsing clothes, etc. Labour
      is astonishingly cheap in Kargopol itself, and the peasants in the
      vicinity “are ready to work for next to nothing.” Work is done
      by hand, there is systematic division of labour, and there is a lengthy
      apprenticeship (8 to 12 years); the lot of the apprentices can easily be
      imagined.
    

6) The Remaining Livestock Processing Trades
    

      A particularly noteworthy example of capitalist manufacture is the
      celebrated boot industry of the village of Kimry, Korcheva Uyezd, Tver
      Gubernia, and its

      environs.[56]
 

      The industry is a very old one, having existed since the 16th
      century. Since the Reform, it has continued to grow and develop. In the
      early 70s Pletnev counted 4 volosts in the area covered by this industry,
      but in 1888 the area included 9 volosts. Basically the organisation of the
      industry is as follows. It is headed by the owners of big workshops
      employing wage-workers; they distribute the cut-out leather to be made up
      by outside workers. Mr. Pletnev counted 20 such masters, employing 124
      adults and 60 boys, with an output totalling 818,000 rubles, while the
      number of workers occupied at home for these capitalists is estimated by
      the author approximately at 1,769 adults and 1,833 boys. Then come the
      small masters, each with 1 to 5 wage-workers and 1 to 3 boys. These
      masters dispose of their goods mainly in the village market in Kimry; they
      number 224 and have 460 adults and 301 boys working for them; output
      totals 187,000 rubles. Hence, there are 244 masters altogether, employing
      2,353 adults (of whom 1,769 work at home) and 2,194 boys (of whom 1,833
      work at home), with an output totalling 1,005,000 rubles. Further, there
      are workshops which do various individual operations: currying
      (skin-cleaning with scraper); chipping (gluing of chips left from
      currying); special
      carting (4 masters, with 16 employees and up to 50 horses); special
      carpentry (box-making),

      etc.[57]

 Pletnev
      calculated the total output at 4.7 million rubles for the whole
      district. In 1881 the number of handicraftsmen was computed at 10,638, and
      with migrants, 26,000, with an output totalling 3.7 million rubles. As to
      conditions

 

      of labour, it is important to note the excessively long working day (14 to
      15 hours) and the extremely insanitary working conditions, payment in
      goods, etc. The centre of the industry, Kimry village, “is more like
      a small town” (Reports and Investigations, I, 224); the
      inhabitants are poor agriculturists, and are engaged in their industry all
      the year round; only the rural handicraftsmen give up the industry during
      haymaking. The houses in Kimry village are urban, and the inhabitants are
      distinguished for their urban habits of life (such as
      “showiness”). Until very recently this industry was not
      included in “factory” statistics, probably because the masters
      “readily style themselves handicraftsmen” (ibid.,
      228). The List has for the first time included 6 boot workshops
      in Kimry district, with 15 to 40 workers each on the premises, and with no
      outside workers. Of course, it contains no end of gaps.

    

      Manufacture also includes the button industry of Moscow Gubernia,
      Bronnitsi and Bogorodskoye uyezds — the making of buttons from hoofs and
      rams’ horns. Engaged in this industry are 487 workers, employed in
      52 establishments; the output totals 264,000 rubles. Establishments with
      fewer than 5 employees number 16; those with 5 to 10 — 26; those with 10
      and more — 10. Masters who do without wage-workers number only 10; these
      work for big masters, using the latter’s materials. Only the big
      industrialists (who, as is evident from the figures given, should have
      from 17 to 21 workers per establishment) are quite independent. It is
      they, evidently, who figure in the Directory as “factory
      owners” (see p. 291: 2 establishments with an output totalling 4,000
      rubles and with 73 workers). This is “serial manufacture”; the
      horns are first steamed in what is called the “smithy” (a
      wooden hut with a furnace); then they are passed on to the
      workshop where they are cut up, after which they go to a stamping
      press, where the pattern is imprinted, and, lastly, are finished and
      polished on lathes. The industry has its apprentices. The working day is
      14 hours. Payment in goods is a regular thing. The relations between
      masters and men are patriarchal, as seen in the following: the master
      calls the workers “boys,” and the pay-book is called the
      “boys’ book”; when the master pays

 

      the workers, he lectures them and never grants in full their
      “requests” for payment.

    

      The horn industry, which is included in our table of small industries
      (Appendix I to Chapter V, Industries Nos. 31 and 33), is also of the same
      type. “Handicraftsmen” employing dozens of wage-workers figure
      also in the Directory as “factory owners” (p. 291). Division
      of labour is practised; work is also given out to home workers (horn
      trimmers). The centre of the industry in Bogorodsk Uyezd is the big
      village of Khoteichi, where agriculture is receding into the background
      (population in 1897 was 2,494). The Moscow Zemstvo publication stated
      quite rightly: Handicraft Industries of Bogorodsk Uyezd,
      Moscow Gubernia, in 1890, that this village
      “is nothing but a large comb manufactory ” (p. 24,
      our italics). In 1890, over 500 industrialists were counted in this
      village, with an output of from 3.5 to 5.5 million combs. “More
      often than not, the horn dealer is also a buyer-up of finished goods, and
      in many cases a big comb-maker as well.” The position of those
      makers who are compelled to take horns “at piece rates” is
      particularly bad: “their position is actually worse than that of the
      wage-workers in the big establishments.” Dire need compels them to
      exploit the labour of their whole families beyond measure, to lengthen
      their working day and to put juveniles to work. “During the
      winter, work in Khoteichi starts at one o’clock in the morning, and
      it is hard to say for certain when it ends in the cottage of the
      ‘independent’ craftsman doing ‘piece-work.’”
      Payment in goods is widely practised. “This system, eliminated with
      such difficulty from the factories, is still in full force in the small
      handicraft establishments” (27). Probably, the horn goods industry
      is organised on similar lines in Kadnikov Uyezd, Vologda Gubernia, in the
      area of Ustye village (known as “Ustyanshchina”), where there
      are 58 hamlets. Mr. V. Borisov (Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, Vol. IX) counts 388 handicraftsmen here, with an output
      totalling 45,000 rubles; all the handicraftsmen work for capitalists, who
      buy horns in St. Petersburg and tortoise-shell abroad.

    

      At the head of the brush industry in Moscow Gubernia (see Appendix I to
      Chapter V, Industry No. 20) we find big establishments with a large number
      of wage-workers and

 

      with systematic division of

      labour.[58]

 It is
      interesting to note at this point the changes that took place in the
      organisation of this industry between 1879 and 1895 (see Moscow Zemstvo
      publication: The Brush Industry According to the Investigation of 1895
      ). Some well-to-do industrialists went to Moscow to carry on the
      industry there. The number of industrialists increased 70%, the increase
      being particularly large in the number of women (+170%) and girls
      (+159%). The number of big workshops with wage-workers diminished: the
      proportion of establishments with wage-workers dropped from 62% to
      39%. This was due to the fact that the masters began to distribute
      work to be done in the home. The introduction into general use of the
      drilling machine (for making holes in brush blocks) accelerated and
      facilitated one of the main processes in brushmaking. The demand for
      “setters” (craftsmen who “set” bristle in the
      block) increased; and this operation, which became increasingly
      specialised, fell to the lot of women, their labour being cheaper. The
      women began to work at home setting bristle, and were paid by the
      piece. Thus, the growing resort to domestic industry was caused in this
      case by progress in technique (drilling machine), progress in division of
      labour (the women do nothing but set bristle), and progress in capitalist
      exploitation (the labour of women and girls being cheaper). This example
      shows very clearly that domestic industry by no means eliminates the
      concept of capitalist manufacture, but, on the contrary, is sometimes
      even a sign of its further development.
    

7) The Processing of Mineral Products
    

      In the section relating to ceramics we get an example of capitalist
      manufacture in the industries of the Gzhel district (an area of 25 villages
      Bronnitsi and Bogorodskoye uyezds, Moscow Gubernia). The relevant
      statistics are given in our table of small industries (Appendix I to
      Chapter V, Industries Nos. 15, 28 and 37). From these data it is evident

 

      that despite the enormous differences between the three Gzhel industries:
      pottery, porcelain and decorative, these differences disappear as we pass
      from one grade of establishment to another in each industry, and we get a
      series of workshops of successively increasing dimensions. Here are the
      average numbers of workers per establishment according to grade in these
      three industries: 2.4 — 4.3 — 8.4 — 4.4. — 7.9 — 13.5 — 18 — 69 —
      226.4. In other words, the workshops range from the very smallest to the
      very biggest. There is no doubt that the big establishments belong to the
      category of capitalist manufacture (inasmuch as they have not introduced
      machines, have not developed into factories); what is important, however,
      is not only this, but also that the small establishments are connected
      with the big ones ; that we have a single system of industry
      here and not separate workshops of one or other type of economic
      organisation. “Gzhel constitutes a single economic whole”
      (Isayev, loc. cit., 138), and the big workshops in the
      district have grown slowly and gradually out of the small ones
      (ibid., 121). The work is done by

      hand,[59]

 with
      considerable division of labour : among the potters we find wheel
      hands (specialising in different sorts of pottery), kilnmen, etc., and
      sometimes special workers for preparing colours. In the manufacture of
      porcelain-ware division of labour is extremely detailed: crushers, wheel
      hands, feeders, kilnmen, decorators, etc. The wheel hands even specialise
      in the various kinds of porcelain ware (cf. Isayev,
      loc. cit., 140: in one case division of labour increases
      productivity of labour by 25%). The decorators’ shops work for the
      porcelain makers and are, therefore, only departments of the
      latter’s manufactories, performing a special detailed operation. It
      is characteristic of developed capitalist manufacture that physical
      strength itself becomes a specialty. Thus, in Gzhel, some of the villages
      are engaged

 

      (almost to a man) in clay digging; for heavy work not requiring special
      skill (grinding), workers from the Tula and Ryazan gubernias are employed
      almost exclusively, being superior in strength and vigour to the not very
      robust Gzhelians. Payment in goods is widely practised. Agriculture is in
      a bad way. “The Gzhelians are a degenerating race” (Isayev,
      168) — weak-chested, narrow-shouldered, feeble; the decorators lose their
      sight at an early age, etc. Capitalist division of labour breaks up the
      worker and deforms him. The working day is from 12 to 13 hours.
    

8) The Metal Trades.  The Pavlovo Industries
    

      The celebrated Pavlovo lock and cutlery industries cover the whole of
      Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, and Murom Uyezd, Vladimir
      Gubernia. These industries originated very long ago. Smirnov states that
      as far back as 1621 there were (according to the

      cadastres[91]) 11
      smithies in Pavlovo. By the middle of the 19th century these industries
      constituted a far-flung network of fully developed capitalist
      relations. After the Reform, the industries in this district continued to
      develop and expand. According to the Zemstvo census of 1889, in Gorbatov
      Uyezd 13 volosts and 119 villages were engaged in industry; a total of
      5,953 households, 6,570 male workers (54% of the total number working in
      these villages) and 2,741 old men, juveniles and women, 9,311 persons in
      all. In the Murom Uyezd, Mr. Grigoryev in 1881 registered 6 industrial
      volosts, 66 villages, 1,545 households and 2,205 male workers (39% of the
      total number working in these villages). Not only were large,
      non-agricultural industrial villages formed (Pavlovo, Vorsma), but even
      the surrounding peasants were diverted from agriculture: outside of
      Pavlovo and Vorsma, in Gorbatov Uyezd, 4,492 persons were engaged in
      industries, of whom 2,357, or more than half did not engage in
      agriculture. Life in centres like Pavlovo has become quite urban and has
      given rise to incomparably more developed requirements, more cultured
      environment, clothes, manner of life, etc., than among the surrounding
      “raw”

      peasants.[60]



      Turning to the economic organisation of the Pavlovo industries, we must
      first of all note the indubitable fact that the
      “handicraftsmen” are headed by the most typical capitalist
      manufactories. For example, in the Zavyalovs’ establishment (which
      already in the 60s employed over 100 workers at the bench and has now
      introduced a steam engine) a penknife passes through 8 or 9 hands: the
      forger, blade-maker, handle-maker (usually an outside worker), hardener,
      facer, polisher, finisher, grinder and marker. This is extensive
      capitalist co-operation based on division of labour, with a considerable
      number of the workers performing individual operations employed at home
      and not in the capitalist’s workshop. Here are facts given by
      Mr. Labzin (in 1866) on the bigger establishments in the villages of
      Pavlovo, Vorsma and Vacha, covering all branches of production in this
      district: 15 proprietors had 500 workers occupied on the premises and
      1,134 workers outside, making a total of 1,634, with an output totalling
      351,700 rubles. How far this description of economic relations is
      applicable to the whole district at the present time may be seen from the
      following

      data[61]:
    






      Thus, the organisation of the industry as outlined by us prevails in all
      the districts. All in all, about three-fifths of the total number
      of workers are employed capitalistically. Here too, consequently, we find
      manufacture predominating in the general structure of the

      industry[62]

 and
      holding masses of workers under its sway, without, however, being able to
      eradicate small production. The relative tenacity of the latter is fully
      explained, firstly, by the fact that in some branches of the Pavlovo
      industry mechanised production has not yet been introduced at all (for
      instance, in lock-making); and, secondly, by the fact that the small
      producer tries to save himself from sinking by resorting to means that
      cause him to sink far lower than the wage-worker. These means are:
      lengthening the working day, and reducing the standard of living and of
      general requirements. “The earnings of the group of handicraftsmen
      who work for proprietors are less subject to fluctuation”
      (Grigoryev, loc. cit., 65); at Zavyalovs’, for
      example, the lowest-paid worker is the handle-maker; “he works at
      home, and that is why he is satisfied with lower earnings” (68). The
      handicraftsmen who work “for factory owners” are “able
      to earn somewhat more than the average earnings of the one who takes his
      products to the market. Larger earnings are particularly noticeable among
      the workers who live in the factories”

      (70).[63]

 The
      working day in the “factories” is from 14 1/2 to 15 hours,
      with a maximum of 16 hours. “The working day of the home-working
      handicraftsmen, on the other hand, is never less than 17 hours and
      sometimes as much as 18 and even 19 hours” (ibid.). It
      would not be in the

 

      least surprising if the law of June 2,

      1897[92] caused an
      increase here in home-work; it is high time these
      “handicraftsmen” directed their efforts towards compelling the
      proprietors to organise factories! Let the reader also recall the
      notorious Pavlovo “loan-purchase,” “exchange,”
      “wife-pawning” and similar forms of bondage and personal
      degradation which grind down the quasi-independent small

      producer.[64]

      Fortunately, rapidly developing large-scale machine industry does not so
      readily tolerate these worst forms of exploitation as manufacture
      does. Running ahead a little, let us quote data on the growth of factory
      production in this

      district.[65]






      We thus see that ever-increasing numbers of workers are being drawn into
      large establishments, which are going over to the use of

      machines.[66]




9) Other Metal Trades
    

      The industries of Bezvodnoye village, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia and Uyezd
      also come under the head of capitalist manufacture. This is also an
      industrial village, the majority of whose inhabitants do not engage in
      agriculture at all, and which serves as the centre of an industrial area
      of several villages. According to the Zemstvo census of 1889
      (Material, Vol. VIII, Nizhni-Novgorod, 1895), in the Bezvodnoye
      Volost (581 households) 67.3% of the households cultivated no land, 78.3%
      had no horses, 82.4% engaged in industries, and 57.7% had literate persons
      and schoolchildren in the family (as against an average for the uyezd of
      44.6%). The Bezvodnoye industries are devoted to the production of various
      metal goods: chains, fish-hooks, and metal fabrics; the output was
      estimated at 2 1/2 million rubles in

      1883[67]

 and 1 1/2
      million rubles in

      1888-89.[68]

 The
      organisation of the industry is as follows: work for proprietors, using
      their materials, which is distributed among a number of workers performing
      single operations and done partly in the employers’ workshops and
      partly in the home. For example, in the making of fish-hooks the various
      operations are performed by “benders,” “cutters”
      (who work in a special shed) and “pointers” (women and
      children who sharpen the hook-points in their homes); all these work at
      piece rates for the capitalist, while the bender gives out work on his own
      account to the cutters and pointers. “Metal wire is now done by
      horse-driven windlasses; formerly the wire was drawn by blind men, who
      were brought here in large numbers. . . .” One of the
      “specialities” of capitalist manufacture! “The
      conditions under which this work is done differ very much from those in
      all the other trades.

 

      People have to work in a stifling atmosphere filled with the harmful
      vapours emanating from accumulated horse

      dung.”[69]

      Organised on the same lines of capitalist manufacture are the

      screen,[70]

      the pin,[71]

      and the gold-thread

      industries.[72]

      In the last-named industry at the beginning of
      the 80s there were 66 establishments, employing 670 workers (of
      whom 79% were hired), with an output totalling 368,500 rubles;
      some of these capitalist establishments were occasionally also
      included among the “factories and

      works.”[73]


      The locksmith industries of the Burmakino Volost (and surrounding volosts)
      of Yaroslavl Gubernia and Uyezd are probably organised on the same
      lines. At all events, here we observe the same division of labour
      (blacksmiths, blowers and locksmiths), the same extensive development of
      wage-labour (of 307 smithies in the Burmakino Volost, 231 employ
      wage-workers), the same predominance of big capital over all these detail
      workers (the buyers-up are at the top; the blacksmiths work for them, and
      the locksmiths for the blacksmiths), the same combination of the buying up
      of wares with the production of wares in capitalist workshops, some of
      which are occasionally included among the “factories and

      works.”[74]


      In the appendix to the preceding chapter, statistics were given on the
      tray and the copper

      industries[75]

      of Moscow Gubernia (the latter in the district known as
      “Zagarye”). The data show that wage-labour plays a predominant
      part in these industries, that the industries are headed by large
      workshops employing an average of from 18 to 23 wage-workers per
      establishment, with an average output of from

 

      16,000 to 17,000 rubles. If we add to this that division of labour is very
      widely practised

      here,[76]

 it will
      be clear that what we have is capitalist

      manufacture.[77]

      “The small industrial units, which are an anomaly under the existing
      conditions of technique and division of labour, can only hold out
      alongside the big

      workshops by lengthening the working day to the utmost” (Isayev,
      loc. cit., p. 33) — among the tray-makers,
      for example, for as long as 19 hours. The ordinary working day
      here is from 13 to 15 hours; with the small proprietors it is
      from 16 to 17 hours. Payment in goods is widely practised (both
      in 1876 and in

      1890).[78]

 Let us
      add that the lengthy existence of this industry (it arose at the beginning
      of the 19th century, at the latest) and extensive specialisation have, in
      this case too, produced highly skilled workers; the Zagarians are famed
      for their craftsmanship. Specialities have also sprung up in the industry
      which need no preliminary training and are within the grasp of even
      under-age workers. “This very possibility,” Mr. Isayev rightly
      observes, “of becoming an under-age worker at once and acquiring a
      trade, as it were, without having to study, indicates that the handicraft
      spirit, which demands the training of labour-power, is disappearing; the
      simplicity of many of the detailed operations is a symptom of the
      transition of handicraft to manufacture”
      (loc. cit., 34). Let us only observe that to a certain
      degree the “handicraft spirit” always remains in manufacture,
      for its basis is the same hand production.
    


10) The Jewellery, Samovar and Accordion Trades
    

      The village of Krasnoye, Kostroma Gubernia and Uyezd, is one of the
      industrial villages usually held up as centres of our
      “people’s” capitalist manufacture. This large village
      (in 1897 it had 2,612 inhabitants) is purely urban in character; the
      inhabitants live like townspeople and (with very few exceptions) do not
      engage in agriculture. Krasnoye is the centre of the jewellery industry
      which covers 4 volosts and 51 villages (including Sidorovskoye Volost of
      Nerekhta Uyezd), and in them 735 households and about 1,706

      workers.[79]

      “The principal representatives of industry,” said Mr. Tillo,
      “are undoubtedly the big industrialists of the village of Krasnoye:
      the Pushilovs, Mazovs, Sorokins, Chulkovs and other merchants. They buy
      materials (gold, silver and copper), employ craftsmen, buy up finished
      articles, distribute orders for work to be done in the home, supply
      samples, etc.” (2043). The big industrialists have their workshops,
      so-called “rabotorni” (laboratories), where the metal is
      smelted and forged, then to be given out for finishing to
      “handicraftsmen”; they have technical appliances, such as
      “pretsi” (presses and dies for stamping),
      “punches” (for embossing designs), “rollers” (for
      stretching the metal), benches, etc. Division of labour is widely
      practised: “Nearly every article passes through several hands in an
      established order in the course of manufacture. For example, in the making
      of ear-rings, the master industrialist first sends the silver to his own
      workshop, where part of it is rolled and part drawn into wire; then on
      receipt of an order the material is given to a craftsman who, if he has a
      family, divides the work among several persons; one uses a punch to cut
      the silver plates into the shapes for the ear-rings, another bends the
      wire into the rings with which the ear-rings are attached

 

      to the ears, a third solders these parts, and, lastly, a fourth polishes
      the finished ear-rings. None of this work is difficult, or requires much
      training; very often the soldering and the polishing are done by women and
      by children of 7 or 8 years of age”

      (2041).[80]

 Here,
      too, the working day is excessively long, usually as much as 16
      hours. Payment in provisions is common.

    

      The following statistics (published quite recently by a local assay
      inspector) clearly illustrate the economic structure of the

      industry:[93]






      “Both the first groups (about two-thirds of the total number of
      craftsmen) should be classed as home-working factory workers rather than
      as handicraftsmen.” In the top group “wage-labour occurs more
      and more frequently. . . . The craftsmen have begun to buy articles made
      by others”; in the upper strata of this group “buying-up

 

      predominates,” and “four of the buyers-up have no workshops at

      all.”[81]


      The samovar and accordion industries in Tula town and environs are highly
      typical examples of capitalist manufacture. Generally speaking, the
      “handicraft” industries in this district have a long history,
      dating back to the 15th

      century.[82]

 They
      evidenced a particularly rapid development in the middle of the 17th
      century; Mr. Borisov considers that the second period in the development
      of the Tula industries then began. In 1637 the first iron foundry was
      built (by the Dutchman Vinius). The Tula gunsmiths formed a separate
      smiths’ suburb, constituted a separate social estate, enjoying
      special rights and privileges. In 1696 the first iron foundry was erected
      in Tula by a famous Tula blacksmith, and the industry spread to the Urals
      and

      Siberia.[83]

 Then
      began the third period in the history of the Tula industries. The
      craftsmen set up their own workshops and taught the trade to surrounding
      peasants. In the 1810s and 1820s the first samovar factories were
      started. “By 1825 there were in Tula 43 different factories that
      belonged to gunsmiths, while those in existence at the present time nearly
      all belong to one-time gunsmiths, now Tula merchants”
      (loc. cit., 2262). Here, consequently, we observe a
      direct continuity and connection between the old guild masters and the
      principals of subsequent capitalist manufacture. In 1864 the Tula
      gunsmiths were freed from serf

      dependence[94] and
      assigned to the burgher estate; earnings dropped as a consequence of the
      severe competition of the village handicraftsmen (which caused a reverse
      flow of industrialists from town to country); the workers turned to the
      samovar, lock, cutlery, and accordion industries (the first Tula
      accordions appeared in 1830-1835).

    

      The samovar industry is at present organised as follows. It is headed by
      big capitalists who own workshops employing

 

      tens and hundreds of wage-workers, but they also distribute many separate
      operations to be done by workers, urban and rural, in their homes; those
      who perform these operations sometimes still have their own workshops and
      employ wage-workers. Naturally, side by side with the big there are small
      workshops, with all the consecutive stages of dependence upon the
      capitalists. Division of labour is the general basis of the whole
      structure of this trade. The process of samovar-making is divided into the
      following separate operations: 1) rolling the copper sheets into tubes
      (tubing); 2) soldering the tubes; 3) filing the seams; 4) fitting the
      bottoms; 5) beating out the shapes; 6) cleaning the insides: 7) turning
      the bodies and necks; 8) plating; 9) press-punching the vents in the
      bottoms and the covers; 10) assembling the samovars. Further, there are
      the separate processes of casting the small copper parts: a) preparing the
      moulds and b)

      casting.[84]

 Where
      work is given out to be done in the home, each of these operations may
      constitute a special “handicraft” industry. One of these
      “industries” was described by Mr. Borisov in Vol. VII of the
      Transactions of the Handicraft Commission. This industry (samovar
      tubing) consists in peasants doing at piece rates one of the operations we
      have described, using merchants’ materials. The handicraftsmen left
      Tula town to work in the countryside after 1861; the cost of living and
      standard of requirements were lower in the countryside
      (loc. cit., p. 893). Mr. Borisov quite rightly
      attributes this tenacity of the “handicraftsman” to the
      retention of hand-labour in the beating out of samovars; “it will
      always be profitable for the manufacturer to employ the village
      handicraftsman, because he works at from 10 to 20% below the rate of the
      urban artisan” (916).

    

      Mr. Borisov estimated the value of the output of samovars in 1882 at
      approximately 5 million rubles, the number of workers (handicraftsmen
      included) totalling from 4,000 to 5,000. In this case also the factory
      statistics cover only

 

      a fraction of capitalist manufacture. The Directory for 1879
      counted in Tula Gubernia 53 samovar “factories” (all
      hand-operated) with 1,479 workers and an output totalling 836,000
      rubles. The Directory for 1890 gives 162 factories, 2,175
      workers, and an output of 1.1 million rubles; the list of firms, however,
      contains only 50 factories (1 steam operated), with 1,326 workers and an
      output totalling 698,000 rubles. Evidently, some hundred small
      establishments were in this case classed as “factories.”
      Lastly, the List gives the following for 1894-95: 25 factories (4
      steam-operated), 1,202 workers (+ 607 outside), and an output totalling
      1,613,000 rubles. In these data neither the number of factories nor the
      number of workers are comparable (for the reason given above, and also
      because of the lumping together in previous years of workers on the
      premises and outside). The only thing beyond doubt is that manufacture is
      being steadily displaced by large-scale machine industry: in 1879, there
      were 2 factories with 100 and more workers; in 1890 there were 2 (one
      steam-operated) and in 1894-95 there were 4 (three

      steam-operated).[85]


      The accordion industry, which is at a lower stage of economic development,
      is organised in precisely the same

      way.[86]

 “In the making of accordions there are
      over ten separate trades” (Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, IX, 236); the making of the different parts of an
      accordion or the performance of some of the operations constitute
      separate, quasi-independent “handicraft”
      industries. “When things are quiet all the handicraftsmen work

 

      for factories or for more or less big workshops, the owners of which
      supply them with materials; when, however, there is a brisk demand for
      accordions, a large number of small producers appear, who buy up parts
      from the handicraftsmen, assemble them and take the finished articles to
      the local shops where accordions are very readily purchased”
      (ibid.). Mr. Borisov in 1882 estimated from 2,000 to 3,000
      workers in this industry, with an output totalling about 4 million rubles;
      factory statistics in 1879 showed two “factories,” with 22
      workers and an output totalling 5,000 rubles; in 1890, 19 factories, with
      275 workers and an output totalling 82,000 rubles; in 1894-95 one factory,
      with 23 workers (plus 17 outside) and an output totalling 20,000

      rubles.[87]

      Steam-engines are not employed at all. All these figure variations
      indicate a purely haphazard picking of individual establishments which are
      component parts of the complex organism of capitalist manufacture.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Cf. Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt. III
      (Moscow, 1883), pp. 63-64.—Lenin

[2]
      For a list of the most important towns of this type, see next chapter.—Lenin

[3]
      Examples of such confusion will be given in the next chapter.—Lenin

[4]
      See Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III. It would be impossible
      and superfluous to give detailed data on all the weaving industries
      described in the literature on our handicraft industry. Moreover, in the
      majority of these industries the factory now reigns supreme. On the
      subject of “handicraft weaving” see also Statistical
      Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vols. VI and VII. — Transactions of
      the Handicraft Commission — Material on Hand-Labour

      Statistics.[95]
      — Reports and Investigations. — Korsak,
      loc. cit.—Lenin

[5]
The Military Statistical Abstract managed to count in Vladimir
      Gubernia, in 1866, 98 silk factories (!) with 98 workers and a total
      output of 4,000 rubles(!). The Directory for 1890 gives 35
      factories, 2,112 workers, and 936,000 rubles. According to the
      List for 1894-95 there were 98 factories, 2,281 workers, with an
      output of 1,918,000 rubles, and in addition, 2,477 workers “outside
      of establishments, on the side.” Just try to distinguish
      “handicraftsmen” here from “factory workers”!—Lenin

[6]
      According to the Directory for 1890 there were outside of Moscow
      10 galloon factories, with 303 workers and an output totalling 58,000
      rubles. But according to Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia
      (Vol. VI, Pt. II), there were 400 establishments, with 2,619 workers (of
      whom 72.8% were wage-workers) and with an output totalling 963,000

      rubles.—Lenin

[7]
      The Collection of Factory Inspectors’ Reports for 1903
      (St. Petersburg, 1906) states that in Saratov Gubernia there were 33
      distributing offices with 10,000 workers. (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[8]
      The centre of this industry is Sosnovka Volost, where the Zemstvo census
      of 1886 counted 4,626 households, with a population of 38,000 persons of
      both sexes; 291 industrial establishments. Altogether in the volost 10% of
      the households were houseless (as against 6.2% in the uyezd), and 44.5% of
      the households cultivated on land (as against 22.8% in the uyezd). See
      Statistical Returns for Saratou Gubernia, Vol. XI. — Capitalist
      manufacture has, consequently, created industrial centres here too which
      divorce the workers from the land.—Lenin

[9]
      The sources are shown in the text. The number of establishments is about
      half the number of independent workers (52 establishments in Vasilyev
      Vrag, 5 + 55 + 110 in Krasnoye village and 21 establishments in the 4
      small villages). On the other hand, the figures for the town of Arzamas
      and Viyezdnaya Sloboda stands for the number of “factories,”
      and not of workers.—Lenin

[10]
      Let us note that the diagram given is typical of all Russian industries
      organised on the lines of capitalist manufacture: everywhere at the head
      of the industry we find big establishments (sometimes classed among
      “factories and works”), and a mass of small

 

establishments
      completely under their sway — in a word, capitalist co-operation based on
      division of labour and hand production. Non-agricultural centres are
      formed by manufacture in exactly the same way, not only here, but also in
      the majority of other industries.—Lenin

[11]
      They are naked as they work in a temperature of 22° to 24°
      Réaumur. The air is full of fine and also coarse dust, wool and
      other stuff. The floors in the “factories” are earthen (in the
      washing sheds of all places), etc.—Lenin

[12]
      It is not without interest to note here the specific jargon of the
      inhabitants of Krasnoye; this is characteristic of the territorial
      isolation peculiar to manufacture. “In the village of Krasnoye
      factories are given the Matroisk name of povarnyas
      (lit. kitchens —Ed.). . . . Matroisk is one of the
      numerous branches of the Ophen dialect, the three main branches of which
      are Ophen proper, spoken mainly in Vladimir Gubernia;
      Galivon, in Kostroma Gubernia; and Matroisk, in the
      Nizhni-Novgorod and Vladimir gubernias” (Transactions of the
      Handicraft Commission, V, p 465). Only large-scale machine industry
      completely destroys the local character of social ties and replaces them
      by national (and international) ties.—Lenin

[13]
Material for Evaluation of the Lands of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia,
      Vol. XI, Nizhni-Novgorod, 1893, pp. 211-214.—Lenin

[14]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, VI.—Lenin

[15]
Reports and Investigations, III.—Lenin

[16]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, Vol. II.—Lenin

[17]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, Vol. II, p. 271.—Lenin

[18]
      See Appendix I to Chapter V, Industry No. 27.—Lenin

[19]
      Some of these establishments were occasionally included among
      “factories and works.” See, for example, the
      Directory for 1879, p.126.—Lenin

[20]
      See above, Chapter V, § VII.—Lenin

[21]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, IV, Pt.I, pp. 282-287.—Lenin

[22]
      See Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX, and
      Reports and Investigations, III.—Lenin

[23]
      By some accident, such workshops have not yet been included among
      “factories and works.”—Lenin

[24]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, II.—Lenin

[25]
      According to Zemstvo statistics (Vol. VII of Material,
      Nizhni-Novgorod, 1892) in these villages in 1889 there were 341 and 119
      households, numbering respectively 1,277 and 540 persons of both
      sexes. There were 253 and 103 allotment households. Households
      participating in industries numbered 284 and 91, of which 257 and 32 did
      not engage in agriculture. There were 218 and 51 horseless
      households. Those leasing their allotments numbered 237 and 53.—Lenin

[26]
      Cf. Nizhni-Novgorod Handbook, Vol IV, article by Rev. Roslavlev.—Lenin

[27]
Sketch of Condition of Handicraft Industry in Perm Gubernia,
      p. 158; in the table totals there is a mistake or a misprint.—Lenin

[28]
Ibid., pp. 40 and 188 of table. To all appearances these same
      establishments also figure in the List, p. 152. For the purpose
      of comparing the big establishments with the small ones we have singled
      out the agriculturist commodity-producers, see Studies,
      p. 156. (See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95
      in Perm Gubernia. —Ed.)—Lenin

[29]
The Handicraft Industries of Perm Gubernia at the Siberian Urals
      Exhibition, Pt. III, p. 47 and foll.—Lenin

[30]
      See Zemstvo statistical returns for Trubchevsk, Karachev and Orel uyezds
      of Orel Gubernia. The connection between the big manufactories and the
      small peasant establishments is also evident from the fact that the
      employment of wage-labour develops in the latter as well: for example, in
      Orel Uyezd, 16 peasant master spinners employ 77 workers.—Lenin

[31]
      V. Ilyin, Studies, p. 176. (See present edition, Vol.2, The Handicraft
      Census of 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia. —Ed.)—Lenin

[32]
      See precise data on Perm handicraft census about this, ibid.,
      p. 177 (See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95
      in Perm Gubernia. —Ed.)—Lenin

[33]
      See Directory and List on Perm Gubernia and the village
      of Nevyansky Zavod (non-agricultural), which is the centre of this
      “handicraft industry.”—Lenin

[34]
      Cf. our Studies, pp. 177-178. (See present edition, Vol. 2,
      The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. —Ed.)—Lenin

[35]
Reports and Investigations, I.—Lenin

[36]
Reports and Investigations, III.—Lenin

[37]
      There are 14 big timber merchants. These have timber-seasoning rooms
      (costing about 300 rubles), of which there are 24 in the village, each
      employing 6 workers. These merchants also give out materials to workers,
      whom they get into their grip by advancing them money.—Lenin

[38]
      It will be appropriate here to note in general the process of development
      of capitalism in the timber industry. The timber merchants do not sell the
      timber raw; they hire workers to dress it and to make various wooden
      articles, which they then sell. See Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, etc., VIII, pp. 1268, 1314. Also Statistical Returns
      for Orel Gubernia, Trubchevsk Uyezd.—Lenin

[39]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol II, 1879. See also
      Zemstvo statistical Material for Semyonov Uyezd, Vol. XI, 1893.—Lenin

[40]
      The statistics we have given (Appendix I to Chapter V, Industries Nos. 2,
      7, 26) cover only a small fraction of the toy-makers; but these data show
      the appearance of workshops with 11 to 18 workers.—Lenin

[41]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. II, p. 47.—Lenin

[42]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX.—Lenin

[43]
Material for the Evaluation of the Lands in Gorbatov Uyezd.—Lenin

[44]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX.—Lenin

[45]
      Thus, at the head of the horse-collar industry are 13 big proprietors,
      each with 10 to 30 wage-workers and 5 to 10 outside workers. The big
      mitten-makers do the cutting in their own workshops (employing 2 or 3
      wage-workers) and get the mittens sewn off the premises by from 10 to 20
      women; these are divided into thumb-makers and
      stitchers, the former taking the work from the owners and
      sub-dividing it among the latter, whom they exploit (information for
      1879).—Lenin

[46]
      In 1889, of 1,812 households (with 9,241 inhabitants) 1,469 cultivated no
      land (in 1897 there were 12,342 inhabitants). The villages of Pavlovo and
      Bogorodskoye differ from the other villages of Gorbatov Uyezd in that very
      few of their inhabitants leave them on the contrary, of all the peasants
      of the Gorbatov Uyezd who have left their villages, 14.9% live in Pavlovo
      and 4.9% in Bogorodskoye. The increase of the population between 1858 and
      1889 was 22.1% for the uyezd, but 42% for the village of
      Bogorodskoye. (See Zemstvo statistical Material.)—Lenin

[47]
      See Zemstvo statistical Material for uyezds mentioned. —
      Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX and VI. —
      Directory and List. — Reports and
      Investigations, II.—Lenin

[48]
      In 1889 it had 380 households (none cultivating land) with 1,305
      inhabitants In the whole of the Katunki Volost, 90.6% of the

 

households
      are engaged in industries, 70.1% of working people being occupied in
      industries alone (i.e., not engaging in agriculture). As regards literacy,
      this volost stands far above the average for the uyezd, yielding in this
      respect only to the Chernoretsk Volost, which is also non-agricultural and
      has highly developed boat-building industries. The village of Bolshoye
      Murashkino had in 1887 a total of 856 households (of which 853 cultivated
      no land) with 3,473 persons of both sexes. According to the 1897 census,
      the population of Gorodets was 6,330, of Bolshoye Murashkino 5,341, of
      Yurino 2,189, of Spasskoye 4,494 and of Vatras 3,012.—Lenin

[49]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX,
      p. 2567. Information for 1880.—Lenin

[50]
      The conditions of the workers in the Arzamas factories are better than
      those of the rural workers (Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, III, p. 133).—Lenin

[51]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, III, p. 76.—Lenin

[52]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. XI,
      p. 3084. (Cf. Directory for 1890). Included among the
      handicraftsmen is the peasant-agriculturist Dolgushin, who owns a works
      employing 60 workers. There are several handicraftsmen of this type.—Lenin

[53]
      According to the Directory for 1890, there were some 27 masters
      employing over 700 workers.—Lenin

[54]
      Cf. also List, p. 489, regarding the well-known
      “handicraft” village of Dunilovo, Shuya Uyezd, Vladimir
      Gubernia. The Directory for 1890 listed here 6 fur factories
      employing 151 workers, while according to the Transactions of the
      Handicraft Commission (Vol. X) there are about 2,200 furriers and
      2,300 sheepskin-coat-makers in this district; in 1877 as many as 5,500
      “handicraftsmen” were counted. Probably, the making of hair
      sieves in this uyezd is organised in the same way; in this industry there
      are engaged about 40 villages and as many as 4,000 people, known as
      “Mardassers” (from the name of this district). We have
      described the similar organisation of the leather and cobbling industries
      in Perm Gubernia in our Studies, p. 171 and foll (See present
      edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. —Ed.)—Lenin

[55]
      Here is some information about the “handicraftsmen” relating
      to 1894. “The squirrel furs are sewn by some of the poorest women

 

in
      the town of Kargopol and by peasant women of the Pavlovo Volost. They are
      paid the very lowest price,” so that a seamstress earns only from 2
      rubles 40 kopeks to 3 rubles per month, providing her own food, and for
      this pay (at piece rates) she has to sit without a break for 12 hours a
      day. “The work is very exhausting, for it calls for great strain and
      assiduity.” The number of seamstresses is now about 200
      (Handicraft Industry in Olonets Gubernia, Essay by
      Messrs. Blagoveshchensky and Garyazin. Petrozavodsk, 1895, pp. 92-93).—Lenin

[56]
      See Statistical Chronicle of the Russian Empire, II, Vol. III,
      St. Petersburg, 1872. Material for the Study of Handicraft Industry and
      Hand-Labour in Russia. Compiled by L. Maikov. Article by V
      A. Pletnev. This work is the best for clarity of description of the whole
      organisation of the industry. The latest works give valuable

 

statistics and facts of the people’s life, but give a less
      satisfactory exposition of the economic structure of this complex
      industry. See, further, Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, Vol. VIII, article by Mr. Pokrovsky, — Reports and
      Investigations, Vol. I.—Lenin

[57]
      Cf. Reports and Investigations : 7 groups of industrialists: 1)
      traders in leather goods; 2) buyers-up of footwear; 3) masters of big
      workshops (5-6 of them), who stock leather and distribute it to home
      workers; 4) masters of small workshops employing wage-workers; also give
      out material to home workers; 5) one-man establishments — working either
      for the market or for masters (sub 3 and 4); 6) wage-workers (craftsmen,
      journeymen, boys); 7) “last-makers, notchers, and also owners and
      workers in currying, greasing and gluing workshops” (p. 227,
      loc. cit.). The population of Kimry village, according
      to the 1897 census, is 7,017.—Lenin

[58]
      The “sawyer” saws the brush blocks; the “borer”
      bores holes in them; the “cleaner” cleans the bristle; the
      “setter” “sets” the bristle; the
      “joiner” glues wooden strips on the brush backs
      (Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. I, p. 18).—Lenin

[59]
      Let us observe that in this industry, as in the above-described weaving
      industries, capitalist manufacture is, strictly speaking, the economy of
      yesterday. Characteristic of the post-Reform era is the transformation of
      this manufacture into large-scale machine industry. The number of Gzhel
      potteries using steam-engines was 1 in 1866, 2 in 1879 and 3 in 1890
      (according to data in The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, Vol. I,
      and Directory for 1879 and 1890).—Lenin

[60]
      See above regarding the greater literacy of the population of Pavlovo and
      Vorsma and the migration of peasants from the villages to these centres.—Lenin

[61]
      Data from Zemstvo statistical Material, and Mr. Annensky’s
      Report, and also A. N. Potresov’s researches (cited above). The
      figures for the Murom district are approximate. The number of inhabitants,
      according to the 1897 census, was 4,674 in Vorsma, and 12,431 in Pavlovo.—Lenin

[62]
      The data we have given by no means express this predominance to the full:
      as will presently be seen, the handicraftsmen who work for the market are
      subjugated to capital even more than those who work for proprietors, and
      the latter handicraftsmen even more than the wage-workers. The
      Pavlovo industries show in strong relief that inseparable connection
      between merchant’s and industrial capital which in general is
      characteristic of capitalist manufacture in its relation to the small
      producers.—Lenin

[63]
      Connection with the land is also an important factor in reducing
      earnings. The village handicraftsmen “on the whole earn less than
      the Pavlovo locksmiths” (Annensky Report, p. 61). True, we must bear
      in mind that the former grow their own grain, but even so “the
      conditions of the ordinary village handicraftsman can scarcely be
      considered better than those of the average Pavlovo locksmith” (61).—Lenin

[64]
      During crises it also happens that they work literally without pay,
      exchange “white for black,” i.e., finished goods for raw
      materials; this happens “quite often” (Grigoryev,
      ibid., 93).—Lenin

[65]
      Data taken from Directory and List for the whole
      district, including the villages of Selitba and Vacha and their
      environs. The Directory for 1890 undoubtedly included outside
      workers in the total number of factory workers; we have estimated the
      number of outside workers approximately, confining ourselves to a
      correction only for the two biggest establishments (the Zavyalovs and
      F. Varypayev). To compare the figures for “factories and
      works” in the List and the Directory, only
      establishments with 15 and more workers must be taken (this is examined in
      greater detail in our Studies, article: On the Question of Our
      Factory Statistics) (See present edition, Vol. 4.—Ed.)—Lenin

[66]
      In one branch of the Pavlovo industry, lock-making, there is, on the
      contrary, a decline in the number of workshops employing

 

wage-workers. A. N. Potresov (loc. cit.), who recorded
      this fact in detail, pointed to its cause — the competition of the
      lock-making factory in Kovno Gubernia (Schmidt Brothers, which in 1890 had
      500 workers, with an output of 500,000 rubles, and in 1894-95 had 625
      workers, with an output of 730,000 rubles).—Lenin

[67]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IX. The population of
      Bezvodnoye village in 1897 was 3,296.—Lenin

[68]
Reports and Investigations, Vol. I. — The List gives 4
      “factories” for this district, with 21 workers on premises and
      29 outside workers, and output totalling 68,000 rubles.—Lenin

[69]
Reports and Investigations, I, p. 186.—Lenin

[70]
      Appendix I to Chapter V, Industry No. 29.—Lenin

[71]
Ibid., No. 32.—Lenin

[72]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. 1, Sec. 2,
      and Industries of Bogorodsk Uyezd in 1890.—Lenin

[73]
      See, for example, the List, No. 8819.—Lenin

[74]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. VI, investigation
      of 1880. — Reports and Investigations, Vol. I (1888-1889),
      cf. p. 271: “nearly the whole trade . . . is concentrated in
      workshops employing wage-workers.” Cf. also Survey of Yaroslavl
      Gubernia, Vol. II, Yaroslavl, 1896, pp. 8, 11. — List,
      p. 403.—Lenin

[75]
      Appendix I to Chapter V, Industries Nos. 19 and 30.—Lenin

[76]
      A copper-smith’s workshop needs five operatives to do the different
      jobs; a tray-maker’s at least 3, while a “normal
      workshop” needs 9 workers. “In the large establishments”
      a “fine division” (of labour) is practised “with the
      object of increasing productivity” (Isayev,
      loc. cit., 27 and 31).—Lenin

[77]
      The Directory for 1890 gives for the district of Zagarye 14
      factories employing 184 workers, with an output totalling 37,000 rubles. A
      comparison of these figures with the above-quoted Zemstvo statistics shows
      that in this case too the factory statistics covered only the upper strata
      of widely developed capitalist manufacture.—Lenin

[78]
      Cf. Handicraft Industries of Bogorodsk Uyezd.—Lenin

[79]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. IX, article by
      Mr. A. Tillo. — Reports and Investigations, Vol. III (1893). The
      industry continues to develop. Cf. letter to Russkiye Vedomosti,
      1897, No. 231. Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No. 42. Output totals over
      1 million rubles, of which about 200,000 rubles is received by the workers
      and about 300,000 rubles by buyers-up and merchants.—Lenin

[80]
      “Among the Krasnoye handicraftsmen every kind of article and even
      every part is made by a specific craftsman, and therefore one rarely
      finds, for example, rings and ear-rings, bracelets and brooches, etc.,
      made in the same house; usually a particular article is made in parts by
      different worker-specialists who live not only in different houses but
      even in different villages” (Reports and Investigations,
      Vol. III, p. 76).—Lenin

[81]
Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No. 42.—Lenin

[82]
      See Mr. V. Borisov’s article in Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, Vol. IX.—Lenin

[83]
      The Tula blacksmith, Nikita Demidov Antufyev, won Peter the Great’s
      favour by building an ironworks near the town of Tula; in 1702 he was
      granted the Nevyansk works. His descendants were the famous Urals iron
      manufacturers, the Demidovs.—Lenin

[84]
      The Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. X, contain an
      excellent description by Mr. Manokhin of the samovar industry in Suksun,
      Perm Gubernia. Its organisation is the same as that in Tula
      Gubernia. Cf. ibid., Vol. IX, Mr. Borisov’s article on
      handicraft industries at the 1882 exhibition.—Lenin

[85]
      Evidently there are analogous features in the organisation of the
      mechanical trades in Tula and its environs. Mr. Borisov in 1882 estimated
      that the number of workers employed in these industries was from 2,000 to
      3,000, producing wares to a value of nearly 2 1/2 million rubles. These
      “handicraftsmen” are very much under the heel of
      merchant’s capital. The hardware “factories” in Tula
      Gubernia sometimes also have outside workers (cf. List,
      pp. 393-395).—Lenin

[86]
      The development of accordion-making is also interesting as a process of
      the elimination of primitive folk instruments and of the creation of a
      wide, national market; without this market there could have been no
      division of labour by processes, and without division of labour the
      finished article could not have been produced cheaply “Owing to
      their cheapness . . . the accordions have nearly everywhere displaced the
      primitive string folk instrument, the balalaika” (Transactions
      of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. IX, p. 2276).—Lenin

[87]
      The Tula town census of November 29, 1891, gave 36 establishments selling
      accordions and 34 accordion workshops (see Tula Gubernia Handbook for
      1895, Tula, 1895).—Lenin
 


[88]
Workroom owners, middlemen — owners of premises who
      rented them to manufacturers for the installation of hand-looms, and
      themselves worked there. The middleman or workroom owner, by arrangement
      with the employer, undertook to heat or repair the premises, deliver raw
      materials to the weavers, send the finished product to the employer or act
      as overseer.  [p.386]
    


[95]
Statistical Chronicle of the Russian Empire,
      II. Vol. III. Material for the Study of Handicraft Industry and Hand
      Labour in Russia. Part 1. Published by the Central Statistical Committee
      of the Ministry of Home Affairs. St. Petersburg, 1872.  [p.388]
    


[89]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 342-350.  [p.396]
    


[90]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 342-350.  [p.398]





[91]
Cadastre — a public record of the extent, value and ownership of
      land, etc., for purposes of taxation. The cadastral surveys gave
      particulars of land held, incomes of inhabitants and descriptions of
      streets, monasteries, fortifications, etc. The oldest cadastre now extant
      dates back to the 15th century, but most of those that have been preserved
      relate to the 17th century. Surveys for the cadastre were made by special
      commissions appointed by the central government authorities.  [p.415]
    


[92]
The Law of June 2, 1897 established a working day of 11
      1/2 hours for industrial enterprises and railway workshops. Prior to the
      adoption of this law the working day in Russia was unlimited and lasted as
      long as 14 and 15 hours and even more. The tsar’s government was
      forced to adopt this law due to the pressure of the working-class
      movement, which was led by the “League of Struggle for the
      Emancipation of the Working Class” headed by Lenin. A detailed
      analysis and criticism of the law is given by Lenin in his pamphlet:
      The New Factory Law. (See present edition, Vol. 2.)  [p. 418]
    


[93]
      The table that follows is based on a similar but more detailed table
      published in the Vestnik Finansov, Issue No. 42, 1898.  [p.423]
    


[94]
      Prior to 1864 the gunsmiths of Tula were serfs of the state and lived in
      special suburbs (slobodas). (The state blacksmiths’ sloboda, etc.)
      They were divided into guilds: barrel, gun-stock, lock, instrumental,
      etc. For the carrying out of auxiliary work serf-peasants from a number of
      villages were attached to the Tula arms factories, their task being to
      prepare charcoal for the gunsmiths, guard the forests allocated to the
      factories, and do jobs in the factory yards.
    




      In Tula at the time of their liberation from feudal dependence there were
      nearly 4,000 gunsmiths, of whom 1,276 were employed in factories and 2,362
      worked at home. In all, the gunsmiths and their families numbered over
      20,000.  [p.424]
    

 
  

I. The Rise of Manufacture and its Main Features

|

III. Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and its Significance

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and Its Significance




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: III. Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and its Significance








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      III. Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and its
      Significance
    

      Let us now draw conclusions from the foregoing data and see whether they
      are really indicative of a special stage in the development of capitalism
      in our industry.
    


      The feature common to all the industries we have examined is the retention
      of hand production and systematic, widely practised division of
      labour. The process of production is split up into several single
      operations performed by different specialist craftsmen. The training of
      such specialists takes a fairly long time, and therefore a natural
      concomitant of manufacture is apprenticeship. It is well known
      that under the general conditions of commodity economy and capitalism this
      gives rise to the worst forms of

 

      personal dependence and

      exploitation.[1]

 The
      disappearance of apprenticeship is connected with a higher development of
      manufacture and with the advent of large-scale machine industry, when
      machines reduce the period of training to a minimum or when such simple
      single operations arise as can be done even by children (see above example
      of Zagarye).

    

      The retention of hand production as the basis of manufacture explains its
      comparative immobility, which is particularly striking when compared with
      the factory. The development and extension of division of labour proceeds
      very slowly, so that for whole decades (and even centuries) manufacture
      retains its form once it has been adopted; as we have seen, quite a number
      of the industries examined are of quite ancient origin, yet no great
      changes in methods of production have been observed in the majority of
      them until recently.

    

      As for division of labour, we shall not repeat here the commonly known
      tenets of theoretical economics concerning the part it plays in the
      process of development of the productive powers of labour. On the basis of
      hand production no other progress in technique was possible except by
      division of

      labour.[2]

 Let us
      merely note the two major circumstances that make clear the need for
      division of labour as a preparatory stage for large-scale machine
      industry. Firstly, the introduction of machines is possible only when the
      production process has been split into a number of the simplest, purely
      mechanical operations; machines are

 

      first used for the simplest operations and their spread to the more
      complicated processes is very gradual. For example, in weaving, the
      power-loom has long predominated in the production of plain fabrics,
      whereas silk weaving continues to be carried on mainly by hand; in the
      engineering trade the machine is applied first of all to one of the
      simplest operations – grinding, etc. But this splitting of production
      into the simplest operations, while being a necessary preparatory step to
      the introduction of large-scale machine production, leads at the same time
      to a growth of small industries. The surrounding population is enabled to
      perform such detailed operations in its homes, either to order of the
      manufactory owners, using their materials (bristle setting in brush
      manufacture, sewing sheepskins, sheepskin coats, mittens, boots, etc., in
      the leather trade, horn trimming in comb manufacture, samovar
      “tubing,” etc.), or even “independently” buying
      the materials, making certain parts of the product and selling them to the
      manufacturers (in the hat, carriage, accordion and other industries,
      etc.). It seems paradoxical that the growth of small (sometimes even
      “independent”) industries should be an expression of the
      growth of capitalist manufacture: nevertheless it is a fact. The
      “independence” of such “handicraftsmen” is quite
      fictitious. Their work could not be done, and their product would on
      occasion even have no use-value, if there were no connection with
      other detailed operations, with other parts of the product. And only
      big capital, ruling (in one form or another) over a mass of
      workers performing separate operations was

      able[3]

 to and did
      create this connection. One of the main errors of Narodnik economics is
      that it ignores or obscures the fact that the “handicraftsman”
      performing a single operation is a constituent part of the capitalist
      manufactory.

    

      The second circumstance that must particularly be stressed is that
      manufacture trains skilled workers. Large-scale machine industry could not
      have developed so quickly

 

      in the post-Reform period had it not been preceded by a long period in
      which manufacture trained workers. For instance, the investigators of the
      “handicraft” weaving industry of the Pokrov Uyezd, Vladimir
      Gubernia, note the remarkable “technical skill and experience”
      of the weavers of Kudykino Volost (where the village of Orekhovo and the
      famous Morozov mills are situated): “nowhere. . . do we find such
      intensity . . . of labour . . . ; a strict division of labour between the
      weaver and the bobbin-hand is invariably practised here. . . .”
      “The past . . . has imparted to the Kudykinians . . . expert skill
      in the technique of production . . . an ability to cope with all sorts of

      difficulties.”[4]

 “Factories cannot be erected in any village
      and in any number,” we read in reference to silk weaving: “the
      factory must follow the weaver into the villages where, due to migratory
      labour” (or, let us add, due to domestic industry), “a
      contingent of proficient workers has been

      formed.”[5]

      Establishments like the St. Petersburg boot

      factory[10][6]

 could not have
      developed so quickly if in the district around Kimry village, say, skilled
      workers who have now taken to migration had not been developing for
      centuries, etc. That, incidentally, is why very great importance attaches
      to the formation by manufacture of a whole number of large districts which
      specialised in certain trades and trained large numbers of skilled

      workers.[7]


      Division of labour in capitalist manufacture disfigures and cripples the
      worker, including the “handicraftsman” who makes single
      parts. It produces virtuosi and cripples; the former as rare exceptions,
      whose skill arouses the

 

      astonishment of

      investigators,[8]

 and
      the latter in the shape of the mass of “handicraftsmen,” –
      weak-chested, with inordinately developed arms, “curvature of the

      spine,”[9]

      etc., etc.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Let us confine ourselves to one example. In the village of Borisovka,
      Graivoron Uyezd, Kursk Gubernia, there is an icon-painting industry,
      employing about 500 persons. The majority of the craftsmen hire no
      workers, but keep apprentices, who work from 14 to 15 hours a day. When a
      proposal was made to set up an art school, these craftsmen strongly
      opposed it, for fear of losing the gratuitous labour-power of their
      apprentices (Reports and Investigations, I, 333). In domestic
      industry the conditions of children under capitalist manufacture are no
      better than those of apprentices, since the domestic worker is compelled
      to lengthen the working day and exert all the efforts of his family to the
      utmost.—Lenin

[2]
      “The domestic form of large-scale production and manufacture are an
      inevitable and to a certain extent even a desirable way out for small
      independent industry when it covers a large district” (Kharizomenov,
      in Yuridichesky Vestnik, 1883, No. 11, p. 435).—Lenin

[3]
      Why is it that only capital was able to create this connection?
      Because, as we have seen, commodity production gives rise to the scattered
      condition of the small producers and to their complete differentiation,
      and because the small industries bequeathed to manufacture a heritage of
      capitalist workshops and merchant’s capital.—Lenin

[4]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, IV, 22.—Lenin

[5]
Ibid., III, 63.—Lenin

[6]
      In 1890 it had 514 workers and an output of 600,000 rubles; in 1894-95,
      845 workers, output 1,288,000 rubles.—Lenin

[7]
      This is very aptly described by the term “wholesale crafts.”
      “Beginning with the 17th century,” writes Korsak, “rural
      industry began to develop more perceptibly; whole villages, especially
      those near Moscow and situated along the high roads, began to engage in
      some particular industry; the inhabitants of some became tanners, of
      others weavers, and of still others dyers, cartwrights, smiths,
      etc. . . . Towards the close of the last century very many of these
      wholesale crafts, as some call them, had developed in
      Russia” (loc. cit., 119-121).—Lenin

[8]
      Let us confine ourselves to two examples: Khvorov, the celebrated Pavlovo
      locksmith, made 24 locks to a weight of one zolotnik (4.25
      grammes. –Ed.); some of the parts of these locks were no larger
      than a pin’s head (Labzin, loc. cit., 44). One
      toy-maker in Moscow Gubernia spent nearly all his life finishing harnessed
      horses and achieved such dexterity that he could finish 400 a day
      (Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. II,
      pp. 38-39).—Lenin

[9]
      This is how Mr. Grigoryev describes the Pavlovo handicraftsmen. “I
      met one of these workers . . . who for six years had been working at the
      same vice and had with his bare left foot worn more than half way through
      the board on which he stood; with bitter irony he said that the employer
      intended to get rid of him when he had worn the board right through”
      (op. cit., pp. 108-109).—Lenin
 


[10]
      Lenin refers here to the factory owned by the St. Petersburg Footwear
      Manufacturing Company, established in 1878. In 1894-95 the factory
      employed 845 workers and the value of its output was 1,287,912 rubles
      (figures taken from the List of Factories and Works,
      St. Petersburg, 1897, Issue No. 13450, pp. 548-549).  [p. 430]
    

 
  

II. Capitalist Manufacture in Russian Industry

|

IV. The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of Agriculture From Industry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of Agriculture from Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: IV. The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of Agriculture From Industry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      IV. The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of
      Agriculture From Industry
    

      Directly connected with division of labour in general is, as has been
      noted, territorial division of labour – the specialisation of certain
      districts in the production of some one product, of one sort of product
      and even of a certain part of a product. The predominance of hand
      production, the existence of a mass of small establishments, the
      preservation of the worker’s connection with the land, the tying of
      the craftsman to a given trade, – all this inevitably gives rise to the
      seclusion of the different industrial districts of manufacture; sometimes
      this local seclusion amounts to complete isolation from the rest of the

      world,[1]

 with which
      only the merchant masters have dealings.

    

      In the following effusion Mr. Kharizomenov underrates the significance of
      the territorial division of labour: “The vast distances of the
      Empire go hand in hand with sharp differences of natural conditions: one
      locality is rich in timber and wild animals, another in cattle, while a
      third abounds in clay or iron. These natural features determined the
      character of industry. The great distances and inconveniences

 

      of communication made the transport of raw materials impossible, or
      extremely costly. As a result, industry had necessarily to nestle where an
      abundance of raw material was close at hand. Hence the characteristic
      feature of our industry – the specialisation of commodity production in
      large and compact areas” (Yuridichesky Vestnik,
      loc. cit., p. 440).

    

      Territorial division of labour is not a characteristic feature of our
      industry, but of manufacture (both in Russia and in other countries); the
      small industries did not produce such extensive districts, while the
      factory broke down their seclusion and facilitated the transfer of
      establishments and masses of workers to other places. Manufacture not only
      creates compact areas, but introduces specialisation within these areas
      (division of labour as to wares). The availability of raw materials in the
      given locality is not at all essential for manufacture, and is hardly even
      usual for it, for manufacture presupposes fairly wide commercial

      intercourse.[2]


      Connected with the above-described features of manufacture is the
      circumstance that this stage of capitalist evolution is marked by a
      specific form of separation of agriculture from industry. It is no longer
      the peasant who is the most typical industrialist, but the non-farming
      “artisan” (and at the other pole – the merchant and the
      workshop owner). In most cases (as we have seen) the industries organised
      on the lines of manufacture have non-agricultural centres: either towns or
      (much more often) villages, whose inhabitants hardly engage in agriculture
      at all, and which should be classed as settlements of a commercial and
      industrial character. The separation of industry from agriculture is here
      deeply rooted in the technique of manufacture, in its economy, and in the
      peculiarities of its way of life (or culture). Technique ties the worker
      to one trade and therefore, on the one hand, renders him unfit for
      agriculture (physically weak, etc.), and, on the

 

      other, demands continuous and long pursuit of the craft. The economic
      structure of manufacture is characterised by a far deeper differentiation
      among the industrialists than is the case in the small industries; and we
      have seen that in the small industries, differentiation in industry is
      paralleled by differentiation in agriculture. With the utter pauperisation
      of the mass of producers, which is a condition and a consequence of
      manufacture, its working personnel cannot be recruited from among farmers
      who are at all economically sound. Among the cultural peculiarities of
      manufacture are, firstly, the very lengthy (sometimes age-old) existence
      of the industry, which leaves its impress upon the population; and
      secondly, the higher standard of living of the

population.[3]

 We shall deal with the
      latter circumstance in greater detail further on, but first let us note
      that manufacture does not bring about the complete separation of industry
      from agriculture. Under hand technique the big establishments cannot
      eliminate the small ones completely, especially if the small
      handicraftsmen lengthen their working day and reduce the level of their
      requirements: under such conditions, manufacture, as we have seen, even
      develops the small industries. It is natural, therefore, that in the
      majority of cases we see around the non-agricultural centre of manufacture
      a whole region of agricultural settlements, the inhabitants of which also
      engage in industries. Hence, in this respect, too, we find clearly
      revealed the transitional character of manufacture between small hand
      production and the factory. If even in

 

      the West the manufacturing period of capitalism could not bring about the
      complete separation of the industrial workers from

agriculture,[4]

 in Russia, with the
      preservation of many institutions that tie the peasants to the land, such
      separation could not but be retarded. Therefore, we repeat, what is most
      typical of Russian capitalist manufacture is the non-agricultural centre
      which attracts the population of the surrounding villages – the
      inhabitants of which are semi-agriculturists and semi-industrialists –
      and dominates these villages.

    

      Particularly noteworthy in this connection is the fact of the higher
      cultural level of the population of such non-agricultural centres. A
      higher degree of literacy, a considerably higher standard of requirements
      and life, vigorous dissociation from the “rawness” of
      “native village soil” – such are the usual distinguishing
      features of the inhabitants of such

centres.[5]

 One can understand the enormous

 

      significance of this fact, which clearly demonstrates the progressive
      historical role of capitalism, and moreover of purely
      “people’s” capitalism, which even the most ardent
      Narodnik would scarcely dare characterise as “artificial,”
      since the overwhelming majority of the centres described are usually
      classified under the heading of “handicraft” industry! The
      transitional character of manufacture is revealed here too, since it
      merely begins the transformation of the mentality of the population, and
      only large-scale machine industry completes it.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      The squirrel-fur industry in Kargopol Uyezd, the wooden spoon industry in
      Semyonov Uyezd.—Lenin

[2]
      Imported (i.e., not local) raw material is used in the weaving industries,
      the Pavlovo and Gzhel industries, the Perm leather industries, and many
      others (cf. Studies, pp. 122-124). (See present edition, Vol. 2,
      The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.)—Lenin

[3]
      Mr. V. V. in his Essays on Handicraft Industry, assures us that
      “in our country . . . there are very few localities of handicraft
      industry where agriculture has been entirely abandoned” (36) – we
      have shown above that, on the contrary, there are very many – and that
      “the slight manifestations of division of labour that we observe in
      our country must be ascribed not so much to the energy of industrial
      progress as to the immobility of the size of peasant holdings. . . ”
      (40). Mr. V. V. fails to notice that these “localities of handicraft
      industry” are distinguished by a special system of technique,
      economy and culture, and that they characterise a specific stage in the
      development of capitalism. The important thing is that the majority of
      “industrial villages” received the “smallest
      allotments” (39) – (in 1861, after their industrial life had
      proceeded for scores and in some cases hundreds of years!) – and of
      course, had there not been this connivance of the authorities there would
      have been no capitalism.—Lenin

[4]
Das Kapital, I2,

      779-780.[6]—Lenin

[5]
      The importance of this fact impels us to supplement the data given in § II
      with the following. Buturlinovka settlement, Bobrov Uyezd, Voronezh
      Gubernia, is one of the centres of leather production. There are 3,681
      households, of which 2,383 do not engage in agriculture. Population over
      21,000. Households with literate persons constitute 53%, as against 38%
      for the uyezd (Zemstvo statistical returns for Bobrov Uyezd). Pokrovskaya
      settlement and Balakovo village, Samara Gubernia, each have over 15,000
      inhabitants, of whom very many are from outside. Non-farming households –
      50% and 42%. Literacy is above average. The statistical materials state
      that the commercial and industrial villages in general are distinguished
      for their higher literacy and the “mass-scale appearance of
      non-farming households” (Zemstvo statistical returns for Novouzensk
      and Nikolayevgk uyezds). Regarding the higher cultural level of
      “handicraftsmen” cf. additionally Transactions of the
      Handicraft Commission, III, p. 42; VII, p. 914; Smirnov,
      loc. cit., p. 59; Grigoryev,
      loc. cit., p. 106 and foll.: Annensky,
      loc. cit., p. 61, Nizhni-Novgorod Handbook,
      Vol. II, pp. 223-239; Reports and Investigations, II, p. 243;
      III, 151. Then Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, p. 109,
      giving a lively account of the conversation of the investigator,
      Mr. Kharizomenov, with his driver, a silk-weaver. This weaver strongly and
      bitterly declaimed against the “drab” life of the peasants,
      the scantiness of their requirements, their backwardness, etc., and wound
      up with the exclamation: “Good Lord, to think what these people live
      for!” It has long been observed that what the Russian peasant is
      poorest in is consciousness of his own poverty. Of the artisan in the
      capitalist manufactory (not to mention the factory), it must be said that
      in this respect he is, comparatively speaking, very rich.—Lenin
 


[6]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 747-749.  [p. 434]
    

 
  

III. Technique in Manufacture. Division of Labour and its Significance

|

V. The Economic Structure of Manufacture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Economic Structure of Manufacture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: V. The Economic Structure of Manufacture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      V. The Economic Structure of Manufacture
    

      In all the industries organised on the lines of manufacture that we have
      examined, the vast mass of the workers are not independent, are
      subordinated to capital, and receive only wages, owning neither raw
      material nor finished product. At bottom, the overwhelming majority of the
      workers in these “industries” are wage-workers, although this
      relationship never achieves in manufacture the completeness and purity
      characteristic of the factory. In manufacture, merchant’s capital is
      combined with industrial capital, is interwoven with it in the most
      diverse ways, and the dependence of the operative on the capitalist
      assumes a host of forms and shades, from work for hire in another
      person’s workshop, to work at home for a “master,” and
      finally to dependence in the purchase of raw material or in the sale of
      the product. Under manufacture, side by side with the mass of dependent
      workers, there always remains a more or less considerable number of
      quasi-independent producers. But all this diversity of forms of dependence
      merely covers up the main feature of manufacture, the fact that the split
      between the representatives of labour and of capital is already manifested
      in full force. By the time the emancipation of the peasants took place
      this split in the larger centres of Russian manufacture had already been
      sealed by a continuity of several generations. In all the
      “industries” above examined we see a mass of people whose only
      means of livelihood is to work in a condition of dependence upon members
      of the propertied class;

 

      on the other hand, we see a small minority of well-to-do industrialists
      who control (in one form or another) nearly the whole industry of the
      given district. It is this fundamental fact that imparts to our
      manufacture a pronounced capitalist character, as distinct from the
      preceding stage. Dependence on capital and work for hire existed then too,
      but it had not yet taken definite shape, had not yet embraced the mass of
      industrialists, the mass of the population, had not given rise to a split
      among the various groups of individuals participating in
      production. Moreover, production itself in the preceding stage still
      preserves its small dimensions – the difference between the master and
      the worker is relatively small – there are scarcely any big capitalists
      (who always head manufacture) – nor are there any workers tied to a
      single operation and thereby tied to capital, which combines these
      detailed operations into a single mechanism of production.

    

      Here is an old writer’s evidence which strikingly confirms this
      characterisation of the data cited by us above: “In the village of
      Kimry, as in other so-called rich Russian villages, Pavlovo, for example,
      half the population are beggars who live entirely on alms. . . . If an
      operative falls sick, and moreover lives alone, he risks going the next
      week without a crust of

bread.”[1]


      Thus, the main feature of the economy of Russian manufacture was already
      fully revealed by the 60s – the contrast between the “wealth”
      of a whole number of “celebrated” “villages” and
      the complete proletarisation of the overwhelming majority of
      “handicraftsmen.” Connected with this feature is the
      circumstance that the most typical workers in manufacture (namely,
      artisans who have entirely or virtually broken with the land) are already
      gravitating towards the next, and not the preceding, stage of capitalism,
      that they stand closer to the worker in large-scale machine industry than
      to the peasant. The above-quoted data on

 

      the cultural level of the handicraftsmen are striking proof of this. But
      that description cannot be extended to the whole mass of the working
      personnel in manufacture. The retention of a vast number of small
      establishments and small masters, the retention of connection with the
      land and the exceedingly extensive development of work in the home – all
      this leads to large numbers of “handicraftsmen” in manufacture
      gravitating still towards the peasantry, towards becoming small masters,
      towards the past and not the

future,[2]

 and clinging to all sorts of illusions about the
      possibility (by supreme exertion, by thrift and resource fullness) of
      becoming independent

masters.[3]

 Here is a remarkably fair appraisal of these
      petty-bourgeois illusions given by an investigator of the
      “handicraft industries” of Vladimir Gubernia:
    

      “The final victory of large-scale industry over small industry, the
      bringing together of the workers, scattered in numerous work rooms, within
      the walls of a single silk mill, is only a matter of time, and the sooner
      this victory is achieved the better it will be for the weavers.
    

      “Characteristic of the present organisation of the silk industry are
      the instability and indefiniteness of economic categories, the struggle
      between large-scale production, and small production and agriculture. This
      struggle drags the small master and the weaver into fevers of excitement,
      yielding them nothing but divorcing them from the land, dragging them into
      debt and overwhelming them in periods of depression. Concentration of
      production will not reduce the weaver’s wages, but will make it
      unnecessary to entice workers and intoxicate them, to attract them with
      advances that do not correspond to their annual earnings. With the
      diminution of mutual competition factory owners lose interest in expending
      considerable sums on involving the weaver in debt. Moreover, large-scale
      production so clearly counterposes the interests of the factory owner and
      the workers, the wealth of the one and the poverty of the others, that the
      weaver cannot develop the desire to become a factory owner himself. Small
      production gives the weaver no more than large-scale production does, but
      it lacks the stability of the latter and for that reason corrupts the
      worker much more deeply. False hopes arise in the mind of the handicraft
      weaver, he looks forward to the opportunity of setting up his own loom. To
      achieve this ideal he strains himself to the utmost, falls into debt,
      steals, lies, regards his fellow-weavers not as

 

      friends in misfortune, but as enemies, as competitors for the very
      wretched loom that he sees in his mind’s eye in the remote
      future. The small master does not understand his economic insignificance;
      he cringes to the buyers-up and the factory owners, hides from his
      fellow-weavers where and on what terms he buys his raw materials and sells
      his product. Imagining that he is an independent master, he becomes a
      voluntary and wretched tool, a plaything in the hands of the big
      traders. No sooner does he succeed in dragging himself out of the mire, in
      acquiring three or four looms, than he begins to talk about the troubles
      of the employer, the laziness and drunkenness of the weavers, about the
      necessity of insuring the factory owner against non-payment of debts. The
      small master is the incarnation of industrial servility, just as in the
      good old days the butler and the housekeeper were the incarnation of serf
      servility. So long as the instruments of production are not entirely
      divorced from the producer and the latter still has opportunities of
      becoming an independent master, so long as the economic gulf between the
      buyer-up and the weaver is bridged by proprietors, small masters and
      middle-men, who direct and exploit the lower economic categories and are
      subject to the exploitation of the upper ones, the social consciousness of
      those who work is obscured and their imagination is distorted by
      fictions. Competition arises where there should be solidarity, and the
      interests of what are really antagonistic economic groups are united. Not
      confining itself to economic exploitation, the present organisation of
      silk production finds its agents among the exploited and lays upon them
      the task of obscuring the minds and corrupting the hearts of those who
      work” (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, Vol. III,
      pp. 124-126).
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      N. Ovsyannikov, “Relation of the Upper Volga Area to the
      Nizhni-Novgorod Fair.” Article in Nizhni-Novgorod Handbook,
      Vol. II (Nizhni-Novgorod, 1869). The author bases himself on data for
      Kimry village for 1865. This author supplements his review of the fair
      with a description of the social and economic relations in the industries
      represented there.—Lenin

[2]
      Exactly like their Narodnik ideologists.—Lenin

[3]
      For isolated heroes of individual endeavour (such as Duzhkin in
      V. Korolenko’s Pavlovo Sketches ) this is still possible in
      the period of manufacture, but, of course, not for the mass of
      propertyless workers who perform a single operation.—Lenin
 

 
  

IV. The Territorial Division of Labour and the Separation of Agriculture From Industry

|

VI. Merchant’s and Industrial Capital In Manufacture. The “Buyer-Up” and the “Factory Owner”

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Merchant’s and Industrial Capital in Manufacture.The "Buyer-up" and the "Factory Owner"




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: VI. Merchant's and Industrial Capital In Manufacture. The 'Buyer-Up' and the 'Factory Owner'








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      VI. Merchant’s and Industrial Capital In Manufacture. The
      “Buyer-Up” and the “Factory Owner”
    

      From the data given above it is evident that along with big capitalist
      workshops we always find an extremely large number of small establishments
      at this stage of capitalist development; numerically, these, as a rule,
      even predominate, although they play a quite subordinate role in the
      sum-total of production. This retention (and even, as we have seen above,
      development) of small establishments under manufacture is quite a natural
      phenomenon. Under hand production, the large establishments have no
      decisive advantage over the small ones; division of labour, by creating
      the simplest detailed operations, facilitates the rise of small
      workshops. For this reason, a typical feature of capitalist
      manufacture is precisely the small number of relatively large
      establishments side by side with a considerable

 

      number of small establishments. Is there any connection between the one
      and the other? The data examined above leave no doubt that the connection
      between them is of the closest, that it is out of the small establishments
      that the large ones grow, that the small establishments are sometimes
      merely outside departments of the manufactories, that in the overwhelming
      majority of cases the connection between them is maintained by
      merchant’s capital, which belongs to the big masters and holds sway
      over the small ones. The owner of the big workshop has to buy raw
      materials and sell his wares on a large scale; the bigger his turnover,
      the smaller (per unit of product) are his expenses on the purchase and
      sale of goods, on sorting, warehousing, etc., etc.; and so there arises
      the retail reselling of raw materials to small masters, and the purchase
      of their wares, which the manufactory owner resells as his

own.[1]

 If (as is often the
      case) bondage and usury are linked with these transactions in the sale of
      raw materials and the purchase of wares, if the small master gets
      materials on credit and delivers wares in payment of debt, the big
      manufactory owner obtains a high level of profit on his capital such as he
      could never obtain from wage-workers. Division of labour gives a fresh
      impetus to the development of such relations of dependence of the small
      masters upon the big ones: the latter either distribute materials in the
      homes for making up (or for the performance of certain detailed
      operations), or buy up from the “handicraftsmen” parts of
      products,

 

      special sorts of products, etc. In short, the closest and most
      inseparable tie between merchant’s and industrial capital is
      one of the most characteristic features of manufacture. The
      “buyer-up” nearly always merges here with the manufactory
      owner (the “factory owner,” to use the current but wrong term,
      which classifies every workshop of any size as a
      “factory”). That is why, in the overwhelming majority of
      cases, data on the scale of production of the big establishments in
      themselves give no idea of their real significance in our
      “handicraft

industries,”[2]

 for the owners of such establishments have at
      their command the labour, not only of the workers employed in their
      establishments, but of a mass of domestic workers, and even (de facto
      ) of a mass of quasi-independent small masters, in relation to whom
      they are

“buyers-up.”[3]

 The data on Russian manufacture thus bring out in
      striking relief the law established by the author of Capital,
      namely, that the degree of development of merchant’s capital is
      inversely proportional to the degree of development of industrial

      capital.[4] And
      indeed, we may characterise all the industries described in § II as
      follows: the fewer the big workshops in them, the more is
      “buying-up” developed, and vice versa; all that changes is the
      form of capital that dominates in each case and that

 

      places the “independent” handicraftsman in conditions which
      often are incomparably worse than those of the wage-worker.

    

      The fundamental error of Narodnik economics is that it ignores, or glosses
      over, the connection between the big and the small establishments, on the
      one hand, and between merchant’s and industrial capital, on the
      other. “The factory owner of the Pavlovo area is nothing more than a
      complex type of buyer-up,” says Mr. Grigoryev
      (loc. cit., p. 119). That is true, not only of Pavlovo,
      but of the majority of industries organised on the lines of capitalist
      manufacture; the reverse is likewise true: the buyer-up in manufacture is
      a complex type of “factory owner”; this, incidentally, is one
      of the fundamental differences between the buyer-up in manufacture and the
      buyer-up in the small peasant industries. But to see in this fact of the
      connection between the “buyer-up” and the “factory
      owner” some argument in favour of small industry (as Mr. Grigoryev
      and many other Narodniks do) means drawing absolutely arbitrary
      conclusions and distorting facts to fit preconceived notions. A host of
      facts testify, as we have seen, to the point that the combination of
      merchant’s capital with industrial capital makes the position of the
      direct producer considerably worse than that of the wage-worker, lengthens
      his working day, reduces his earnings, and retards economic and cultural
      development.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Let us supplement the above by one other example. In the furnishing
      industry of Moscow Gubernia (information dated 1876, from
      Mr. Isayev’s book), the biggest industrialists are the Zemns, who
      introduced the making of costly furniture and “trained generations
      of skilled artisans.” In 1845 they established a sawmill of their
      own (in 1894-95 – 12,000 rubles output, 14 workers, steam-engine). Let us
      note that altogether in this industry there were 708 establishments, 1,979
      workers, of whom 846, or 42.7%, were hired, and an output totalling
      459,000 rubles. In the beginning of the 60s the Zenins began to buy raw
      materials wholesale in Nizhni-Novgorod. They bought timber in waggon-loads
      at 13 rubles per hundred planks and sold it to small handicraftsmen at
      18-20 rubles. In 7 villages (where 116 are at work) the majority sell
      furniture to Zenin, who has a furniture and plywood warehouse in Moscow
      (established in 1874) with a turnover reaching 40,000 rubles. About 20
      one-man jobbers are working for the Zenins.—Lenin

[2]
      Here is an example illustrating what has been said above. In the village
      of Negino, Trubchevsk Uyezd, Orel Gubernia, there is an oil works
      employing 8 workers, with an output of 2,000 rubles (Directory
      for 1890). This small works would seem to indicate that the role of
      capital in the local oil-pressing industry is very slight But the slight
      development of industrial capital is merely indicative of an enormous
      development of merchant’s and usurer’s capital. From the
      Zemstvo statistical returns we learn of this village that of 186
      households 160 are completely in the grip of the local factory owner, who
      even pays all their taxes for them, lends them all they
      need (and that over many, many years), receiving help at a reduced
      price in payment of debt. The mass of the peasants in Orel Gubernia are in
      a similar state of bondage. Can one, under such circumstances, rejoice
      over the slight development of industrial capital?—Lenin

[3]
      One can therefore imagine what sort of picture one gets of the economic
      organisation of such “handicraft industries” if the big
      manufactory owners are left out of account (after all, this is not
      handicraft, but factory industry!), while the “buyers-up” are
      depicted as being “virtually quite superfluous and called into being
      solely by the failure to organise the sale of products” (Mr. V. V.,
      Essays on Handicraft Industry, 150)!—Lenin
 


[4]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 323.  [p.440]
    

 
  

V. The Economic Structure of Manufacture

|

VII. Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: VII. Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      VII. Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture
    

      Capitalist domestic industry – i.e., the processing at home, for payment
      by the piece, of raw materials obtained from an entrepreneur – is also
      met with, as indicated in the preceding chapter, in the small peasant
      industries. Later we shall see that it is met with again (and on a large
      scale) alongside the factory, i.e., large-scale machine industry. Thus,
      capitalist domestic industry is met with at all stages of the development
      of capitalism in industry, but is most characteristic of manufacture. Both
      the small peasant industries and large-scale machine industry manage very
      easily without domestic industry. The manufactory

 

      period, however, of capitalist development, with its characteristic
      retention of the worker’s connection with the land, and with an
      abundance of small establishments around big ones – can be imagined with
      difficulty, or hardly at all, without the distribution of home

work.[1]

 And the facts of
      Russia do indeed show, as we have seen, that in the industries organised
      on the lines of capitalist manufacture the distribution of home work is
      particularly widespread. That is why we think it most appropriate to
      examine in precisely this chapter the characteristic features of
      capitalist domestic industry, although some of the examples quoted below
      cannot be assigned specifically to manufacture.

    

      Let us point, first of all, to the multitude of middlemen between the
      capitalist and the worker in domestic industry. The big entrepreneur
      cannot himself distribute materials to hundreds and thousands of workers,
      scattered sometimes in different villages; what is needed is the
      appearance of middle-men (in some cases even of a hierarchy of middle-men)
      to take the materials in bulk and distribute them in small quantities. We
      get a regular sweating

system,[2]

 a system of the severest exploitation: the
      “subcontractor” (or “workroom owner,” or
      “tradeswoman” in the lace industry, etc., etc.), who is close
      to the worker, knows how to take advantage even of specific cases of his
      distress and devises such methods of exploitation as would be
      inconceivable in a big establishment, and as absolutely preclude all
      possibility of control or

      supervision.[3]




      Alongside the sweating system, and perhaps as one of its forms, should be
      placed the truck

system[4]

--the system of payment in provisions–which is
      prohibited in factories, but continues to reign in handicraft industries,
      especially where the work is distributed to homes. Above, in describing
      the various industries, instances were given of this widespread practice.

    

      Further, capitalist domestic industry inevitably entails extremely
      insanitary working conditions. The utter poverty of the worker, the utter
      impossibility of controlling working conditions by regulations of any
      kind, and the combination of the living and working premises, such are the
      conditions that convert the dwellings of the home workers into hotbeds of
      infection and occupational disease. In the large establishments one can
      fight such things; domestic industry, however, is in this respect the most
      “liberal” form of capitalist exploitation.

    

      An excessively long working day is also an essential feature of domestic
      work for the capitalist and of the small industries in general. Instances
      have been given illustrating the comparative length of the working day in
      the “factories” and among the “handicraftsmen.”

    

      The drawing of women and of children of the tenderest age into production
      is nearly always observed in domestic industry. To illustrate this, let us
      cite some facts from a description of the women’s industries of
      Moscow Gubernia. There are 10,004 women engaged in cotton winding;
      children start work at the age of 5 or 6 (!); daily earnings are 10
      kopeks, yearly 17 rubles. The working day in the women’s industries
      in general is as much as 18 hours. In the knitting industry children start
      work from the age of six, daily earnings are 10 kopeks, yearly 22
      rubles. Altogether 37,514 females are employed in the women’s
      industries; they begin working from the age of 5 or 6 (in 6 out of 19
      industries, which 6 industries account for 32,400 female workers);

 

      the average daily earnings are 13 kopeks, yearly 26 rubles 20

      kopeks.[5]


      One of the most pernicious aspects of capitalist domestic industry is that
      it leads to a reduction in the level of the worker’s
      requirements. The employer is able to recruit workers in remote districts
      where the popular standard of living is particularly low and where the
      worker’s connection with the land enables him to work for a bare
      pittance. For example, the owner of a village stocking establishment
      explains that in Moscow rents are high and that, besides, the knitters
      “have to be . . . supplied with white bread . . . whereas here the
      workers do the job in their own cottages and eat black bread. . . . Now
      how can Moscow compete with

us!”[6]

 In the cotton-winding industry the explanation of
      the very low wages is that for the peasants’ wives, daughters, etc.,
      this is merely a supplementary source of income. “Thus, the system
      prevailing in this trade forces down to the utmost limit the wages of
      those for whom it is the sole means of livelihood, reduces the wages of
      those who obtain their livelihood exclusively by factory labour below
      their minimum needs, or retards the raising of their standard of
      living. In both cases it creates extremely abnormal

conditions.”[7]

 “The factory
      seeks cheap weavers,” says Mr. Kharizomenov, “and it finds
      them in their native villages, far from the centres of
      industry. . . . That wages drop steadily as one moves from the industrial
      centres to the outer regions is an undoubted

fact.”[8]

 Hence, the
      employers are perfectly well able to take advantage of the conditions
      which artificially tie the population to the rural districts.

    

      The isolation of the home workers is a no less pernicious aspect of this
      system. Here is a graphic description of this aspect of the matter, as
      given by buyers-up

 

      themselves: “The operations of both” (the small and the big
      buyers-up of nails from the Tver blacksmiths) “are organised
      according to one system – when they collect the nails, they pay partly in
      money and partly in iron, and to make the blacksmiths more
      tractable always have them working in their

homes.”[9]

 These words provide
      a simple clue to the “vitality” of our
      “handicraft” industry!

    

      The isolation of the home workers and the abundance of middle-men
      naturally lead to widespread bondage, to all kinds of personal dependence,
      which usually accompany “patriarchal” relationships in remote
      rural districts. Workers’ indebtedness to employers is extremely
      widespread in the “handicraft” industries in general, and in
      domestic industry in

particular.[10]

 Usually the worker is not only a
      Lohnsklave but also a

      Schuldsklave.[11]

 Instances were given above of the conditions in
      which the worker is placed by the “patriarchal character” of
      rural

      relationships.[12]


      Passing from the description of capitalist domestic industry to the
      conditions making for its spread, we must first make mention of the
      connection between this system and the tying of the peasant to his
      allotment. The lack of freedom of movement, the necessity of occasionally
      suffering monetary loss in order to get rid of land (when payments for the
      land exceed returns from it, so that a peasant who leases his allotment
      finds himself paying a sum to the lessee), the social-estate exclusiveness
      of the peasant community – all this artificially enlarges the sphere of

 

      application of capitalist home-work, artificially binds the peasant to
      these worst forms of exploitation. Obsolete institutions and an agrarian
      system that is thoroughly saturated with the social-estate principle thus
      exert a most pernicious influence in both agriculture and industry,
      perpetuating technically backward forms of production which go hand in
      hand with the greatest development of bondage and personal dependence,
      with the hardest lot and the most helpless position of the working

      people.[13]


      Furthermore, there is also an undoubted connection between home-work for
      capitalists and the differentiation of the peasantry. Extensive incidence
      of home-work presupposes two conditions: 1) the existence of a mass of
      rural proletarians who have to sell their labour-power, and to
      sell it cheaply; 2) the existence of well-to-do peasants, well
      acquainted with local conditions, who can undertake the function of agents
      in distributing work. A salesman sent in by the merchant will not always
      be able to fulfil this function (particularly in the more or less complex
      industries) and will hardly ever be able to fulfil it with such
      “virtuosity” as can a local peasant, “one of

      themselves.”[14]

 The big entrepreneurs would probably be unable
      to carry out half their operations in distributing work to home workers if
      they did not have at their command a whole army of small entrepreneurs who
      can be trusted with goods on credit or on commission, and who greedily
      clutch at every opportunity of enlarging their small commercial
      operations.

    

      Finally, it is extremely important to point to the significance of
      capitalist domestic industry in the theory of the

 

      surplus-population created by capitalism. No one has talked so much about
      the “freeing” of the Russian workers by capitalism as have
      Messrs. V. V., N.-on and other Narodniks, but none of them has taken the
      trouble to analyse the specific forms of the “reserve army” of
      labour that have arisen and are arising in Russia in the post-Reform
      period. None of the Narodniks has even noticed the trifling detail that
      home workers constitute what is, perhaps, the largest section of our
      “reserve army” of

      capitalism.[15]

      By distributing work to be done in the home the
      entrepreneurs are enabled to increase production immediately to
      the desired dimensions without any considerable expenditure of
      capital and time on setting up workshops, etc. Such an immediate
      expansion of production is very often dictated by the conditions
      of the market, when increased demand results from a livening up
      of some large branch of industry (e.g., railway construction),
      or from such circumstances as war,

      etc.[16]

 Hence,
      another aspect of the process which

 

      we described in Chapter II as the formation of an agricultural proletariat
      of millions, is, incidentally, the enormous development in the post-Reform
      period of capitalist domestic industry. “What has become of the
      hands released from the occupations of domestic, strictly natural economy,
      which had in view the family and the few consumers in the neighbouring
      market? The factories overcrowded with workers, the rapid expansion of
      large-scale domestic industry provide a clear answer”
      (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 20. Our italics). The
      figures given in the following section will show how great the number of
      workers employed by entrepreneurs in domestic industry must be in Russia
      today.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      In Western Europe also, as we know, the manufactory period of capitalism
      was distinguished by the extensive development of domestic industry – in
      the weaving industries for instance. It is interesting to note that in
      describing clock-making, which he cites as a classic example of
      manufacture, Marx points out that the dial, spring and case are rarely
      made in the manufactory itself, and that, in general, the detail worker
      often works at home (Das Kapital, 1, 2-te Aufl.,

S. 353-354).[17]—Lenin

[2]
      These words are in English in the original.—Ed.

[3]
      That, incidentally, is why the factory fights such middle-men, as, for
      example, the “jobbers,” workers who hire workmen on their own
      account. Cf. Kobelyatsky: Handbook for Factory Owners,
      etc., St. Petersburg, 1897, p. 24 and foll. All the literature on
      the handicraft industries teems with facts testifying to the extreme
      exploitation

 

of craftsmen by middle-men where work is distributed to
      homes. Let us cite as an example Korsak’s general opinion,
      loc. cit., .p. 258, the description of
      “handicraft” weaving (quoted above), the descriptions of the
      women’s industries in Moscow Gubernia (Statistical Returns for
      Moscow Gubernia, Vols. VI and VII), and many others.—Lenin

[4]
      These words are in English in the original.—Ed.

[5]
      Mme. Gorbunova, who has described the women’s industries, wrongly
      gives the earnings as 18 kopeks and 37 rubles 77 kopeks respectively, for
      she takes only the average figures for each industry and leaves out of
      account the different numbers of women working in the different

      industries.[18]—Lenin

[6]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt. II,
      p. 104.—Lenin

[7]
Ibid., p. 285.—Lenin

[8]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 63. Cf. ibid.,
      250.—Lenin

[9]
Reports and Investigations, 1, 218. Cf. ibid., 280:
      statement by factory owner Irodov that he finds it more profitable to give
      out work to hand weavers working in their homes.—Lenin

[10]
      Examples of workers’ indebtedness to employers in the brush industry
      of Moscow Gubernia (Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia,
      Vol. VI, Pt. I, p. 32), the comb industry (ibid., 261), the toy
      industry (Vol. VI, Pt. II, 44), the stone-setting industry, etc., etc. In
      the silk industry the weaver is up to his ears in debt to the factory
      owner, who pays his taxes and, in general, “rents the weaver as one
      rents land,” etc. (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III,
      51-55).—Lenin

[11]
      Not only a wage-slave, but also a debt-slave.—Lenin

[12]
      “Of course,” we read of the blacksmiths of Nizhni-Novgorod
      Gubernia, “here, too, the master exploits the worker’s labour,
      but to a lesser degree (?), and moreover it is done patriarchally, as it
      were, by common consent (!) without any misunderstandings”
      (Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, IV, 199).—Lenin

[13]
      Of course, in all capitalist society there will always be a rural
      proletariat that agrees to take home-work on the worst terms; but obsolete
      institutions enlarge the sphere of application of domestic industry and
      hinder the struggle against it. Korsak, as far back as 1861, pointed to
      the connection between the tremendously widespread nature of domestic
      industry in Russia and our agrarian system (loc. cit.,
      305-307).—Lenin

[14]
      We have seen that the big master-industrialists, the buyers up, workroom
      owners and subcontractors are at the same time well to-do
      agriculturists. “The subcontractor,” we read, for example, in
      a description of galloon-weaving in Moscow Gubernia (Statistical
      Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. II, p. 147), “is a
      peasant just like his weaver, but has a cottage, a horse and a cow more
      than the weaver has, and perhaps is able with his whole family to drink
      tea twice a day.”—Lenin

[15]
      This error of the Narodniks is all the more gross in that the majority of
      them want to follow the theory of Marx, who most emphatically stressed the
      capitalist character of “modern domestic industry” and
      pointed especially to the fact that these home workers constitute one
      of the forms of the relative surplus-population characteristic of
      capitalism. (Das Kapital, I2, S. S. 503 u. ff.; 668 u. ff.;
      Chapter 23, § 4

particularly.)[19]—Lenin

[16]
      A small example. In Moscow Gubernia, the tailoring industry is widespread
      (Zemstvo statistics counted in the gubernia at the end of the 1870s a
      total of 1,123 tailors working locally and 4,291 working away from home);
      most of the tailors worked for the Moscow ready-made clothing
      merchants. The centre of the industry is the Perkhushkovo Volost,
      Zvenigorod Uyezd (see data on the Perkhushkovo tailors in Appendix I to
      Chapter V, Industry No. 36). The Perkhushkovo tailors did particularly
      well during the war of 1877. They made army tents to the order of special
      contractors; subcontractors with 3 sewing-machines and ten women day
      workers “made” from 5 to 6 rubles a day. The women were paid
      20 kopeks per day. “It is said that in those busy days over 300
      women day workers from various surrounding villages lived in Shadrino (the
      principal village in the Perkhushkovo Volost)” (Statistical
      Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VI, Pt. II,
      loc. cit., 256). “At that time the Perkhushkovo
      tailors, that is, the owners of the workshops, made so much money that
      nearly all of them built themselves fine homes”
      (ibid.). These hundreds of women day workers who, perhaps, would
      have a busy season once in 5 to 10 years, must always be available, in the
      ranks of the reserve army of the proletariat.—Lenin
 


[17]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 342-343.  [p.442]
    


[18]
      The reference here is to M. K. Gorbunova’s Women’s
      Industries in Moscow Gubernia, Part IV (Statistical Returns for
      Moscow Gubernia. Section covering economic statistics, Vol. VII, Part
      II, Moscow, 1882). Introduction, p. IX.  [p.444]
    


[19]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 478, etc., pp. 643,
      etc.; Chapter XXV, Section 4 particularly.  [p.447]
    

 
  

VI. Merchant’s and Industrial Capital In Manufacture. The “Buyer-Up” and the “Factory Owner”

|

VIII. What Is “Handicraft” Industry?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## What Is "Handicraft" Industry?




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Six: VIII. What Is 'Handicraft' Industry?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VI. Capitalist Manufacture and Capitalist Domestic Industry




      VIII. What Is “Handicraft” Industry?
    

      In the two preceding chapters we dealt mainly with what in Russia is
      usually called “handicraft” industry; we may now try to answer
      the question put in the heading.

    

      Let us begin with some statistics, so as to judge which of the forms of
      industry analysed above figure in publications among the general mass of
      “handicraft industries.”

    

      The Moscow statisticians, in concluding their investigation of the peasant
      “industries,” summarised all and sundry non-agricultural
      occupations. They listed altogether 141,329 persons (Vol. VII, Pt. III)
      engaged in local industries (in the making of commodities), but among
      these were included artisans (a section of the shoe-makers, glaziers and
      many others), wood sawyers, etc., etc. Not fewer than 87,000 (according to
      our calculations of the different industries) were domestic workers
      employed by

      capitalists.[1]

 The
      number of wage-workers in the 54 industries for which we have been able to
      combine the data is 17,566, out of 29,446, i.e., 59.65%. For Vladimir
      Gubernia we have obtained the following results (from five issues of
      Industries of Vladimir Gubernia ): altogether, 18,286 engaged in
      31 industries; of these 15,447 were engaged in

 

      industries in which capitalist domestic industry predominates (including
      5,504 wage-workers, i.e., hirelings of the second degree, so to
      speak). Further, there are 150 rural artisans (of whom 45 are hired) and
      2,689 small commodity producers (of whom 511 are hired). The total number
      of capitalistically engaged workers is (15,447 + 45 + 511 =) 16,003, i.e.,

      87.5%.[2]

 In Kostroma
      Gubernia (on the basis of Mr. Tillo’s tables in the Transactions
      of the Handicraft Commission ), there are 83,633 local
      industrialists, of whom 19,701 are lumber-workers (fine
      “handicraftsmen”!), while 29,564 work in their homes for
      capitalists; some 19,954 are engaged in industries in which small
      commodity-producers predominate, and some 14,414 are village

      artisans.[3]

 In 9
      uyezds of Vyatka Gubernia there are (according to the same
      Transactions ) 60,019 local industrialists; of these, 9,672 are
      millers and oil-pressers; 2,032 are pure artisans (engaged in
      fabric-dyeing); 14,928 are partly artisans and partly commodity-producers,
      the overwhelming majority working independently; 14,424 engage in
      industries partly subordinated to capital; 14,875 engage in industries
      entirely subordinated to capital; 4,088
      engage in industries in which wage-labour completely

predominates.



      On the basis of the data in the Transactions regarding the other
      gubernias we have compiled a table of those industries on

 

      the organisation of which more or less detailed information is
      available. We get 97 industries employing 107,957 persons, with an output
      totalling 21,151,000 rubles. Of these, industries in which wage-labour and
      capitalist domestic industry predominate employ 70,204 persons (18,621,000
      rubles); industries in which wage-workers and workers occupied at home for
      capitalists constitute only a minority employ 26,935 persons (1,706,000
      rubles); and, finally, industries in which independent labour almost
      completely predominates employ 10,818 persons (824,000 rubles). According
      to Zemstvo statistical materials regarding 7 industries of Gorbatov and
      Semyonov uyezds of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, there are 16,303
      handicraftsmen, of whom 4,614 work for the local market; 8,520 work
      “for a master,” and 3,169 as wage-workers; in other words,
      11,689 are capitalistically employed workers. According to the returns of
      the 1894-95 Perm handicraft census, of 26,000 handicraftsmen, 6,500 (25%)
      are wage-workers, and 5,200 (20%) work for buyers-up, in other words, 45%
      are capitalistically employed

workers.[4]


      Fragmentary as the data are (no others were available), they nevertheless
      clearly show that, taken as a whole, a mass of capitalistically employed
      workers are classified among the “handicraftsmen.” For
      instance, those working at home for capitalists number (according to the
      above-quoted data) over 200,000. And this is for some 50 or 60 uyezds, by
      no means all of which have been investigated thoroughly. For the whole of
      Russia the number of workers of this type must be something like two

      million.[5]

 If to
      these are added

 

      the wage-workers employed by “handicraftsmen” – and, as may
      be seen from the above-quoted figures, their number is by no means as
      small as is sometimes thought here in Russia – we shall have to concede
      that the figure of 2 million industrial workers capitalistically employed
      outside the so-called “factories and works” is, if anything, a
      minimum

figure.[6]


      To the question – “What is handicraft industry?” – the data
      quoted in the last two chapters compel us to give the answer that the term
      used is absolutely unsuitable for purposes of scientific investigation,
      and is one usually employed to cover all and sundry forms of industry,
      from domestic industries and handicrafts to wage-labour in very large

      manufactories.[7]

      This lumping together of the most diverse types of economic organisation,
      which prevails in a host of descriptions of “handicraft

      industries,”[8]

      was

 

      taken over quite uncritically and quite senselessly by the Narodnik
      economists, who made a tremendous step backward by comparison, for
      example, with a writer like Korsak, and availed themselves of the
      prevailing confusion of terms to evolve the most curious
      theories. “Handicraft industry” was regarded as something
      economically homogeneous, something sufficient unto itself, and was
      “counterposed ” (sic !) to
      “capitalism,” which without further ado was taken to mean
      “factory” industry. Let us take Mr. N.-on, for instance. On
      p. 79 of his Sketches we find the heading “Capitalisation
      (?) of

      Industries,”[9]

 and then, without any reservation or
      explanation, “Data on Factories.”. . . The simplicity is
      positively touching: “capitalism” = “factory
      industry,” and factory industry = what is classified under this
      heading in official publications. And on the basis of such a
      profound “analysis” the masses of capitalistically employed
      workers included among the “handicraftsmen” are wiped off
      capitalism’s account. On the basis of this sort of
      “analysis” the question of the different forms of industry in
      Russia is completely evaded. On the basis of this sort of
      “analysis” one of the most absurd and pernicious prejudices is
      built up concerning the distinction between our “handicraft”
      industry and our “factory” industry, the divorcement of the
      latter from the former, the “artificial character” of
      “factory” industry, etc. It is a prejudice because no one has
      ever so much as attempted to examine the data, which in all branches of

 

      industry show a very close and inseparable connection between
      “handicraft” industry and “factory” industry.

    

      The object of this chapter has been to show in what precisely this
      connection consists and precisely which specific technical, economic and
      cultural features are represented by the form of industry that in Russia
      stands between small-scale industry and large-scale machine industry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Let us recall that Mr. Kharizomenov (article quoted above) calculated that
      of 102,245 persons engaged in 42 industries of Moscow Gubernia, 66% were
      engaged in industries where there was an absolute predominance of the
      domestic system of large-scale production.—Lenin

[2]
      Unfortunately, we are unable to acquaint ourselves with the latest work on
      handicraft industry in Yaroslavl Gubernia (Handicraft
      Industries. Published by Statistical Bureau of Yaroslavl Gubernia
      Zemstvo. Yaroslavl, 1904). Judging from the detailed review in
      Russkiye Vedomosti (1904, No. 248), it is an extremely valuable
      piece of research. The number of handicraftsmen in the gubernia is
      estimated as 18,000 (the number of factory workers in 1903 was placed at
      33,898). Industries are on the decline. One-fifth of the enterprises
      employ wage-workers. One quarter of the total number of handicraftsmen are
      wage-workers. Of the total number of handicraftsmen 15% are engaged in
      establishments with 5 and more workers. Exactly one half of all the
      handicraftsmen work for masters, with materials supplied by the
      latter. Agriculture is on the decline; one-sixth of the handicraftsmen
      have neither horses nor cows, one-third cultivate by hiring a neighbour;
      one-fifth have no land under crops. The earnings of a handicraftsman are 1
      1/2, rubles a week!  (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[3]
      All these figures are approximate, for the source does not give precise
      figures. Among the village artisans are included millers, blacksmiths,
      etc., etc.—Lenin

[4]
      See Studies, pp. 181-182. The figures for
      “handicraftsmen” here include artisans (25%). If we exclude
      the artisans, we get 29.3% wage-workers and 29.5% working for buyers-up
      (p. 122), i.e., 58.8% are capitalistically employed workers. (See present
      edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.)—Lenin

[5]
      For example, capitalist work in the home is particularly developed in the
      ready-made clothing industry, which is growing rapidly. “The demand
      for such an article of prime necessity as ready made clothing is
      increasing from year to year” (Vestnik Finansov, 1897
      No. 52, Survey of Nizhni-Novgorod Fair). The enormous development of this
      industry has taken place only since the 80s. At the present time, in
      Moscow alone ready-made clothing is produced to a total value of not less
      than 16 million rubles, with some 20,000 workers employed. It is estimated
      that for the whole of Russia the

 

output reaches the sum of 100 million
      rubles (Successes of Russian Industry According to Surveys of Expert
      Commissions, St. Petersburg 1897, pp. l36-137). In St. Petersburg,
      the 1890 census gave the number employed in ready-made clothing (Group XI,
      Classes 116-118) as 39,912, counting members of industrialists families,
      including 19,000 workers, and 13,000 one-man producers with their families
      (St. Petersburg According to the Census of December 15, 1890
      ). The 1897 census shows that the total number of persons employed in
      the clothing industry in Russia was 1,158,865, the members of their
      families numbering 1,621,511; total 2,780,376. (Note to 2nd
      edition.)—Lenin

[6]
      Let us recall that the number of “handicraftsmen” in Russia is
      estimated at no less than 4 million (Mr. Kharizomenov’s figure
      Mr. Andreyev gave the figure of 7 1/2 million, but his methods are too

      sweeping)[10];

      consequently, the total figures given in the text cover about one-tenth of
      the total number of “handicraftsmen.”—Lenin

[7]
      Cf. Studies, p. 179 and foll. (See present edition, Vol, 2,
      The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.)—Lenin

[8]
      The desire to retain the term “handicraftsmanship” for the
      purpose of scientifically defining forms of industry has led in our
      publications to purely scholastic arguments about, and definitions of,
      this “handicraftsmanship.” One economist
      “understood” handicraftsmen to mean only commodity-producers,
      while another included artisans in this term; one considered connection
      with the land as an essential feature, while another allowed for
      exceptions; one excluded wage-labour, while another allowed for it where,
      for example, there were up to 16 workers, etc., etc. It goes without
      saying that arguments of this sort (instead of investigation of the
      different forms of industry) could lead nowhere. Let us observe that the
      tenacity of the special term “handicraftsmanship” is to be
      explained most of all by the social-estate divisions in Russian society; a
      “handicraftsman”

 

is an industrialist belonging to the lower
      estates, a person who may be patronised and in relation to whom schemes
      may be concocted without compunction; the form of industry is left out of
      account. The merchant, however and the member of the nobility (even though
      they be small industrialists) are rarely classified as
      “handicraftsmen.” By “handicraft” industries are
      usually meant all sorts of peasant, and only peasant, industries.—Lenin

[9]
      This term “capitalisation,” of which Messrs. V. V. and N.-on
      are so fond, is permissible in a newspaper article, for the sake of
      brevity, but it is totally out of place in an economic investigation of
      which the whole purpose is to analyse the various forms and stages of
      capitalism, their significance, their connection, and their consecutive
      development. “Capitalisation” may be taken to mean anything in
      the world: the hiring of a single “labourer,” buying-up, and a
      steam-driven factory. How can one make head or tail of it, with all these
      things jumbled together!—Lenin
 


[10]
      Lenin refers to Y. N. Andreyev’s Handicraft Industry in Russia
      According to the Investigations of the “Commission of Inquiry into
      Handicraft Industry in Russia” and Other Sources,
      St. Petersburg, 1885 (the estimate of the number of persons engaged in
      “subsidiary trades” as 7 1/2 millions is given on p. 69 of the
      book). Lenin also refers to the pamphlet by the same author entitled
      Handicraft Industry in Russia, St. Petersburg, 1882, p. 12.
      [p.451]
    

 
  

VII. Capitalist Domestic Industry as an Appendage of Manufacture

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 454-551
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. The Scientific Conception of the Factory and the Significance of “Factory” Statistics
  454



II. Our Factory Statistics
  456



III. An Examination of Historico-Statistical Data On the Development of Large-Scale Industry
  468



IV. The Development of the Mining Industry
  484



V. Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist Enterprises Growing?
  496



VI. Steam-Engine Statistics
  507



VII. The Growth of Large Factories
  509



VIII. The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry
  518



IX. The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries
  525



X. The Appendage to the Factory
  534



XI. The Complete Separation of Industry From Agriculture
  536



XII. Three Stages in the Development of Capitalism in Russian Industry
  541

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Scientific Conception of the Factory and the Significance of "Factory" Statistics




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: I. The Scientific Conception of the Factory and the Significance of 'Factory' Statistics








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry





      I. The Scientific Conception of the Factory and the Significance
      of “Factory”
      Statistics[5]


      Before dealing with large-scale machine (factory) industry, we must first
      establish the fact that the scientific conception of the term does not
      correspond at all to its common, everyday meaning. In our official
      statistics, and in literature generally, a factory is taken to mean any
      more or less big industrial establishment with a more or less considerable
      number of wage-workers. According to Marx’s theory, however, the
      term large-scale machine (factory) industry applies only to a definite
      stage of capitalism in industry, namely, the highest stage. The principal
      and most important feature of this stage is the employment of a system of
      machines for

production.[1]

 The transition from the manufactory to the factory
      signifies a complete technical revolution, which does away with the
      craftsman’s manual skill that has taken centuries to acquire, and
      this technical revolution is inevitably followed by the most thoroughgoing
      destruction of social production relations, by a final split among the
      various groups of participants in production, by a complete break with
      tradition, by an intensification and extension of all the dark aspects of
      capitalism, and at the same time by a mass socialisation of labour by
      capitalism. Large-scale machine industry is thus the last word of
      capitalism, the last word of its “elements of social

      progress”[2]

      and regress.

    
      From this it is clear that the transition from the manufactory to the
      factory is particularly important when we

 

      deal with the development of capitalism. Whoever confuses these two stages
      deprives himself of the possibility of understanding the transforming,
      progressive role of capitalism. That is the mistake made by our Narodnik
      economists, who, as we have seen, na\"ively identify capitalism generally
      with “factory” industry and propose to solve the problem of
      the “mission of capitalism” and even of its “unifying

      significance”[3]

 by simply referring to factory statistics. Apart
      from the fact that on matters of factory statistics these writers (as we
      shall show in detail below) have betrayed astonishing ignorance, they
      commit a still graver error in their amazingly stereotyped and narrow
      understanding of Marx’s theory. In the first place, it is ridiculous
      to reduce the problem of the development of large-scale machine industry
      to mere factory statistics. It is a question not only of statistics, but
      of the forms assumed and the stages traversed by the development of
      capitalism in the industry of the country under consideration. Only after
      the substance of these forms and their distinguishing features have been
      made clear is there any sense in illustrating the development of this or
      that form by means of properly compiled statistics. If, however, they
      restrict themselves to Russian statistics, this inevitably leads to
      lumping together the most diverse forms of capitalism, to not seeing the
      wood for the trees. Secondly, to reduce the whole mission of capitalism to
      that of increasing the number of “factory” workers means to
      betray as profound an understanding of theory as did Mr. Mikhailovsky when
      he expressed surprise as to why people talk about the socialisation of
      labour by capitalism, when all that this socialisation amounts to, he
      averred, is that several hundred or thousand workers saw, chop, cut,
      plane, etc., under one

roof.[4]

      The task of our further exposition is twofold: on the one hand, we shall
      examine in detail the condition of our factory statistics and the question
      of their suitability.

 

      This, largely negative, work is necessary because the data involved are
      positively abused in our literature. On the other hand, we shall examine
      the data attesting to the growth of large-scale machine industry in the
      post-Reform period.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Das Kapital, I, Chapter 13 [Chap. 15, Eng. ed. –Ed.].—Lenin

[2]
Ibid., I2,

S. 499.[6]—Lenin

[3]
      Mr. N.–on in Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1894, No. 6, pp. 103 and
      119.—See also his Sketches, and Mr. V. V.’s
      Destiny of Capitalism, passim.—Lenin

[4]
Otechestvenniye Zapiski, 1883, No. 7, Letter to the editor from
      Mr. Postoronny [Outsider].—Lenin
 


[5]
      To characterise the development of large-scale industry in tsarist Russia
      in the post-Reform period Lenin examined the material contained in
      numerous factory statistical sources of that period (statistical returns,
      monographs and works of research, official reference books, magazine and
      newspaper reports, papers, etc.). Lenin’s work of checking,
      processing, combining and scientifically grouping statistical data is
      shown in the notes he made in various books and from other material
      published in section 2 of Lenin Miscellany XXXIII. For
      Lenin’s estimation of the main sources of factory statistics see
      also his article “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics.”
      (See present edition, Vol. 4.) [p. 454]
    


[6]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 474.  [p.  454]
    

 
  


|

II. Our Factory Statistics

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Our Factory Statistics




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: II. Our Factory Statistics








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      II. Our Factory Statistics
    

      The main source of factory statistics in Russia is the returns supplied
      annually by owners of factories and works to the Department of Commerce
      and Manufacture, in conformity with the law passed at the very beginning
      of the present

century.[1]

 The very detailed regulations in this law
      concerning the submission of information by factory owners are nothing but
      a pious wish, and to this day the factory statistics are organised on the
      old, purely pre-Reform lines and are simply appendices to gubernatorial
      reports. There is no precise definition of the term “factory
      and-works,” and consequently gubernia and even uyezd authorities
      employ it in the most diverse ways. There is no central body to direct the
      proper and uniform collection, and verification, of returns. The
      distribution of industrial establishments among various departments
      (Mining, Department of Commerce and Manufacture, Miscellaneous Taxes
      Department, etc.)  still further increases the

confusion.[2]

      In Appendix II we cite the data on our factory industry in the post-Reform
      period that are to be found in official publications, namely, for the
      years of 1863-1879 and 1885-1891. These data relate only to trades not
      subject to excise duty; moreover, for different periods information is
      given for a different number of trades (the returns for

 

      1864-1865 and for 1885 and subsequent years being the fullest); that is
      why we have singled out 34 trades for which data are available for
      1864-1879 and 1885-1890, i.e., for 22 years. To judge the value of these
      data, let us first examine the most important publications on our factory
      statistics. Let us begin with the 60s.

    
      The compilers of factory statistics in the 60s fully appreciated the
      extremely unsatisfactory nature of the returns they were handling. In
      their unanimous opinion the number of workers and the total output were
      considerably understated in the factory-owners’ reports;
      “there is no uniform definition, even for the different gubernias,
      of what should be regarded as a factory and a works, since many gubernias
      include among the factories and works, for example, windmills,
      brick-making sheds and small industrial establishments, while others take
      no account of them, with the result that even comparative data on the
      total numbers of factories and works in the different gubernias are

      valueless.”[3]

      Still more trenchant is the criticism by Bushen, Bok and

      Timiryazev,[4]

 who,
      in addition, point to the inclusion of those occupied at home among the
      factory workers, to the fact that some factory owners supply returns only
      for workers who live on the factory premises, etc. “There are no
      correct official statistics on manufactory and factory industry,”
      says Mr. Bushen, “and there will be none until there is a change in
      the main principles on which the primary material is

      gathered.”[5]

      “The tables of factories and works for many trades include,
      evidently by misunderstanding, numerous purely artisan and handicraft
      establishments that possess nothing of the character of a factory or

      works.”[6]

      In
      view of this, the editors of the Yearbook refused even
      to summarise the data printed, “not desiring to pass on to the
      public incorrect and obviously exaggerated

      figures.”[7]

 To
      give the reader a precise idea of the extent

 

      of this obvious exaggeration, let us turn to the data given in the
      Yearbook, which differs to advantage from all other sources, in
      that it contains a list of factories with an output exceeding 1,000
      rubles. At the present time (since 1885), establishments with a smaller
      total output are not counted as factories. An estimate of these small
      establishments according to the Yearbook reveals that 2,366 were
      included in the general list of factories, employing 7,327 workers and an
      output amounting to 987,000 rubles. The total number of factories,
      however, in 71 trades, according to the Yearbook, was 6,891, with
      342,473 workers and an output totalling 276,211,000 rubles. Consequently,
      the small establishments represent 34.3 % of the total number of
      establishments, 2.1% of the total number of workers, and 0.3% of the total
      output. It stands to reason that it is absurd to regard such small
      establishments (with an average per establishment of a little over 3
      workers and less than 500 rubles output) as factories, and that there can
      be no question of there being anything like a complete registration of
      them. Not only have such establishments been classed as factories in our
      statistics, but there have even been cases of hundreds of handicraftsmen
      being quite artificially and arbitrarily combined as a
      “factory.” For example, this very Yearbook mentions in the
      rope-making trade of the Izbylets Volost, Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod
      Gubernia, a factory “of the peasants of the Izbylets Volost; 929
      workers; 308 spinning wheels; output 100,400 rubles” (p. 149); or in
      the village of Vorsma in the same uyezd, a factory of “temporarily
      bound peasants of Count Sheremetev; 100 smithies; 250 carpenters’
      benches (in homes); 3 horse-operated and 20 hand-operated grind stones;
      902 workers; output 6,610 rubles” (p. 281). One can imagine what an
      idea of the real situation such statistics

      give![8]




      A special place among the sources of factory statistics of the 60s is held
      by the Military Statistical Abstract (Vol. IV. Russia,
      St. Petersburg, 1871). It gives data on all the factories and works of the
      Russian Empire, including mining and excise-paying establishments, and
      estimates that in 1866 there were in European Russia no more nor less than
      70,631 factories, 829,573 workers, with an output totalling 583,317,000
      rubles!! These curious figures were arrived at, firstly, because they were
      taken, not from the reports of the Ministry of Finance, but from the
      special returns of the Central Statistical Committee (these returns were
      never published in any of the Committee’s publications, nor is it
      known by whom, how and when they were gathered and

      processed);[9]

      secondly, because the compilers of the Military Statistical
      Abstract did not hesitate in the least to class even the smallest
      establishments as factories. (Military Statistical Abstract,
      p. 319) and furthermore supplemented the basic returns with other
      material: returns of the Department of Commerce and Manufacture, returns
      of the Commissariat, returns of the Ordnance and Naval Departments, and
      finally, returns “from the most diverse sources”
      (ibid.,

p. XXIII).[10]

 Therefore,
      in using

 

      the data of the Military Statistical Abstract for purposes of
      comparison with present-day data, Messrs.

      N.–on,[11]

      Karyshev[12]

      and Kablukov[13]

      revealed their total unfamiliarity with the principal sources of our
      factory statistics and their utterly uncritical attitude towards these
      statistics.

    
      During the debate in the Free Economic Society on the paper read by
      M. I. Tugan-Baranovsky, who pointed to the completely erroneous character
      of the figures in the Military Statistical Abstract, several
      speakers declared that even if there was an error in the number of
      workers, it was only a slight one—10 to 15%. That was said, for
      example, by Mr. V. V. (see verbatim report of debate, St. Petersburg,
      1898, p. 1). He was “joined” by Mr. V. Pokrovsky, who also
      confined himself to a bald statement (p. 3). Without even attempting a
      critical examination of the various sources of our factory statistics,
      these people and their supporters contented themselves with generalities
      about the unsatisfactory nature of factory statistics, and about the data
      having recently become more exact (??) and so forth. The main issue, the
      crude error of Messrs. N.–on and Karyshev, was thus simply glossed over,
      as P. B. Struve quite rightly observed (p. 11). We therefore think it
      worth while to calculate those exaggerations in the data of the
      Military Statistical Abstract which could and should have been
      noticed by anybody handling the sources attentively. For 71 trades we have
      the parallel statistics for 1866 both of the Ministry of Finance
      (Ministry of Finance Yearbook, I) and of unknown origin
      (Military Statistical Abstract ). For these trades, leaving out
      the metallurgical, the Military Statistical Abstract exaggerated
      the number of workers employed in factories and works in European Russia
      by 50,000. Further, for those trades for which the
      Yearbook gave only gross figures for the Empire, refusing to
      analyse them in detail

 

      in view of their “obvious exaggeration” (Yearbook,
      p. 306), the Military Statistical Abstract gives 95,000 workers
      over and above these figures. In brick-making the number of workers is
      exaggerated by a minimum of 10,000 ; to convince oneself
      of this, one should compare the data by gubernias given in the
      Military Statistical Abstract and those in Returns and
      Material of the Ministry of Finance, No. 4 of 1866 and No. 6 of
      1867. For the metallurgical trades the Military Statistical
      Abstract exaggerated the number of workers by
      86,000 as compared with that in the Yearbook,
      having evidently included some of the mine workers in its figure. For the
      excise-paying trades the Military Statistical Abstract, as we
      shall show in the next section, exaggerates the number of workers by
      nearly 40,000. Altogether there is an exaggeration of
      280,000. This is a minimum and incomplete figure, for we
      lack material to verify the data of the Military Statistical
      Abstract for all trades. One can therefore judge to what extent those
      who assert that the error of Messrs. N.–on and Karyshev is trifling are
      informed on this subject!

    
      In the 1870s much less was done to combine and analyse factory statistics
      than in the 1860s. The Ministry of Finance Yearbook contains data
      for only 40 trades (not subject to excise duty) for 1867-1879 (Vols. VIII,
      X and XII; see Appendix II), the exclusion of the other trades being
      ascribed to the “extremely unsatisfactory nature of the
      material” for industries “which are connected with
      agricultural life, or are appendages of artisan and handicraft
      industries” (Vol. VIII, p. 482; same, Vol. X, p. 590). The most
      valuable source for the 1870s is Mr. P. Orlov’s Directory of
      Factories and Works (1st edition, St. Petersburg, 1881, returns for
      1879 taken from the same reports of factory owners to the Department of
      Commerce and Manufacture). This publication lists all establishments with
      an output of not less than 2,000 rubles. The others, being small and
      inseparable from handicraft establishments, are not enumerated in this
      list, but are included in the summarised data given by the
      Directory. Since no separate totals are given for establishments
      with an output of 2,000 rubles and over, the general data of the
      Directory, like those of previous publications, combine the small

 

      establishments with the large ones; for different trades and different
      gubernias unequal numbers of small establishments are included (quite
      fortuitously, of course) in the

      statistics.[14]

      Regarding trades connected with agriculture, the Directory
      repeats (p. 396) the Yearbook’s reservation and refuses to
      give “even approximate totals” (author’s
      italics) owing to the inaccuracy and incompleteness of the

      data.[15]

 This view
      (quite a legitimate one, as we shall see below) did not, however, prevent
      the inclusion in the Directory’s general totals of all
      these particularly unreliable figures, which are thus lumped together with
      relatively reliable ones. Let us give the Directory’s total
      figures for European Russia, with the observation that, unlike previous
      figures, they also embrace excise paying trades (the second edition of the
      Directory, 1887, gives the returns for 1884; the third, 1894,
      those for 1890):
    







1879[16]



      We shall show further that the drop in the number of factories indicated
      by these data was actually fictitious; the whole point is that at
      different times different numbers of small establishments were classed as
      factories. Thus, the number of establishments with an output exceeding
      1,000 rubles was estimated in 1884 at 19,277, and in 1890, at 21,124; with
      an output of 2,000 rubles and over: in 1884 at 11,509, and in 1890 at

      17,642.[17]



      In 1889 the Department of Commerce and Manufactures began to issue in
      separate editions Collections of Data on Factory Industry in
      Russia (for 1885 and subsequent years). These data are based on the
      material mentioned (factory owners’ reports), and their treatment is
      far from satisfactory, being inferior to that in the above-mentioned
      publications of the 60s. The only improvement is that the small
      establishments, i.e., those with an output of under 1,000 rubles, are not
      included among the factories and works, and information regarding them is
      given separately, without their being distributed according to

      trades.[18]

 This,
      of course, is a totally inadequate criterion of what a
      “factory” is; a complete registration of
      establishments with an output exceeding 1,000 rubles is out of the
      question under the present system of gathering information; the separation
      of “factories” in trades connected with agriculture is done
      quite haphazardly—for instance, for some gubernias and in some years
      watermills and windmills are classed as factories, while in others they
      are

      not.[19]

 The author
      of the section “Chief Results of Factory Industry in Russia for
      1885-1887” (in the Collection for these years) falls
      repeatedly into error in disregarding the fact that the data for the
      different gubernias are dissimilar and not comparable. Finally, to our
      characterisation of the Collections let us add that till 1891
      inclusive they only covered trades not subject to excise duty, while from
      1892 onwards they cover all trades, including mining and excise-paying; no
      special mention is made of data

 

      comparable with others given previously, and no explanation whatever is
      given of the methods by which ironworks are included in the total number
      of factories and works (for instance, ironworks statistics have never
      given the value but merely the volume of works’ output. How the
      compilers of the Collections arrived at the value of the output
      is unknown).

    
      In the 1880s there was still another source of information about our
      factory industry, one deserving attention for its negative qualities and
      because Mr. Karyshev used data from this

      source.[20]

 This is
      the Returns for Russia for 1884-85 (St. Petersburg,
      1887. Published by the Central Statistical Committee), which gives in one
      of its tables the “totals of output of factory industry in European
      Russia, 1885” (Table XXXIX); the number of factories and of workers
      is given only for Russia as a whole, without being distributed according
      to gubernias. The source of information is “data of reports of
      Messrs. the Governors” (p. 311). The data cover all trades,
      including both excise-paying and mining, and for every trade the
      “average” number of workers and output per works is given for
      the whole of European Russia. Now it is these “averages” that
      Mr. Karyshev proceeded to “analyse.” To judge their value, let
      us compare the data in the Returns with those in the
      Collection (to make such a comparison we must subtract from the
      first-mentioned data the metallurgical, excise-paying, fishing and
      “other” trades; this will leave 53 trades; the data are for
      European Russia):
    






      Thus, the gubernatorial reports included tens of thousands of small
      agricultural and handicraft establishments among the
      “factories”! Of course, such establishments were included
      among the factories quite fortuitously for the various trades, and for the
      various gubernias and uyezds. Here are examples of the number of works
      according to the Returns and the Collection, in some
      trades: fur—1,205 and 259; leather—4,079 and 2,026;
      mat-and-bag—562 and 55; starch-and-treacle—1,228 and 184;
      flour-milling—17,765 and 3,940; oil-pressing—9,341 and 574;
      tar-distilling—3,366 and 328; brick-making—5,067 and 1,488;
      pottery and glazed tile–2,573 and 147. One can imagine the sort of
      “statistics” that will be obtained if one estimates the
      “size of

      establishments”[21]

 in our factory industry by taking “average
      figures” based on such a method of computing
      “factories”! But Mr. Karyshev forms his estimate in precisely
      this manner when he classes under large-scale industry only those trades
      in which the above mentioned “average number ” of
      workers per factory (for the whole of Russia) is over one
      hundred. By this phenomenal method the conclusion is reached that
      only a quarter of the total output is provided by “large-scale
      industry as understood within the above-indicated limits”!! (p. 47
      of article

      cited).[22]

 Further
      on we shall show that factories with 100 and more workers actually account
      for more than half the total output of our factory industry.

    


      Let us observe, incidentally, that the data of the local gubernia
      statistical committees (which are used for the gubernatorial reports) are
      always distinguished by the utter vagueness of the term
      “factory-and-works” and by the casual registration of small
      establishments. Thus, in Smolensk Gubernia, for 1893-94, some uyezds
      counted dozens of small oil-presses as factories, while others did not
      count any; the number of tar “works” in the gubernia was given
      as 152 (according to Directory for 1890, not one), with the same
      casual registration in the various uyezds,

      etc.[23]

 For
      Yaroslavl Gubernia, the local statisticians in the 90s gave the number of
      factories as 3,376 (against 472 in the Directory for 1890),
      including (for some uyezds) hundreds of flour-mills, smithies, small
      potato-processing works,

      etc.[24]

      Quite recently our factory statistics have undergone a reform which has
      changed the plan for the gathering of information, changed the
      significance of the term “factory and-works” (new criteria
      have been adopted; the presence of an engine or of not less than 15
      workers), and enlisted factory inspectors in the work of gathering and
      verifying information. We refer the reader for details to the above
      mentioned article in our

      Studies[25]

 where a detailed examination is made of the
      List of Factories and Works (St. Petersburg,

      1897)[26]

 compiled
      according to the new plan, and where it is shown that despite the reform,
      improvements in our factory statistics are scarcely noticeable ;
      that the term “factory-and-works” has remained absolutely
      vague; that the data are very often still quite haphazard and must,
      therefore, be handled with extreme

      caution.[27]
 

      Only a proper industrial census, organised on European lines, can
      extricate our industrial statistics from their chaotic

      condition.[28]

      It follows from the review of our factory statistics that the data they
      contain cannot in the overwhelming majority of cases be used without being
      specially processed, the principal object of which should be to separate
      the relatively useful from the utterly useless. In the next section we
      shall examine in this respect the data on the most important trades, but
      at the moment we put the question: is the number of factories in Russia
      increasing or decreasing? The main difficulty in answering this question
      is that in our factory statistics the term “factory” is
      employed in the most chaotic manner; that is why the negative replies to
      this question which are sometimes given on the basis of factory statistics
      (e.g., by Mr. Karyshev) cannot be of any use. We must first establish some
      definite criterion for the term “factory”; without that
      condition it would be absurd to illustrate the development of large-scale
      machine industry with

 

      data for establishments of which the totals have at various times included
      various numbers of small flour-mills, oil-presses, brick-sheds, etc.,
      etc. Let us take as a criterion the employment of not fewer than 16
      workers in the establishment, and then we shall see that the number of
      such industrial establishments in European Russia in 1866 was a maximum of
      from 2,500 to 3,000, in 1879 about 4,500, in 1890 about 6,000, in 1894-95
      about 6,400, and in 1903 about

      9,000.[29]

      Consequently, the number of factories in Russia in the post-Reform
      period is growing, and growing fairly rapidly.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      For a detailed review of the sources of our factory statistics, see in
      Statistical Chronicle of the Russian Empire, Series II, Vol. VI,
      St. Petersburg, 1872, Material for the Statistics of Factory Industry
      in European Russia for 1868. Compiled by Mr. Bok. Introduction,
      pp. I-XXIII.—Lenin

[2]
      See article “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics” in
      Studies, where the latest publication of the Department of
      Commerce and Manufacture on our factory industries is examined in
      detail. (See present edition, Vol. 4. –Ed.)—Lenin

[3]
      P. Semyonov in the preface to Statistical Chronicle, I, 1866,
      p.XXVII.—Lenin

[4]
Statistical Atlas of Main Branches of Factory Industry of European
      Russia, with List of Factories and Works, 3 vols.,
      St. Petersburg 1869, 1870 and 1873.—Lenin

[5]
The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, I, p. 140.—Lenin

[6]
Ibid., p. 306.—Lenin

[7]
Ibid., p. 306.—Lenin

[8]
      As to understatements by factory owners in their returns regarding the
      number of employed workers and the output, the above mentioned sources
      make two interesting attempts at verification. Timiryazev compared the
      returns made by over a hundred big factory owners for the official
      statistics with the returns they made for the 1865 Exhibition. The latter
      figures proved to be 22% higher than the former
      (loc. cit., I, pp. IV-V). In 1868 the Central
      Statistical

 

Committee, as an experiment, instituted a special
      investigation of factory industry in Moscow and Vladimir gubernias (where
      in 1868 nearly half of all the workers and of the total output of the
      factories and works of European Russia were concentrated). If we take the
      trades for which data are given both by the Ministry of Finance and the
      Central Statistical Committee, we get the following figures: according to
      the Ministry of Finance there were 1,749 factories, 186,521 workers, with
      an output totalling 131,568,000 rubles, whereas according to the
      investigation by the Central Statistical Committee there were 1,704
      factories, 196,315 workers on premises plus 33,485 outside workers, and an
      output totalling 137,758,000 rubles.—Lenin

[9]
      It is very possible that these returns were simply taken from
      gubernatorial reports, which, as we shall see below, always enormously
      exaggerate the number of factories and works.—Lenin

[10]
      How widely the Military Statistical Abstract applied the term
      “factory” becomes particularly evident through the following:
      the Yearbook statistics are called “the statistics of our
      large establishments” (p. 319, authors’ italics). As
      we have seen, 1/3, of these “large” establishments have an
      output of less than 1,000 rubles!! We omit more detailed proof of the
      point that the figures given in the Military Statistical Abstract
      must not be used for purposes of comparison with present-day factory
      statistics, since this task has already been

 

performed by
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky (see his book The Factory, etc.,
      p. 336 and foll.). Cf. Studies, pp. 271 and 275. (See present
      edition, Vol. 4, “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics.”
      –Ed.)—Lenin

[11]
Sketches, p. 125 and Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1894, No 6.—Lenin

[12]
Yuridichesky Vestnik, 1889 No. 9, and Material on the Russian
      National Economy, Moscow, 1898.—Lenin

[13]
Lectures on Agricultural Economics, Moscow, 1897, p. 13.—Lenin

[14]
      Examples will be given in the next section. Here let us refer to p. 679
      and foll. of the Directory; a glance at these pages will readily
      convince anyone of the justice of what has been said in the text.—Lenin

[15]
      In the third edition of the Directory (St. Petersburg, 1894),
      this reservation is not repeated, regrettably so, for the data are as
      unsatisfactory as ever.—Lenin

[16]
      Certain missing data have been added approximately; see
      Directory, p. 695.—Lenin

[17]
      See classification of factories according to total output in the second
      and third editions of the Directory.—Lenin

[18]
      It goes without saying that the data on the small establishments are quite
      haphazard: in some gubernias and in some years their number is given in
      hundreds and thousands, in others in tens and units. For example, in
      Bessarabia Gubernia, from 1887 to 1890: 1,479—272—262—
      1,684; in Penza Gubernia, from 1885 to 1891
      4—15—0—1,127—1,135— 2,148—2,264, etc.,
      etc.—Lenin

[19]
      Cf. examples in Studies, p. 274. (See present edition, Vol. 4,
      “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics.” –Ed.)
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky was somewhat mistaken in asserting that the number of
      actual factories dropped between 1885 and 1891 (The Factory,
      p. 350), and comparing the average number of workers per factory for
      different trades at different times (ibid., 355). The data in the
      Collection are too chaotic for use, without being specially
      processed, in drawing such conclusions.—Lenin

[20]
      N. A. Karyshev, “Statistical Survey of the Distribution of the
      Principal Branches of Manufacturing Industry in Russia.”
      Yuridichesky Vestnik, 1889, No. 9, September. Together with
      Mr. Karyshev’s latest work, examined by us in our Studies,
      this article serves as an example of how not to handle our factory
      statistics.—Lenin

[21]
      Section IV of Mr. Karyshev’s article. Let us observe that for
      comparison with the Returns we could, instead of the
      Collection, have taken Mr. Orlov’s Directory, the
      second edition of which (1884) is quoted by Mr. Karyshev too.—Lenin

[22]
      “Thus, three quarters of the latter” (total annual output)
      “is provided by establishments of a relatively small type. This
      phenomenon may have its roots in many extremely important elements of
      Russian national economy. To them, by the way, should be assigned the
      system of land tenure of the mass of the population, the tenacity
      of the village community (sic !), which raises serious obstacles
      to the development of a professional class of factory workers in our
      country. With this is combined (!) the widespread character of the
      domestic form of the processing of products in the very (central)
      zone of Russia in which our factories and works are mainly
      concentrated” (ibid., Mr. Karyshev’s italics). Poor
      “village community”! It alone must bear all the blame for
      everything, even for the statistical errors of its learned admirers!—Lenin

[23]
      Data from Mr. D Zhbankov’s Sanitary Investigation of Factories
      and Works of Smolensk Gubernia (Smolensk, Vol. I, 1896).—Lenin

[24]
Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia, Vol. II, Yaroslavl, 1896 Cf. also
      Tula Gubernia Handbook for 1895 (Tula, 1895), Sec. VI; pp. 14-15:
      Factory Returns for 1893.—Lenin

[25]
      See present edition, Vol. 4, “On the Question of Our Factory
      Statistics.”—Ed.

[26]
      According to Mr. Karyshev’s calculations, the totals of the figures
      given in the List relating to European Russia are: 14,578
      factories, with 885,555 workers and an output totalling 1,345,346,000
      rubles.—Lenin

[27]
      The collections of factory inspectors’ reports published by the
      Ministry of Commerce and Industry (for 1901-1903) give data on

 

the number
      of factories and works, as well as workers employed in them (for 64
      gubernias of Russia), the factories and works being classified according
      to the number of workers (up to 20; 21-50; 51-100; 101-500- 501-1,000;
      over 1,000). This is a big step forward in our factory statistics. The
      data for large workshops (21 workers and over) are probably reliable, at
      least in some degree. The data for “factories” with fewer than
      20 workers are obviously casual and utterly worthless. For example, in
      Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia the number of factories employing fewer than 20
      workers in 1903 is given as 266; the number of workers employed in
      them—1,975, or an average of fewer than 8 workers. In Perm Gubernia
      there are 10 such factories with 159 workers!  Ridiculous, of course. The
      total for 1903 for 64 gubernias: 15,821 factories with 1,640,406 workers;
      and if we deduct factories and works employing fewer than 20 workers, we
      get 10,072 factories and works with 1,576,754 workers. (Note to 2nd
      edition.)—Lenin

[28]
      Cf. Vestnik Finansov, 1896, No. 35. Reports
      of papers and debates at Nizhni-Novgorod
      congress. Mr. Mikhailovsky very vividly described the chaotic
      condition of factory statistics, showing how the questionnaire
      travels “down to the lowest police official, who circulates it
      at last, getting a receipt, of course, to those industrial
      establishments which he deems worthy of attention, but most
      often in those of them which he circularised the previous
      years”;—how the replies given to the various questions are
      either: “same as last year”—(it is enough to go over the
      Collections of the Department of Commerce and
      Manufacture for the various trades in various gubernias to be
      convinced of the truth of this) —or are absolutely
      meaningless, etc.—Lenin

[29]
      The data concern all trades (i.e., including excise-paying) except
      mining. For 1879, 1890 and 1894-95 we have computed the data from
      Directories and the List. From the data in the
      List we have excluded printing works, of which no account was
      taken formerly in factory statistics (see Studies, p. 273) [See
      present edition, Vol 4, “On the Question of Our Factory
      Statistics.” –Ed.]. For 1866 we have according to the data
      in the Yearbook for 71 trades, 1,861 establishments each
      employing 16 and more workers, out of a total of 6,891 establishments; in
      1890 these 71 trades accounted for about four-fifths of the total number
      of establishments with 16 and more workers. The criterion adopted by us
      for the term “factory” is, in our view, the most exact, since
      the most varied programmes for our factory statistics have undoubtedly
      accepted the inclusion of establishments with 16 and more workers among
      the factories, and this for all branches of industry. There can be no
      doubt that the factory statistics never could, and cannot now, register
      all establishments employing 16 and more workers (see instances in Chapter
      VI, II), but we have no grounds for thinking that there were more
      omissions formerly than now. For 1903 the data are from the Collection
      of Factory Inspectors’ Reports. In the 50 gubernias of European
      Russia there were 8,856 factories and works with over 20 workers 41 each.—Lenin
 

 
  

I. The Scientific Conception of the Factory and the Significance of “Factory” Statistics

|

III. An Examination of Historico-Statistical Data On the Development of Large-Scale Industry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## An Examination of Historical-Statistical Data on the Development of Large-Scale Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: III. An Examination of Historico-Statistical Data On the Development of Large-Scale Industry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      III. An Examination of Historico-Statistical Data On the
      Development of Large-Scale Industry
    

      We have noted above that to judge the development of large-scale industry
      from factory statistics it is necessary to separate the relatively useful
      material in these statistics from the utterly useless. Let us, with this
      in view, examine the main branches of our manufacturing industry.
    


 1) Textile Trades 

      At the head of the wool trades is cloth production, which in 1890 had an
      output of over 35 million rubles and employed 45,000 workers. The
      historico-statistical data on this trade indicate a considerable drop in
      the number of workers, namely, from 72,638 in 1866 to 46,740 in

      1890.[1]

 To appraise
      this phenomenon we must take account of the fact that up to the 1860s
      inclusive, felt cloth production was organised on specific and original
      lines: it was concentrated in relatively large establishments which,
      however, did not in any way come under the category of capitalist factory
      industry, since they were based on the labour of serfs, or of temporarily
      bound peasants. In the surveys of the “factory” industry of
      the 60s we therefore meet with the division of cloth mills into 1) those
      owned by landlords or nobles, and 2) those owned by merchants. The former
      produced mainly army cloth, the government contracts having been
      distributed equally among the mills in proportion to the number of
      machines. Compulsory labour was the cause of the technical backwardness of
      such establishments and of their employing a much larger number of workers
      than the merchant mills based on the employment of hired

      labour.[2]

 The
      principal drop in the number of workers, engaged in felt cloth production
      took place in the gubernias with landlord factories; thus, in the 13 such
      gubernias (enumerated in the Survey of Manufactory Industries ),
      the number of workers dropped from 32,921 to 14,539 (1866 and 1890), while
      in the 5 gubernias with merchant factories

 

      (Moscow, Grodno, Liflandia, Chernigov and St. Petersburg) it dropped from
      31,291 to 28,257. From this it is clear that we have here two opposite
      trends, both of which, however, indicate the development of
      capitalism—on the one hand, the decline of landlord establishments
      of a manorial-possessional

      character,[35] and on
      the other, the development of purely capitalist factories out of merchant
      establishments. A considerable number of the workers employed in felt
      cloth production in the 60s were not factory workers at all in
      the strict sense of the term; they were dependent peasants working for

      landlords.[3]

 Cloth
      production is an example of that specific phenomenon of Russian
      history—the employment of serf labour in industry. Since we are
      dealing only with the post-Reform period, the above brief remarks will
      suffice to show the way in which this phenomenon is reflected in factory

      statistics.[4]

 We
      shall now quote some figures drawn from statistics on steam-engines in
      order to estimate the development of large-scale machine production in
      this industry: in 1875-1878, in the wool-spinning and cloth industries of
      European Russia there were 167 mechanised establishments using 209
      steam-engines with a total of 4,632 h.p., and in 1890 there were 197
      establishments using

 

      341 steam-engines with a total of 6,602 h.p. The use of steam power,
      therefore, did not make very rapid progress; this is to be explained
      partly by the traditions of landlord factories and partly by the
      displacement of felt cloth by the cheaper worsted and mixed

      fabrics.[5]

 In the
      years 1875-1878 there were seven mechanised establishments using 20
      steam-engines with a total of 303 h.p., and in 1890 there were 28
      mechanised establishments employing 61 steam-engines to a total of 1,375

      h.p.[6]

      In regard to the woollen-goods industry let us also take note of
      felt-making, a branch that shows in particularly striking fashion the
      impossibility of comparing factory statistics for different times: the
      figures for 1866 are 77 factories with a total of 295 workers, while for
      1890 they are 57 factories with 1,217 workers. The former figure includes
      60 small establishments employing 137 workers with an output of under
      2,000 rubles, while the latter includes an establishment with four
      workers. In 1866 39 small establishments were recorded in Semyonov Uyezd,
      Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, where felt-making is now highly developed but is
      regarded as a “handicraft” and not a “factory”
      industry (see Chapter VI, § II, 2).

    
      Further, a particularly important place in the textile trades is held by
      cotton processing, a branch which now employs over 200,000 workers. Here
      we observe one of the biggest errors of our factory statistics, namely,
      the combining of factory workers and capitalistically occupied home
      workers. Large-scale machine industry developed here (as in many other
      cases) by drawing home workers into the factory. It is obvious how
      distorted this process will appear if work-distributing offices and work
      rooms are classed as “factories,” if home workers are lumped

 

      together with factory workers! For 1866 (according to the Yearbook
      ) up to 22,000 home workers were included among factory workers (by
      no means the full number, for the Yearbook, evidently by pure
      accident, omits in the case of Moscow Gubernia those notes about
      “work from village to village” which are so abundant for
      Vladimir Gubernia). For 1890 (according to the Directory ) we
      found only about 9,000 such workers. Clearly, the figures given in the
      factory statistics (1866—59,000 workers in the cotton weaving mills;
      1890—75,000) underrate the increase in the number of
      factory workers that actually took

      place.[7]

 Here are
      data showing what different establishments were classed at different times
      as cotton-weaving

      “factories”:[8]






      Thus, the decrease in the number of “factories” shown by the
      “statistics” actually indicates the displacing of distributing
      offices and workrooms by the factory. Let us illustrate this by the
      example of two factories:
    






      Hence, to assess the development of large-scale machine production in this
      branch of industry it is best to take the data giving the number of
      power-looms. In the 18609 there were about

      11,000,[9]

 and in
      1890 about 87,000. Large-scale machine industry was consequently
      developing at enormous speed. In cotton spinning and weaving there was
      recorded in 1875-1878 a total of 148 mechanised establishments, having 481
      steam-engines totalling 20,504 h.p., and in 1890, 168 mechanised
      establishments, having 554 steam-engines with a total of 38,750 h.p.

    
      Precisely the same mistake is made in Russian statistics in relation to
      linen production, wherein a decrease in the number of factory workers is
      erroneously shown (1866—17,171; 1890—15,497). Actually, in
      1866, of 16,900 looms belonging to linen-mill owners only 4,749 were kept
      in their establishments, the remaining 12,151 being held by work room

      owners.[10]

 The
      number of factory workers for 1866, therefore, included about 12,000 home
      workers, and for 1890 only about 3,000 (computed from Directory
      ). The number of power-looms, however, grew from 2,263 in 1866
      (computed from Military Statistical Abstract ) to 4,041 in

 

      1890, and of spindles from 95,495 to 218,012. In flax spinning and
      linen-weaving in the years 1875-1878 there were 28 mechanised
      establishments, having 47 steam engines with a total of 1,604 h.p., while
      in 1890 there were 48 mechanised establishments, having 83 steam-engines
      with a total of 5,027

      h.p.[11]

      Lastly, of the textile trades mention should be made of dyeing, printing
      and finishing, in which trades the factory statistics combine factories
      and the very smallest handicraft establishments with only 1 or 2 workers
      each and an output of a few hundred

      rubles.[12]

      Naturally, this causes no little confusion and obscures the rapid growth
      of large-scale machine industry. The following figures reflect this
      growth: in the wool-cleaning, dyeing, bleaching and finishing trades in
      1875-1878 there were 80 mechanised establishments with 255 steam-engines
      totalling 2,634 h.p.; in 1890 there were 189 mechanised establishments
      with 858 steam-engines totalling 9,100 h.p.
    

 2) Wood - Working Industries 

      In this section the most reliable data are those on saw milling, although
      in the past small establishments were also included

      here.[13]

 The
      enormous development of this trade in the post-Reform period (1866—4
      million rubles 1890—19 million rubles), accompanied by a
      considerable increase in the number of workers (4,000 and 15,000) and in
      the number of steam-powered establishments (26 and 430), is particularly
      interesting, in that it affords striking evidence of the growth of the
      lumber industry. Saw-milling is but one of the operations of the lumber
      industry, which is a necessary concomitant of the first steps of
      large-scale machine industry.

    
      As to the rest of the trades in this section, namely,

 

      furnishing and carpentry, bast-matting, and pitch and tar—the
      factory statistics relating to them are distinguished for their
      particularly chaotic condition. The small establishments so numerous in
      these trades were formerly included among the “factories” in
      numbers fixed arbitrarily, and the same is sometimes done even

      today.[14]


 3) Chemical,  Livestock - Product and
    Ceramic  Industries 

      The statistics on the chemical industry proper are distinguished for their
      relative reliability. The following returns show its growth: in 1857
      chemical products were consumed in Russia to a total of 14 million rubles
      (3.4 million rubles home produced and 10.6 million rubles imported); in
      1880, to a total of 36 1/4 million rubles (7 1/2 million rubles home
      produced and 28 3/4 imported); and in 1890, to a total of 42.7 million
      rubles (16.1 million rubles home produced and 26.6

      imported).[15]

      These data are particularly interesting because the chemical industries
      are extremely important as producers of auxiliary materials for
      large-scale machine industry, i.e., articles of productive (and
      not personal) consumption. As to potash and saltpetre production, let us
      remark that the number of factories given is unreliable, again due to the
      inclusion of small

      establishments.[16]



      The tallow trade has undoubtedly declined in the post-Reform period. Thus,
      the value of output of the tallow candle and tallow-boiling trade was
      estimated in 1866-1868 at 13.6 million rubles, and in 1890 at 5 million

      rubles.[17]

 This
      decline is to be explained by the growing use of mineral oils for
      lighting, which are displacing the old-time tallow candle.

    
      For leather production (1866: 2,308 establishments with 11,463 workers and
      an output totalling 14.6 million rubles; 1890: 1,621 establishments with
      15,564 workers and an output totalling 26.7 million rubles) statistics
      constantly lump together factories and small establishments. The
      relatively high cost of raw materials, which explains the high total
      output, and the fact that this trade requires very few workers, make it
      particularly difficult to draw a line of demarcation between the
      handicraft establishments and the factories. In 1890, of the total number
      of factories (1,621), only 103 had an output of less than 2,000 rubles; in
      1879 there were 2,008 out of a total of

      3,320[18];
      in 1866, of 2,308

      factories[19]

 1,042
      had an output of less than 1,000 rubles (these 1,042 factories employed
      2,059 workers and had an output totalling 474,000 rubles). Thus, the
      number of factories increased, although the factory statistics show a
      decrease. As for the small leather establishments, their number is still
      very large today: for instance, The Factory Industry and Trade of
      Russia, published by the Ministry of Finance (St. Petersburg, 1893),
      gives a total of nearly 9,500 handicraft works, with 21,000 workers and an
      output of 12 million rubles. These “handicraft” establishments
      are much larger than those which in the 60s were included among
      “factories and works.” Since small establishments

 

      are included among the “factories and works” in unequal
      numbers in the different gubernias and in different years, the statistics
      on this trade should be treated with great caution. The steam-engine
      statistics for 1875-1878 gave for this industry 28 mechanised
      establishments with 33 steam-engines to a total of 488 h.p. and in 1890
      there were 66 mechanised establishments with 82 steam-engines to a total
      of 1,112 h.p. In these 66 factories 5,522 workers (more than a third of
      the total) were concentrated with an output totalling 12.3 million rubles
      (46% of the total), so that the concentration of production was very
      considerable, and the productivity of labour in the large establishments
      far above the

      average.[20]

      The ceramic trades fall into two categories in accordance with the
      character of the factory statistics: in some, there is hardly any
      combining of small-scale production with large. That is why these
      statistics are fairly reliable. This applies to the following industries:
      glass, porcelain and chinaware, plaster and cement. Particularly remark
      able is the rapid growth of the last-mentioned trade, which is evidence of
      the development of the building industry: the total output in 1866 was
      estimated at 530,000 rubles (Military Statistical Abstract ), and
      in 1890 at 3,826,000 rubles; the number of power-operated establishments
      in 1875-1878 was 8, and in 1890 it was 39. On the other hand, in the
      pottery and brick trades the inclusion of small establishments is observed
      on a tremendous scale, and for that reason the factory statistics are very
      unsatisfactory, being particularly exaggerated for the 60s and 70s. Thus,
      in the pottery trade in 1879 there were listed 552 establishments, with
      1,900 workers and an output totalling 538,000 rubles, and in 1890, 158
      establishments with 1,978 workers and an output totalling 919,000
      rubles. If we subtract the small establishments (those with an output of
      less than 2,000 rubles) we get: 1879—70 establishments, with

 

      840 workers and an output of 505,000 rubles; 1890—143
      establishments, with 1,859 workers and an output of 857,000 rubles. That
      is to say, instead of the decrease in the number of
      “factories” and stagnation in the number of workers shown in
      the statistics, there was actually a considerable increase in both the one
      and the other. In brick-making the official data for 1879 showed 2,627
      establishments, with 28,800 workers and an output totalling 6,963,000
      rubles; for 1890—1,292 establishments, with 24,334 workers and an
      output of 7,249,000 rubles; and without the small establishments (those
      with an output of less than 2,000 rubles) we get for 1879—518
      establishments, with 19,057 workers and an output of 5,625,000 rubles; and
      for 1890—1,096 establishments, with 23,222 workers and an output of
      7,240,000

      rubles.[21]


 4) Metallurgical  Industries 

      In the factory statistics for the metallurgical industries the sources of
      confusion are, firstly, the inclusion of small establishments (exclusively
      in the 60s and

      70s),[22]

 and,
      secondly and mainly, the fact that metallurgical plants are
      “subject, not to the jurisdiction” of the Department of
      Commerce and Manufacture, but to that of the Department of Mines. The
      returns of the Ministry of Finance usually omit ironworks “on
      principle”; but there have never been uniform and invariable rules
      for the separation of ironworks from the other works (and it would hardly

 

      be possible to devise them). That is why the factory statistics published
      by the Ministry of Finance always include ironworks to some extent,
      although the actual degree to which they are included varies for different
      gubernias and for different

      years.[23]

 General
      data on the increased use of steam-engines in metallurgy since the Reform
      will be given below, when we deal with the mining and metallurgical
      industry.
    

 5) Food  Industries 

      These industries merit special attention for the question that concerns
      us, since the confusion in factory statistics attains here its
      maximum. And yet, these industries occupy a prominent place in our factory
      industry as a whole.

    
      Thus, according to the Directory for 1890 these industries
      account for 7,095 factories, with 45,000 workers and an output totalling
      174 million rubles out of a total for European Russia of 21,124 factories,
      with 875,764 workers and an output of 1,501 million rubles. The fact is
      that the principal trades of this group—flour-milling, groat milling
      and oil-pressing—consist of the processing of agricultural
      produce. There are hundreds and thousands of small establishments in
      Russia engaged in this processing in every gubernia, and since there are
      no generally established rules for selecting the “factories and
      works” from among them, the statistics pick out such small
      establishments quite fortuitously. That is why the numbers of
      “factories and works” for different years and for different
      gubernias fluctuate enormously. Here, for example, are the figures for the
      flour-milling trade for various years, as taken from various sources:
      1865— 857 mills (Returns and Material of the Ministry of Finance
      ); 1866— 2,176 (Yearbook ); 1866—18,426
      (Military Statistical Abstract ); 1885—3,940
      (Collection ); 17,765 (Returns for Russia ); 1889, 1890
      and 1891—5,073,

 

      5,605 and

      5,201[24]

      (Collection ); 1894-95—2,308 (List ). Among the
      5,041 mills listed in 1892 (Collection ), 803 were steam-, 2,907
      water-, 1,323 wind- and 8 horse-operated! Some gubernias counted only
      steam-mills, others included watermills (in numbers ranging from 1 to
      425), still others (the minority) included also windmills (from 1 to 530)
      and horse-operated mills. One can imagine the value of such statistics,
      and of conclusions based on a credulous use of the data they

      provide![25]

      Obviously, to judge
      the growth of large-scale machine industry we must first
      establish a definite criterion for the term “factory.” Let us
      take as such a criterion the employment of steam-engines:
      steam-mills are a characteristic concomitant of the epoch of
      large-scale machine

      industry.[26]

      We get the following picture of the development of factory production in
      this branch of

      industry.[27]







      The statistics for the oil-pressing trade are unsatisfactory for the same
      reason. For instance, in 1879 2,450 works were listed with 7,207 workers
      and an output totalling 6,486,000 rubles, and in 1890 there were 383
      works, with 4,746 workers and an output totalling 12,232,000 rubles. But
      this decrease in the number of factories and of workers is

 

      only apparent. If the data for 1879 and 1890 are made comparable, i.e., if
      we exclude establishments with an output of less than 2,000 rubles (not
      included in the lists) we get for 1879: 272 works, with 2,941 workers and
      an output totalling 5,771,000 rubles, and for 1890—379 works, with
      4,741 workers and an output totalling 12,232,000 rubles. That large-scale
      machine industry has developed in this trade no less rapidly than in
      flour-milling is evident, for example, from the statistics for
      steam-engines; in 1875-1878 there were 27 steam-powered works, with 28
      steam engines of 521 h.p., while in 1890 there were 113 mechanised works,
      with 116 steam-engines totalling 1,886 h.p.

    
      The other trades of this group are relatively small. Let us note that in
      the mustard and fish-products trades, for instance, the statistics of the
      60s included hundreds of small establishments such as have nothing
      whatever in common with factories and are now not classed as such. The
      extent to which our factory statistics for various years need correction
      is evident from the following: with the exception of flour-milling, the
      Directory for 1879 gave in this section a total of 3,555
      establishments with 15,313 workers, and for 1890—1,842
      establishments with 19,159 workers. For 7

      trades,[28]

 small
      establishments (with an output of less than 2,000 rubles) were included as
      follows: in 1879—2,487 with 5,176 workers and an output totalling
      916,000 rubles and in 1890, seven establishments, employing ten workers
      and with an output totalling two thousand rubles! To make the data
      comparable, one should, consequently, subtract in one case five thousand
      workers, and in the other, ten persons!
    

 6) Excise - Paying  and  Other  Trades 

      In some of the excise-paying trades we observe a decrease in the number of
      factory workers between the 1860s and the present day, but the decrease is
      not nearly as considerable as is asserted by Mr.

      N.–on,[29]

 who
      blindly

 

      believes every figure in print. The fact is that for the majority of
      excise-paying trades the only source of information is the Military
      Statistical Abstract, which, as we know, tremendously exaggerates the
      totals in the factory statistics. Unfortunately, however, we have little
      material with which to verify the data in the Abstract . In
      distilling, the Military Statistical Abstract counted in 1866 a
      total of 3,836 distilleries with 52,660 workers (in 1890—1,620, with
      26,102 workers), but the number of distilleries does not coincide with the
      data of the Ministry of Finance, which in 1865-66 calculated 2,947
      operating distilleries and in

      1866-67—3,386.[30]

 Judging by this, the number of workers is
      exaggerated by some 5,000 to 9,000. In vodka distilling, the Military
      Statistical Abstract computes 4,841 distilleries, with 8,326 workers
      (1890: 242 distilleries with 5,266 workers); of these Bessarabia Gubernia
      has 3,207 distilleries with 6,873 workers. The absurdity of these figures
      is glaring. In fact, we learn from material published by the Ministry of

      Finance[31]

 that
      the actual number of vodka distilleries in Bessarabia Gubernia was 10 or
      12, and in the whole of European Russia 1,157. The number of workers was
      consequently exaggerated by a minimum of 6 thousand. The cause of this
      exaggeration is, evidently, that the Bessarabian
      “statisticians” included vineyard owners among the owners of
      distilleries (see below on tobacco making). In beer- and mead-brewing, the
      Military Statistical Abstract counts 2,374 breweries, with 6,825
      workers (1890—918 breweries, with 8,364 workers), whereas The
      Ministry of Finance Yearbook estimates a total of 2,087 breweries in
      European Russia for 1866. The number of workers is exaggerated here

      too.[32]

 In the
      beet-sugar and sugar-refining trades, the Military Statistical
      Abstract exaggerates the number of workers by 11 thousand, counting
      92,126 persons,

 

      as against 80,919 according to the data of The Ministry of Finance
      Yearbook (1890—77,875 workers). In tobacco-making, the
      Military Statistical Abstract gives 5,327 factories, with 26,116
      workers (1890— 281 factories, with 26,720 workers); of these, 4,993
      factories with 20,038 workers are in Bessarabia Gubernia. Actually, the
      number of tobacco factories in Russia in 1866 was 343, and in Bessarabia
      Gubernia

      13.[33]

 The number
      of workers has been exaggerated by about 20 thousand, and even
      the compilers of the Military Statistical Abstract themselves
      indicated that “the factories shown in Bessarabia Gubernia . . . are
      nothing but tobacco plantations” (p. 414). Mr. N.–on evidently
      thought it superfluous to glance at the text of the statistical
      publication he uses; that is why he failed to notice the error, and
      discoursed with a highly serious air about a “slight increase in the
      number of workers in the . . . tobacco factories” (article cited,
      p. 104)!! Mr. N.–on simply takes the total number of workers in the
      excise paying trades from the Military Statistical Abstract and
      the Directory for 1890 (186,053 and 144,332) and calculates the
      percentage of decrease. . . . “In a period of 25 years there has
      been a considerable drop in the number of workers employed. It has
      diminished by 22.4%. . . . “Here” (i.e., in the excise-paying
      trades) “we see no signs of an increase, the plain fact being that
      the number of workers has simply declined by a quarter of its previous
      magnitude” (ibid.). Indeed, what could be
      “simpler”! Take the first figure you lay your hands on, and
      calculate a percentage! As for the trifling circumstance that the figure
      given in the Military Statistical Abstract exaggerates the number
      of workers by some forty thousand, that can be ignored.
    

 7) Conclusions 

      The criticism of our factory statistics given in the last two sections
      leads us to the following main conclusions:

    


      1. The number of factories in Russia has been rapidly growing in the
post-Reform period.

    
      The opposite conclusion, which follows from our factory statistics, is
      erroneous. The point is that the figures we are given of factories include
      small artisan, handicraft and agricultural establishments, and the
      further back we go from the present day, the larger the number of
      small establishments included in the number of factories.

    
      2. The number of factory workers and the volume of output of factories
and works are likewise exaggerated for the past period in our
statistics. This is due, firstly, to the fact that former]y a
greater number of small establishments were included. Hence, the data
for the industries that merge with handicrafts are particularly

      unreliable.[34]

      Secondly, it is due to the fact that in the past more
      capitalistically employed home workers were classified as
      factory workers than today.

    
      3. It is customary in this country to think that if figures are taken from
      the official factory statistics they must be considered comparable with
      other figures taken from the same source, and must be regarded as more or
      less reliable, until the contrary is proved. What has been said above,
      however, leads to the opposite conclusion, namely, that all comparisons of
      our factory statistics for different times and for different gubernias
      must be regarded as unreliable until the reverse is proved.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      In all cases, unless otherwise stated, we take the data of the
      Yearbook for 1866 and those of the Directories for 1879
      and 1890.—The Historico-Statistical Survey (Vol. II) gives
      annual information on cloth production from 1855 to 1879; the following
      are the five-year averages of workers employed from 1855-1859 to
      1875-1879: 107,433-96,131- 92,117; 87,960 and 81,458.—Lenin

[2]
      See A Survey of Various Branches of Manufactory Industry in
      Russia, Vol. I, St. Petersburg, 1862, particularly pp. 165 and
      167. Cf. also Military Statistical Abstract, D. 357 and foll. At
      the present time we rarely meet in the lists of cloth manufacturers the
      celebrated noble families that constituted the overwhelming majority in
      the 1860s.—Lenin

[3]
      The following examples are taken from Zemstvo statistical
      material. Concerning N. P. Gladkov’s cloth factory in Volsk Uyezd
      Saratov Gubernia (in 1866 it had 306 workers), we read in the Zemstvo
      statistical abstract for this uyezd (p. 275) that peasants were forced to
      work in the factory belonging to the lord. “They worked in the
      factory until they married, and then became tax-paying members of the
      peasant community.” In the village of Rvassy, Ranenburg Uyezd,
      Ryazan Gubernia, there was in 1866 a cloth factory employing 180
      workers. The peasants performed their CorvÃ©e by working in the mill, which
      was closed down in 1870 (Statistical Returns for Ryazan Gubernia,
      Vol. II, Pt. I, Moscow, 1882, p. 330).—Lenin

[4]
      See Nisselovich, A History of the Factory Legislation of the Russian
      Empire, Pts. I and II, St. Petersburg, 1883-1884.—A. Semyonov,
      A Study of Historical Data on Russian Foreign Trade and Industry,
      St. Petersburg, 1858-1859, 3 parts.—V. I. Semevsky, The Peasants
      in the Reign of Catherine II, St. Petersburg,
      1881.—Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia. Sanitary
      Statistical Sec, Vol IV, Pt. I (general summary), Moscow, 1890, article by
      A. V. Pogozhev, “The Manorial-Possessional Factories of Moscow
      Gubernia.”—M. Tugan-Baranovsky, The Russian Factory,
      St. Petersburg, 1898, Vol. I.—Lenin

[5]
      Cf. Successes of Russian Industry According to Surveys of Expert
      Commissions, St. Petersburg, 1897, p. 60.—Lenin

[6]
      The data on steam-engines in this and the following instances are taken
      from Material for the Statistics of Steam-Engines in the Russian
      Empire published by the Central Statistical Committee,
      St. Petersburg, 1882; for 1890 they are taken from Collection of Data
      on Factory Industry ; data on mechanised establishments are from the
      Directory.—Lenin

[7]
      Cf. Tugan-Baranovsky, loc. cit., p. 420.—The total
      number of village hand weavers working for capitalists was estimated by
      Semyonov at approximately 385,857 in 1859 (loc. cit.,
      III, 273) to these he added another 200,000 village workers engaged
      “in other factory trades” (ibid., p. 302). At the
      present time, as we have seen above, the number of capitalistically
      employed home workers is much larger.—Lenin

[8]
      Establishments with an output of under 2,000 rubles are classed as
      workrooms. The data of the special investigation of factories and works in
      Moscow and Vladimir gubernias made in 1868 by the Central Statistical
      Committee contain the repeated statement that the output figures of the
      small weaving establishments merely indicate pay for work
      done. Establishments that distribute work to home workers are classed as
      offices. For 1866 the figure given for these establishments is far from
      complete, owing to obvious omissions in the case of Moscow Gubernia.—Lenin

[9]
Military Statistical Abstract, 380.— Survey of
      Manufactory Industry, Vol, II, St. Petersburg, 1863,
      p. 451. —In 1898 the number of power-looms used in cotton weaving
      (for the whole Empire, evidently) was reckoned at 100,630. Successes
      of Russian Industry, p. 33.—Lenin

[10]
Military Statistical Abstract, pp. 367-368: Commissariat returns.—Lenin

[11]
      In silk-weaving in 1879 there were 495 power-looms and 5,996 hand-looms
      (Historico-Statistical Survey), and in 1890 there were 2,899 of
      the former and over 7,500 of the latter.—Lenin

[12]
      For example, in 1879 the number of factories computed in these trades was
      729; of this number, 466 had 977 workers and an output of 170,000
      rubles. Even today one can find many such
      “factories”—for instance, in the description of the
      handicraft industries of Vyatka and Perm gubernias.—Lenin

[13]
      Cf. Military Statistical Abstract, p. 389. Survey of
      Manufactory Industry, I, 309.—Lenin

[14]
      Thus in 1879, of 91 bast-matting factories 39 had an output of less than
      1,000 rubles each (Cf. Studies, p. 155). [See present edition
      Vol. 2,  The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.] In the pitch-and-tar trade for f890 there
      were computed 140 factories, all with an output exceeding 2,000 rubles;
      for 1879, 1,033 were computed, of which 911 had an output of less than
      2,000 rubles; for 1866 the number listed was 669 (for the Empire), while
      the Military Statistical Abstract even gave the figure of 3,164!!
      (Cf. Studies, pp. 156 and 271.) [See present edition, Vol. 2,
      The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm Gubernia, and Vol. 4,
      “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics.” –Ed.]—Lenin

[15]
Military Statistical Abstract, Historico-Statistical
      Survey and Productive Forces, IX, 16.—The number of
      workers in 1866—5,645; in 1890—25,471; in 1875-1878—38
      mechanised establishments, with 34 steam-engines to a total of 332 h.p.;
      and in 1890—141 mechanised establishments, with 208 steam-engines to
      a total of 3,319 h.p.—Lenin

[16]
      Cf. Directory for 1879 and 1890 about potash production. The
      production of saltpetre is now concentrated in one factory in
      St. Petersburg, whereas in the 60s and 70s saltpetre was obtained from
      burti (dungheaps).—Lenin

[17]
      Here, too, the number of factories in the 60s and 709 included a host of
      small establishments.—Lenin

[18]
      In 1875, Prof. Kittary, in his Map of Leather Production in
      Russia, gave an aggregate of 12,939 establishments, with output
      totalling 47 1/2 million rubles, whereas the factory statistics gave 2,764
      establishments, with output totalling 26 1/2 million rubles
      (Historico-Statistical Survey). In the fur trade, another in this section,
      a similar lumping is observed of small establishments together with
      factories: Cf. Directory for 1879 and for 1890.—Lenin

[19]
The Military Statistical Abstract gave an aggregate of even
      3,890!!—Lenin

[20]
      If we distribute the factories shown in the Directory as for 1890
      according to date of establishment we get the following: of 1,506
      factories the number established at dates unknown was 91, before 1850
      —331; in the 1850s—147; in the 60s—239; in the
      70s—320; in the 80s —351; in 1890—21. In every
      succeeding decade more factories were established than in the preceding
      one.—Lenin

[21]
      The small establishments in these industries are now classed with the
      handicrafts. Cf., for instance, the table of small industries (Appendix I)
      or Studies, pp. 158-159. (See present edition, Vol. 2,  The
      Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.). The Ministry of Finance Yearbook
      (Vol. I) refused to give totals for these industries because the figures
      were obviously exaggerated. Progress in statistics since then is expressed
      in an increased boldness and disregard of the quality of material used.—Lenin

[22]
      Thus, in the 60s, dozens of smithies were classed for some gubernias as
      “ironworks.”– See Returns and Material of the Ministry of
      Finance, 1866, No. 4, p. 406; 1867, No. 6
      p. 384.—Statistical Chronicle, Series II,
      Vol. 6.—Cf. also the example quoted above (§ II) where the
      Yearbook for 1866 includes the small handicraftsmen of the
      Pavlovo district among the “factory owners.”—Lenin

[23]
      See examples in Studies, p. 269 and p. 284 (see present edition,
      Vol. 4, “On the Question of Our Factory Statistics.”
      –Ed.), where Mr. Karyshev’s error in ignoring this
      circumstance is examined. The Directory for 1879, for instance,
      includes the Kulebaki and Vyksa ironworks, or departments of them (pp. 356
      and 374), which are omitted in the Directory for 1890.—Lenin

[24]
      And in addition 32,957 “small windmills,” not counted among
      the “factories and works.”—Lenin

[25]
      See examples of such conclusions drawn by Mr. Karyshev in the above-quoted
      article in the Studies. (See present edition, Vol. 4,
      op. cit. –Ed.)—Lenin

[26]
      Large watermills are also in the nature of factories, of course, but we
      have no data to enable us to single them out from among the small ones. In
      the Directory for 1890 we saw listed 250 watermills each
      employing 10 and more workers. They employed 6,378 workers.—Lenin

[27]
Military Statistical Abstract, Directories and
      Collection. According to the List for 1894-95, there are
      1,192 steam-mills in European Russia. The statistics for steam-engines
      gave the number of steam-mills in European Russia in 1875-1878 as 294.—Lenin

[28]
      Oil-pressing, starch, treacle, malt, confectionery, preserves and vinegar.—Lenin

[29]
Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1894, No. 6, pp. 104-105.—Lenin

[30]
The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, I, pp. 76 and 82. The total
      number of distilleries (including those not in operation) was 4,737 and
      4,646 respectively.—Lenin

[31]
Yearbook, I, p. 104.—Lenin

[32]
      E.g., in Simbirsk Gubernia, the Military Statistical Abstract
      computes 218 distilleries (!) with 299 workers and an output totalling
      21,600 rubles. (According to the Yearbook there were 7
      distilleries in the gubernia.)  Very likely, these were small domestic or
      peasant establishments.—Lenin

[33]
The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, p. 61. Cf. Survey of
      Manufactory Industry (Vol. II St. Petersburg, 1863), which gives
      detailed information for 1861: 534 factories, with 6,937 workers; and in
      Bessarabia Gubernia, 31 factories, with 73 workers. The number of tobacco
      factories fluctuates greatly from year to year.—Lenin

[34]
      If we take the gross figures for all trades and for long periods, the
      exaggeration resulting from the cause mentioned will not be great, for the
      small establishments account for a small percentage of the total number of
      workers and the total output. It goes without saying that one presumes a
      comparison of figures taken from similar sources (there can be no question
      of comparing the returns of the Ministry of Finance with those of
      gubernatorial reports, or of the Military Statistical Abstract ).—Lenin
 


[35]
      The “landlord establishment of a manorial-possessional character
      ” was a feudal manorial manufactory belonging to a landlord and

 

      employing his serf-peasants. By a decree of Peter I issued in 1721,
      merchant factory owners were permitted to purchase peasants for work in
      their factories. The feudal workers attached to such enterprises were
      called “possessional peasants.” [p. 470]
    

 
  

II. Our Factory Statistics

|

IV. The Development of the Mining Industry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Development of the Mining Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: IV. The Development of the Mining Industry[10101010 10101010] 








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      IV. The Development of the Mining

      Industry[1]



      In the initial period of Russia’s post-Reform development the
      principal centre of ore-mining was the Urals. Constituting a single area,
      until quite recently separated sharply

      from Central Russia, it has at the same time an original industrial
      structure. For ages the basis of the “organisation of labour”
      in the Urals was serfdom, which to this day, the very end of the 19th
      century, leaves its impress on quite important aspects of life in this
      mining area. In the old days serfdom was the basis of the greatest
      prosperity of the Urals and of its dominant position, not only in Russia,
      but partly also in Europe. In the 18th century iron was one of
      Russia’s principal items of export; in 1782 nearly 3.8 million poods
      of iron were exported; in 1800-1815 from 2 to 1 1/2 million poods; in
      1815-1838 about 1 1/3 million poods. Already “in the 20s of the 19th
      century Russia was producing 1 1/2 times as much pig-iron as France, 4 1/2
      times as much as Prussia and 3 times as much as Belgium.” But the
      very serfdom that helped the Urals to rise to such heights when European
      capitalism was in its initial period was the very cause of the
      Urals’ decline when capitalism was in its heyday. The iron industry
      in the Urals developed very slowly. In 1718 Russia’s output of
      pig-iron was about 6 1/2 million poods, in 1767 about 9 1/2 million poods,
      in 1806 12 million poods, in the 30s—9 to 11 million poods, in the
      40s—11 to 13 million poods, in the 50s—12 to 16 million poods,
      in the 60s—13 to 18 million poods, in 1867—17 1/2 million
      poods. In one hundred years the output was not even doubled, and Russia
      dropped far behind other European

 

      countries, where large-scale machine industry had given rise to a
      tremendous development of metallurgy.

    
      The main cause of stagnation in the Urals was serfdom; the ironmasters
      were at once feudal landlords and industrialists, and their power was
      based not on capital and competition, but on

      monopoly[2]

 and their
      possessional right. The Ural ironmasters are big landowners even today. In
      1890, the 262 ironworks in the Empire had 11.4 million dessiatines of land
      (including 8.7 million dessiatines of forestland), of which 10.2 million
      belonged to 111 Urals ironworks (forestland covering 7.7 million
      dessiatines). On the average, consequently, each Urals works possesses
      vast latifundia covering some hundred thousand dessiatines. The allotment
      of land to the peasants from these estates has to this day not been
      completed. Labour is obtained in the Urals, not only by hire, but also on
      the labour-service basis. The Zemstvo statistics for Krasnoufimsk
      Uyezd, Perm Gubernia, for example, estimate that there are thousands of
      peasant farms that have the use of factory-owned land, pastures, woodland,
      etc., either gratis, or at a low rent. It stands to reason that this free
      use of the land actually has a very high cost, for it serves to reduce
      wages to a very low level; the ironworks get their “own”
      workers, tied down to the works and cheaply

      paid.[3]
 

      Here is the way Mr. V. D. Belov describes these relationships:
    


      The Urals enjoy the advantage, says Mr. Belov, of having workers who have
      been moulded by their “original” history. “Workers in
      other factories, abroad, or even in St. Petersburg, have not the interests
      of their factory at heart: they are here today and gone tomorrow. While
      the factory is running they work; when losses take the place of profits,
      they take up their knapsacks and go off as fast and as readily as they
      came. They and their employers are permanent enemies. . . . The position
      is entirely different in the case of the Ural workers. They are natives of
      the place and in the vicinity of the works they have their land, their
      farms and their families. Their own welfare is closely, inseparably, bound
      up with the welfare of the works. If it does well, they do well; if it
      does badly, it is bad for them; but they cannot leave it (sic !):
      they have more here than a knapsack (sic !); to leave means to
      wreck their whole world, to abandon the land, farm and family. . . . And
      so they are ready to hang on for years to work at half pay, or, what
      amounts to the same thing, to remain unemployed half their working time so
      that other local workers like themselves may earn a crust of bread. In
      short, they are ready to accept any terms the employers offer, so long as
      they are allowed to remain. . . . Thus, there is an inseparable bond
      between the Ural workers and the works; the relationships are the same
      today as they were in the past, before their emancipation from serf
      dependence; only the form of these relationships has changed, nothing
      more. The former principle of serfdom has been superseded by the lofty
      principle of mutual

      benefit.”[4]



      This lofty principle of mutual benefit manifests itself primarily in
      reduction of wages to a particularly low level. “In the South
      . . . a worker costs twice and even three times as much as in the
      Urals”—for example, according to data covering several
      thousand workers, 450 rubles (annually per worker) as against 177
      rubles. In the South “at the first opportunity of earning a decent
      wage in the fields of their native villages or anywhere else, the workers
      leave the iron works, and coal- or ore-mines” (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 17, p. 265). In the Urals, however, a decent wage
      is not to be dreamt of.

    
      Naturally and inseparably connected with the low wages and servile status
      of the Ural workers is the technical backwardness of the Urals. There
      pig-iron is smelted mostly

 

      with the aid of wood fuel, in old-fashioned furnaces with cold or slightly
      heated blast. In 1893, the number of cold-blast furnaces in the Urals was
      37 out of 110, while in the South, there were 3 out of 18. A mineral-fuel
      furnace had an average output of 1.4 million poods per year, while a
      wood-fuel furnace had one of 217,000 poods. In 1890 Mr. Keppen wrote:
      “The refining process of smelting pig-iron is still firmly
      established in the ironworks of the Urals, whereas in other parts of
      Russia it has been almost entirely displaced by the puddling

      process.”[19]
      Steam-engines are used to a far less extent in the Urals than in the
      South. Lastly, we cannot but note the seclusion of the Urals, its
      isolation from the centre of Russia owing to the vast distance and the
      absence of railways. Until quite recently the products of the Urals were
      transported to Moscow mainly by the primitive method of
      “floating” by river once a

      year.[5]

      Thus the most direct survivals of the pre-Reform system, extensive
      practice of labour-service, bonded condition of the workers, low
      productivity of labour, backwardness of technique, low wages, prevalence
      of hand production, primitive and rapaciously antediluvian exploitation of
      the region’s natural wealth, monopolies, hindrances to competition,
      seclusion and isolation from the general commercial and industrial march
      of the times— such is the general picture of the Urals.

    
      The mining area in the

      South[6]

 is in many
      respects the very opposite of the Urals. The South is in the period of

 

      formation and is as young as the Urals are old and the system prevailing
      there “time-hallowed.” The purely capitalist industry which
      has arisen here during recent decades recognises no traditions, no
      social-estate or national divisions, no seclusion of definite sections of
      the population. There has been a mass influx of foreign capital, engineers
      and workers into South Russia; and in the present period of boom (1898)
      entire factories are being brought there from

      America.[7]

      International capital has not hesitated to settle within the tariff wall
      and establish itself on “foreign” soil: ubi bene,

      ibi patria[8]

....

      The following are statistics on the displacement of the Urals by
      the

      South[20]:
    






      These figures clearly show what a technical revolution is now taking place
      in Russia, and what an enormous capacity for the development of productive
      forces is possessed by large-scale capitalist industry. The predominance
      of the Urals meant the predominance of serf labour, technical backwardness
      and

      stagnation.[9]

 On
      the contrary, we now

 

      see that the development of metallurgical industry is proceeding faster in
      Russia than in Western Europe and in some respects even faster than in the
      United States. In 1870 Russia produced 2.9% of the world output of
      pig-iron (22 million poods out of 745 million), and in 1894—5.1%
      (81.3 million poods out of 1,584.2) (Vestnik Finansov, 1897,
      No. 22). In the last 10 years (1886-1896) Russia has trebled her output of
      pig-iron (32 1/2 to 96 1/2 million poods), whereas it took France, for
      example, 28 years to do so (1852-1880), the U.S.A. 23 years (1845-1868),
      England 22 (1824-1846) and Germany 12 (1859-1871; see Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 50). The development of capitalism in the young
      countries is greatly accelerated by the example and the aid of
      the old countries. Of course, the last decade (1888-1898) has been a
      period of exceptional boom, which, like all capitalist prosperity, will
      inevitably lead to a crisis; but capitalist development cannot proceed at
      all except in spurts.

    
      The introduction of machinery into production and the increase in the
      number of workers have been much more rapid in the South than in the

      Urals.[10]








      Thus we see that in the Urals the increase in the use of steam-power was
      only some 2 1/2 times, whereas in the South it was sixfold ; the
      increase in the number of workers in the Urals was 1 2/3 times, whereas in
      the South it was nearly

      fourfold.[11]

 Consequently, it is capitalist large-scale
      industry that rapidly increases the number of workers, at the same time
      enormously increasing the productivity of their labour.

    
      Alongside of the South, mention should be made of the Caucasus, which is
      also characterised by an amazing growth of the mining industry in the
      post-Reform period. The out put of oil, which in the 60s did not even
      reach a million poods (557,000 in 1865), was in 1870—I.7 million
      poods, in 1875—5.2 million poods, in 1880—21.5 million poods,
      in 1885— 116 million poods, in 1890—242.9 million poods, in
      1895—38k million poods and in 1902—637.7 million poods. Nearly
      all the oil is obtained in Baku Gubernia, and Baku “from an
      insignificant town has turned into a first-class Russian industrial
      centre, with 112,000

      inhabitants.”[12]

 The

 

      enormous development of the extraction and processing of oil has given
      rise in Russia to a greater consumption of kerosene that has completely
      ousted the American product (increase of personal consumption with the
      cheapening of the product by factory processing), and to a still greater
      consumption of oil by-products as fuel in factories, in works and on the
      railways (increase of productive

      consumption).[13]

      The number of workers
      in the mining industry of the Caucasus has also grown very
      rapidly: from 3,431 in 1877 to 17,603 in 1890, i.e., has
      increased fivefold .

    
      To illustrate the structure of industry in the South let us take the data
      for the coal industry in the Donets Basin (where the average mine is
      smaller than in any other part of Russia). Classifying the mines according
      to number of workers employed, we get the following

      picture:[14]

 (See
      Table on p. 493.)
    






      Thus, in this area (and in this one only) there are extremely small
      peasants’ mines, which, however, despite their great number, play an
      absolutely insignificant part in the total output (104 small mines account
      for only 2% of the total coal output) and are marked by an exceedingly low
      productivity of labour. On the other hand, the 37 largest mines employ
      nearly all of the total number of workers and produce over 70% of the
      total coal output. Productivity of labour increases parallel with the
      increase in the size of the mines, even irrespective of whether machinery
      is used or not (cf., for example, categories V and III of mines, as to
      quantity of steam-power and output per worker). Concentration of
      production in the Donets Basin is steadily increasing: thus, in the four
      years 1882-1886, of 512 coal consigners, 21 dispatched over 5,000
      wagon-loads (i.e., 3 million poods) each, making 229,700 wagon-loads out

 

      of 480,800, i.e., less than half. In the four years 1891-1895, however,
      there were 872 consigners, of whom 55 dispatched over 5,000 wagon-loads
      each, making 925,400 wagon-loads out of 1,178,000, i.e., over 8/10 of the
      total

      number.[15]

      The foregoing data on the development of the mining industry are
      particularly important in two respects: firstly, they reveal with
      exceptional clarity the essence of the change in social-economic relations
      that is taking place in Russia in all spheres of the national economy;
      secondly, they illustrate the theoretical proposition that in a developing
      capitalist society there is a particularly rapid growth of those branches
      of industry which produce means of production, i.e., articles not of
      personal, but of productive, consumption. The replacement of one form of
      social economy by another is particularly clear in the mining industry,
      because here the typical representatives of the two forms are distinct
      areas. In one area there is the old pre-capitalist world, with its
      primitive, routine technique, personal dependence of a population tied to
      place of residence, firmly established social-estate traditions,
      monopolies, etc.; while in the other area one finds a complete break with
      all tradition, a technical revolution, and the rapid growth of purely
      capitalist machine

      industry.[16]

 This
      example brings out in bold relief the mistake of the Narodnik
      economists. They deny the progressive nature of capitalism in Russia,
      pointing to the fact that in agriculture our entrepreneurs readily resort
      to labour-service and in industry to the distribution of home work and
      that in mining they seek to secure the tying down of the worker,
      legislative prohibition of competition by small

 

      establishments, etc., etc. The illogicality of such arguments and their
      flagrant distortion of historical perspective are glaring. Whence, indeed,
      does it follow that the efforts of our entrepreneurs to utilise the
      advantages of pre-capitalist methods of production should be charged to
      our capitalism, and not to those survivals of the past which retard the
      development of capitalism and which in many cases are preserved by force
      of law? Can one be surprised, for instance, at the southern mine owners
      being eager to tie the workers down and to secure the legislative
      prohibition of competition by small establishments, when in the other
      mining area such tying down and such prohibitions have existed for ages,
      and exist to this day, and when in another area the ironmasters, by using
      more primitive methods and employing cheaper and more docile labour, get a
      profit on their pig-iron, without effort, of “kopek per kopek and
      sometimes even one and a half kopeks per

      kopek”?[17]

      Should we not, on the contrary, be surprised at the fact that, under these
      circumstances, there are people who are capable of idealising the
      pre-capitalist economic order in Russia, and who shut their eyes to the
      most urgent and pressing necessity of abolishing all obsolete institutions
      that hinder the development of

      capitalism?[18]

      On the other hand, the data on the growth of the mining industry are
      important because they clearly reveal a more rapid growth of capitalism
      and of the home market on account of articles of productive consumption
      than on account of articles of personal consumption. This circumstance is
      ignored by Mr. N.–on, for instance, who argues that the satisfaction of
      the entire home demand for the products of the mining industry “will
      probably take place very soon” (Sketches, 123). The fact is
      that the consumption of metals, coal, etc. (per inhabitant), does not and
      cannot remain stationary in capitalist society, but necessarily


increases. Every new mile of railway, every new workshop, every
      iron plough acquired by a rural bourgeois increases the demand
      for the products of ore-mining. Although from 1851 to 1897 the consumption
      of pig-iron, for example, in Russia increased from 14 pounds per head to 1
      1/3 poods, even this latter amount will have to increase very considerably
      before it approaches the size of the demand for pig-iron in the advanced
      countries (in Belgium and England it is over 6 poods per inhabitant).
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Sources: Semyonov, A Study of Historical Data on Russian Trade and
      Industry, Vol. III, St. Petersburg, 1859, pp. 323-339. Military
      Statistical Abstract, section on mining industry. The

Ministry of Finance Yearbook, Vol. I, St. Petersburg,
      1869. Statistical Returns for Mining, for 1864-186i,
      St. Petersburg, 1864 1867 (published by the Scientific Committee of the
      Corps of Mining Engineers). I. Bogolyubsky, Essay in Mining Statistics
      for the Russian Empire, St. Petersburg,
      1878. Historico-Statistical Survey of Russian Industry,
      St. Petersburg, 1883, Vol. I (article by Keppen). Statistical Returns
      for the Mining and Metallurgical Industries of Russia in 1890,
      St. Petersburg, 1892. Ditto for 1901 (St. Petersburg, 1904) and for 1902
      (St. Petersburg, 1905). K. Skalkovsky, Mining and Metallurgical
      Productivity of Russia in 1877, St. Petersburg, 1879. The Mining
      and Metallurgical Industry of Russia, published by the Department of
      Mines for the Chicago Exhibition, St. Petersburg, 1893 (compiled by
      Keppen). Returns for Russia for 1890, published by the Central
      Statistical Committee, St. Petersburg, 1890. Ditto for 1896,
      St. Petersburg, 1897. Productive Forces of Russia,
      St. Petersburg, 1896, Section VII. Vestnik Finansov for
      1896-1897. Zemstvo Statistical Returns for Ekaterinburg and Krasnoufimsk
      uyezds of Perm Gubernia, and others.—Lenin

[2]
      When the peasants were emancipated, the Ural ironmasters particularly
      insisted on, and secured the retention of, a law prohibiting the opening
      of any coal- and wood-burning establishments within the area of their
      undertakings. For some details, see Studies, pp. 193-194. (See
      present edition Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in Perm
      Gubernia. –Ed.)—Lenin

[3]
      The Ural worker “is . . . partly a cultivator, so that work in the
      mines is of good assistance to him on his farm, although the pay is lower
      than in the other mining-and-metal districts” (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 8). As we know, the terms on which the Ural
      peasants were emancipated from serf dependence were made to correspond to
      their position in the mining industry. The mining and works population was
      divided into workmen having no land, who had to work in the industry all
      year round, and agricultural labourers, having allotments, who had to do
      auxiliary jobs. Highly characteristic is the term that has survived to
      this day, namely, of Ural workers being “debtbound.” When, for
      example, one reads in the Zemstvo statistics “information about a
      team of workers bound by debt to their jobs in the shops of the Arta
      works” one involuntarily turns to the title-page to see the date: Is
      it really ninety-four, and not, say,

      forty-four?[21]—Lenin

[4]
Transactions of the Commission of Inquiry into Handicraft
      Industry, Vol. XVI, St. Petersburg, 1887, pp. 8-9 and foll. The same
      author later goes on to talk about “healthy people’s”
      industry!—Lenin

[5]
      For a description of this floating see Crags by Mr. Mamin
      Sibiryak. In his writings this author vividly portrays the specific life
      of the Urals, which differs very little from that of the pre-Reform
      period, with the lack of rights, ignorance and degradation of a population
      tied down to the factories, with the “earnest, childish
      dissipations” of the “gentry,” and the absence of that
      middle stratum of society (middle class and other intellectuals) which is
      so characteristic of capitalist development in all countries, not
      excluding Russia.—Lenin

[6]
      In mining statistics the term “South and South-West Russian”
      means the Volhynia, Don, Ekaterinoslav, Kiev, Astrakhan, Bessarabia,
      Podolsk, Taurida, Kharkov, Kherson and Chernigov gubernias. It is to these
      that the quoted figures apply. All that is said further on about the South
      could also be said (with slight modifications) of Poland, which forms
      another mining area of outstanding significance in the post-Reform period.—Lenin

[7]
Vestnik Finansov, 1897, No. 16: The Nikopol-Mariupol Co. ordered
      a pipe-rolling mill in America and had it brought to Russia.—Lenin

[8]
      Where it is well, there is my country.—Ed.

[9]
      It goes without saying that the Ural ironmasters depict the situation
      somewhat differently. Here is a sample of their eloquent

 

complaints at
      last year’s congresses: “The historical services rendered by
      the Urals are common knowledge. For two hundred years all Russia ploughed
      and reaped, hammered, dug and hewed with the products of Ural
      factories. The Russian people wore on their breasts crosses made of Ural
      copper, rode on Ural axles, used fire-arms made of Ural steel, cooked
      pancakes on Ural frying-pans, and rattled Ural pennies in their pockets
      The Urals satisfied the requirements of the entire Russian
      people. . .” (who used scarcely any iron. In 1851 the consumption of
      pig-iron in Russia was estimated at about 14 pounds per inhabitant, in
      1895—1.13 poods, and in 1897—1.33 poods)
      “. . . producing articles to suit their needs and tastes. The Urals
      generously (?) squandered their natural wealth, without chasing after
      fashion, or being carried away by the making of rails, fire grates and
      monuments. And in return for their centuries of service—they found
      themselves one fine day forgotten and neglected” (Vestnik
      Finansov, 1897, No. 32; Results of Mining Congresses in the Urals
      ). Indeed, what neglect of “time-hallowed”
      institutions. And it is all the fault of insidious capitalism, which has
      introduced such “instability” into our national economy. How
      much nicer it would be to live in the old way, without “being
      carried away by the making of rails,” and to cook oneself pancakes
      on Ural frying-pans!—Lenin

[10]
      Mr. Bogolyubsky estimates the number of steam-engines used in mining in
      1868 at 526 with a total of 13,575 h.p.—Lenin

[11]
      The number of workers in iron production in the Urals in 1886 was 145,910,
      and in 1893—164,126, in the South 5,956 and 16,467. The increases
      are 1/3, (approx.) and 2 3/4-fold. For 1902 there are no data on the
      number of steam-engines and horse-power. The number however, of mine
      workers employed (not including saltminers) in 1902 in the whole of Russia
      was 604,972, including 249,805 in the Urals and 145,280 in the South.—Lenin

[12]
Vestnik Finansov, 1897, No. 21. In 1863 the population of Baku
      was 14,000 and in 1885—45,700.—Lenin

[13]
      In 1882, over 62% of the locomotives were fueled with wood; in 1895-96,
      however, wood fueled 28.3%, oil 30% and coal 40.9% of the locomotives
      (Productive Forces, XVII, 62). After capturing the home market,
      the oil industry went in quest of foreign markets, and the export of oil
      to Asia is growing very rapidly (Vestnik Finansov, 1897, No. 32)
      in spite of the a priori predictions of certain Russian
      economists who love to talk about the absence of foreign markets for
      Russian capitalism.—Lenin

[14]
      Data taken from list of mines in Returns for the Mining and
      Metallurgical Industries in 1890.—Lenin

[15]
      From data of N. S. Avdakov: Brief Statistical Survey of the Donets
Coal Industry, Kharkov, 1896.—Lenin

[16]
      Latterly the Urals, too, have begun to change under the influence of the
      new conditions of life; and this change will be still more rapid when the
      Urals are tied closer to “Russia” by railway lines. Of
      particular importance in this respect will be the proposed connection by
      rail of the Urals and the South with a view to the exchange of Ural
      iron-ore for Donets coal. Till now the Urals and the South have scarcely
      competed with each other, having worked for different markets and existed
      mainly on government contracts. But the abundant rain of government
      contracts will not go on for ever.—Lenin

[17]
      Article by Yegunov in Reports and Investigations of Handicraft
Industry, Vol. III, p. 130.—Lenin

[18]
      For example, Mr. N.–on levelled all his complaints solely against
      capitalism (cf., in particular, his observations on the southern mine
      owners, Sketches, pp. 211 and 296) and thus utterly distorted the
      relation between Russian capitalism and the pre-capitalist structure of
      our mining industry.—Lenin
 


[21]
      Lenin refers to Material for the Statistics of Krasnoufimsk Uyezd,
      Perm Gubernia, Vol. V, Pt. 1 (Zavodsky district), Kazan, 1894, on
      p. 65 of which there is a table headed “Information on a team of
      workers bound by debt to their jobs in the shops of the Arta works in
      1892.” [p. 486]
    


[19]
      Lenin quotes here The Mining and Metallurgical Industry of
      Russia. Published by the Department of Mines. International Columbia
      Exhibition, 1893, in Chicago, St. Petersburg, 1893, p. 52. [p. 488]
    


[20]
      In the first edition of The Development of Capitalism in Russia the table
      contained the figures for the years 1890 and 1896. In the second edition
      these figures were omitted. Furthermore, the figures for 1897 differed
      somewhat from those for the same year cited in the second edition. The
      corresponding part of the table as it appeared in the first edition was as
      follows:
    





      The figures for 1897 given in the first edition had a footnote, also
      omitted in the second edition, stating:—“In 1898 the pig iron
      output in the Empire is estimated at 133 million poods, of which 60
      million poods were produced in the South and 43 million poods in the Urals
      (Russkiye Vedomosti [Russian Gazette ], 1899,
      No. 1).” [p. 489]
    

 
  

III. An Examination of Historico-Statistical Data On the Development of Large-Scale Industry

|

V. Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist Enterprises Growing?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist Enterprises Growing?




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: V. Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist Enterprises Growing?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      V. Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist
      Enterprises Growing?
    

      Having examined the statistics of the factory and mining industries, we
      can now attempt to answer this question, one which has so much engaged the
      attention of the Narodnik economists, and which they have answered in the
      negative (Messrs. V. V., N.–on, Karyshev and Kablukov have asserted that
      the number of factory workers in Russia is increasing—if it is
      increasing—more slowly than the population). Let us observe first of
      all that the question must be whether an increase is taking place in the
      commercial and industrial population at the expense of the agricultural
      population (of this below), or whether an increase is taking place in the
      number of workers employed in large-scale machine industry. It cannot be
      asserted that the number of workers in small industrial establishments or
      in manufactories must increase in a developing capitalist society, for the
      factory constantly eliminates the more primitive forms of industry. Our
      factory statistics, however, as was shown in detail above, do not always
      refer to the factory in the scientific sense of the term.

    
      To examine the data on the question that interests us, we must take,
      firstly, the returns for all branches, and, secondly, the returns for a
      long period. Only if we do that is there a guarantee that the data will be
      more or less comparable. We take the years 1865 and 1890, a stretch of
      twenty-five years in the post-Reform period. Let us sum up the available
      statistics. The factory statistics give the fullest data for 1865; for
      European Russia they

 

      showed 380,638 factory workers in all trades except distilling, brewing,
      beet-sugar and

      tobacco.[1]

 To
      determine the number of workers in these trades, we have to take the only
      data available, those of the Military Statistical Abstract, which, as has
      been shown above, must be corrected. By adding the 127,935 workers in the
      trades

      mentioned,[2]

 we get
      the total number of factory workers in European Russia in 1865 (in
      excise-paying and non-excise-paying trades) as

      508,573.[3]

 For 1890
      the corresponding figure will be

      839,730.[4]

 The
      increase is 65%, much greater than the increase in population. It must,
      however, be borne in mind that actually the increase was undoubtedly
      bigger than these figures show : above it was demonstrated in detail
      that the factory statistics for the 1860s are exaggerated due to their
      inclusion of small handicraft, artisan and agricultural establishments, as
      well as home workers. Unfortunately, we are unable, for lack of material,
      to correct all these exaggerations in full, and prefer not to correct them
      in part, especially as more exact data will be given below regarding the
      number of workers in large factories.

    
      Let us pass to the mining and metallurgical statistics. For 1865 the
      number of mine workers was given only for the copper and iron trades, as
      well as the gold and platinum fields; for European Russia it was

      133,176.[5]

 In 1890,

 

      there were in the same trades 274,748

      workers,[6]

      i.e., more than twice as many. The latter figure represents 80.6% of the
      total number of mine workers in European Russia in 1890; if we assume that
      in 1865 the trades mentioned also covered 80.6% of the total mine

      workers,[7]

 we get
      the total number of mine workers for 1865 as 165,230 and
      for 1890 as 340,912. An increase of 107%.

    
      Further, railway workers also belong to the category of workers in big
      capitalist enterprises. In 1890, in European Russia, together with Poland
      and the Caucasus, they numbered

      252,415.[8]

 The figure for 1865 is unknown, but it can be
      determined with a sufficient degree of approximation, since the number of
      railway workers employed per verst of railway fluctuates very
      slightly. Counting 9 workers per verst, we get the total number of railway
      workers in 1865 as

      32,076.[9]



      Let us sum up our calculations.
    






      Thus, in 25 years the number of workers in large capitalist enterprises
      more than doubled, i.e., it increased not only much faster than the
      population in general, but even faster than the urban

      population.[10]

 The
      steadily increasing diversion of workers from agriculture and from the
      small industries to big industrial enterprises is consequently beyond

      doubt.[11]

 This is
      indicated by the very statistics that are so often resorted to and abused
      by our Narodniks. But the culminating point of their abuse of the
      statistics is the following truly phenomenal device: they work out the
      proportion of factory workers to the total population (!) and on the basis
      of the figure arrived at (about 1%) expatiate on how insignificant this

      “handful”[12]

 of workers is! Mr. Kablukov, for example, after
      repeating the calculation of

 

      the proportion of “factory workers in

      Russia”[13]

      to the population, goes on to say: “In the West, however (!!), the
      number of workers engaged in manufacturing industry . . .” (is it
      not obvious to every schoolboy that “factory workers” and
      “workers engaged in manufacturing industry” are not one and
      the same thing at all?) . . . “constitute quite a different
      proportion of the population,” namely, from 53% in Britain to 23% in
      France. “It is not difficult to see that the difference in the
      proportion of the class of factory workers (!!) there and here is so great
      that it is out of the question to identify the course of our development
      with that of Western Europe.” And this is written by a professor and
      specialist in statistics! With extraordinary valour he perpetrates two
      misrepresentations at one blow: 1) factory workers are replaced by workers
      engaged in manufacturing industry, and 2) the latter are replaced by the
      population engaged in manufacturing industry. Let us explain the meaning
      of these categories to our learned statisticians. In France, according to
      the census of 1891, the workers engaged in manufacturing industry numbered
      3.3 million—less than one-tenth of the population (36.8 million
      classified according to occupation; and 1.3 million not classified
      according to occupation). These are workers employed in all industrial
      establishments and enterprises, and not only factory workers. The
      population, however, that is engaged in manufacturing industry numbered
      9.5 million (about 26% of the total population). Added here to the number
      of workers are employers, etc. (1 million); then office employees, clerks,
      etc., 0.2 million; dependents in household, 4.8 million; and
      domestic servants, 0.2

      million.[14]

 To
      illustrate the corresponding proportions in Russia, we must take
      particular centres as our examples, for we have no statistics showing the
      occupations of the whole population. Let us take one urban and one rural
      centre. In Petersburg the factory statistics for 1890 gave the number of
      factory workers as 51,760 (according to the Directory ), whereas
      according to the St. Petersburg census of December 15, 1890, the number of
      persons of both sexes

 

      engaged in manufacturing industry was 341,991, distributed as

      follows:[15]







      Another example: In Bogorodskoye village, Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod
      Gubernia (which, as we have seen, does not engage in agriculture, but
      constitutes “a single tannery as it were”), there are,
      according to the Directory for 1890, 392 factory
      workers, whereas the population engaging in industries, according to
      the Zemstvo census of 1889, numbers nearly 8,000 (the total population
      equals 9,241; more than 9/10 of the families engage in industries). Let
      these figures give food for thought to Messrs. N.—on, Kablukov and
      Co.!

    
Addendum to second edition. We now have the returns of the
      national census of 1897, giving statistics on the occupations of the
      entire population. Here are the data, summarised by us, for the whole of
      the Russian

      Empire[16]

 (in
      millions):
    







      Needless to say, these data fully confirm what has been said above
      regarding the absurdity of the Narodnik device of comparing the number of
      factory workers with the whole population.

    
      It will be interesting, first of all, to group the data on the
      occupational distribution of the whole population of Russia, in a way that
      will illustrate the division of social labour as the basis of the
      whole of commodity production and capitalism in Russia. From this point of
      view, the entire population should be distributed into three large
      subdivisions: I. Agricultural. II. Commercial and
      industrial. III. Unproductive (more precisely, not participating in
      economic activity). Of the nine groups given (a to i ),
      only one cannot be directly and entirely assigned to any one of these
      three main subdivisions. That is group g : private service,
      domestic servants and day labourers. This group has to be distributed
      approximately between the commercial-and-industrial and the
      agricultural population. We have assigned to the former the section of
      this group which is shown as residing in towns

 

      (2.5 million), and to the latter those residing in rural areas (3.3
      million). We then get the following picture of the distribution of the
      total population of Russia:
    






      This picture clearly shows, on the one hand, that commodity circulation
      and, hence, commodity production are firmly implanted in Russia. Russia is
      a capitalist country. On the other hand, it follows from this that Russia
      is still very backward, as compared with other capitalist countries, in
      her economic development.

    
      To proceed. After the analysis we have made in the present work, the
      statistics of the occupations of the whole population of Russia can and
      should be used to determine approximately the main
      categories into which the entire population of Russia is divided according
      to class status, i.e., according to their status in the social
      system of production.

    
      It is possible to determine these categories—only approximately, of
      course—because we know the main economic groups into which the
      peasantry are divided. And the entire mass of the agricultural population
      of Russia may safely be regarded as peasants, for the number of landlords
      in the sum-total is quite negligible. Quite a considerable section of
      landlords, moreover, are included in the category of rentiers, government
      officials, high dignitaries, etc. In the peasant mass of 97 millions,
      however, one must distinguish three main groups: the bottom
      group—the proletarian and semi-proletarian strata of the population;
      the middle group—the poor small peasant farmers; and the top
      group—the well-to-do small peasant farmers. We have analysed above
      the main economic features of these groups as distinct class elements. The
      bottom group is the propertyless population, which earns its livelihood
      mainly, or half of it, by the sale of labour-power. The middle
      group comprises the poor small peasant farmers, for the middle peasant in

 

      the best of years just barely manages to make ends meet, but the
      principal means of livelihood of this group is
      “independent” (supposedly independent, of course)
      small-scale farming. Finally, the top group consists of the
      well-to-do small peasant farmers, who exploit more or less considerable
      numbers of allotment-holding farm labourers and day labourers and all
      sorts of wage-labourers in general.

    
      These groups constitute approximately 50%, 30% and 20% respectively of the
      total. Above we invariably took the share of each group in the total
      number of households or farms. Now we shall take them as a proportion of
      the population. This change effects an increase in the bottom group and a
      decrease in the top one. But this, undoubtedly, is precisely the change
      that has taken place in Russia in the past decade, as is proved
      incontrovertibly by the decline in horse-ownership and by the ruin of the
      peasantry, the growth of poverty and unemployment in the rural districts,
      etc.

    
      That is to say, among the agricultural population we have about 48.5
      million proletarians and semi-proletarians about 29.1 million poor small
      peasant farmers and their families, and about 19.4 million of the
      population on the well-to-do small farms.

    
      Now the question is how to distribute the commercial and industrial and
      the unproductive population. The latter group contains sections of the
      population who obviously belong to the big bourgeoisie: all the rentiers
      (“living on income from capital and real estate”—first
      subdivision of group 14 in our statistics: 900,000), then part of the
      bourgeois intelligentsia, the high military and civil officials,
      etc. Altogether, these will number about 1 1/2 million. At the opposite
      pole of this group of unproductive population are the lower ranks of the
      army, navy, gendarmerie and police (about 1.3 million), domestics and
      numerous servants (about 1/2 million altogether), nearly 1/2 million
      beggars, tramps, etc., etc. Here we can only roughly distribute the groups
      that most closely approximate to the main economic types: about 2 million
      will go to the proletarian and semi-proletarian population (partly
      lumpen-proletarians), about 1.9 million to the poor small proprietors, and
      about

 

      1.5 million to the well-to-do small proprietors, including the bulk of the
      clerks, managerial personnel, bourgeois intellectuals, etc.

    
      Lastly, among the commercial and industrial population the largest section
      is undoubtedly the proletariat, and the gulf is widest between the
      proletariat and the big bourgeoisie. But the census returns supply no data
      as to the distribution of this section of the population into employers,
      one-man producers, workers, etc. We have no alternative but to take as a
      model the above-quoted data on the industrial population of
      St. Petersburg, classified according to position in production. On the
      basis of these data we may roughly assign about 7% to the big bourgeoisie,
      10% to the well-to-do petty bourgeoisie, 22% to the poor small proprietors
      and 61% to the proletariat. In Russia as a whole, small production in
      industry is, of course, much more tenacious than it is in St. Petersburg,
      but then we do not assign to the semi-proletarian population the mass of
      one-man producers and handicraftsmen who work in their homes for
      masters. Hence, on the whole, the proportions taken will in all
      probability not differ very much from what they actually are. For the
      commercial and industrial population we shall then get about 1.5 million
      big bourgeoisie, about 2.2 million well-to-do, about 4.8 million needy
      small producers, and about 13.2 million belonging to the proletarian and
      semi-proletarian strata of the population.

    
      By combining the agricultural, commercial and industrial, and unproductive
      sections of the population, we shall get the following approximate
      distribution of the entire population of Russia according to class status:
    







Proletarians[17]





      We have no doubt that our Cadet and quasi-Cadet economists and politicians
      will raise their voices in indignation against this
      “over-simplified” concept of the economy of Russia. After all,
      it is so convenient, so advantageous to gloss over the profundity of
      economic contradictions in a detailed analysis and at the same time to
      complain of the “crudity” of socialist views on these
      contradictions as a whole. Such criticism of the conclusion we have
      reached is, of course, without scientific value.

    
      Differences of opinion are, of course, possible about the degree of
      approximation of various figures. It is of interest to note, from this
      point of view, the work of Mr. Lositsky, Studies of the Population of
      Russia Based on the Census of 1897 (Mir

Bozhy,[18]

      1905, No. 8). The author took the bare census figures of the number of
      workers and servants, and from these estimated the proletarian population
      in Russia at 22 million; the peasant and land-owning population at 80
      million, employers and clerks in commerce and industry at about 12
      million, and the population not engaged in industry at about 12 million.

    
      The number of proletarians according to these figures comes quite close to
      the figure we have arrived

      at.[19]

 To deny the
      existence of a vast mass of semi-proletarians among the poor peasants who
      are dependent upon “employments,” among the handicraftsmen,
      etc., would be to scoff at all the data on the Russian economy. One need
      but recall the 3 1/4 million horseless households in European
      Russia alone, the 3.4 million one-horse households, the sum-total of
      Zemstvo statistics on rented land, “employments,” budgets,
      etc., to abandon all doubt about the huge size of the semi-proletarian
      population. To agree that the proletarian and semi-proletarian population
      taken together comprises one-half of the peasantry is probably no
      understatement and no exaggeration of its numbers. And outside

 

      of the agricultural population, the proletarians and semi-proletarians
      undoubtedly constitute a still higher percentage.

    
      Further, if we are not to replace the complete economic picture by petty
      details, we should include among the well-to-do small proprietors a
      considerable section of the commercial and industrial managerial
      personnel, clerks, bourgeois intellectuals, government officials, and so
      on. Here we have perhaps been too cautious and fixed the number of this
      group of the population too high: it is quite possible that we-should have
      put the poor small proprietors at a higher figure and the well-to-do at a
      lower. But, of course, in making such divisions one does not lay claim to
      absolute statistical accuracy.

    
      Statistics should illustrate the socio-economic relations established by
      an all-round analysis, and not be made an end in themselves, as too often
      happens in our country. To gloss over the large numbers of the
      petty-bourgeois strata in the population of Russia would be simply to
      falsify the picture of our real economic situation.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Returns and Material of the Ministry of Finance, 1867, No 6. It
has been shown above that for comparison with contemporary data one can
only take data from the same source, i.e., those of the Ministry of
Finance.—Lenin

[2]
      The number of workers in brewing is 6,825, this figure is also
      exaggerated, but it cannot be corrected for lack of data; in beet sugar
      making—68,334 (according to The Ministry of Finance Yearbook
      ); tobacco-making—6,116 (corrected) and distilling—
      46,660 (corrected).—Lenin

[3]
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky quotes for 1866 the figure given by
      Mr. Veshnyakov—493,371 (The Factory, p. 339). We do not
      know how this figure was arrived at; it differs very slightly from the one
      we give.—Lenin

[4]
      According to the Directory for 1890. From the total of 875,764 we
      have to subtract the number of workers duplicated in mining statistics,
      viz., 291 in asphalt, 3,468 in salt, and 32,275 in rails production.—Lenin

[5]
      For the number of mine workers in the 60s, see Statistical
      Chronicle, I, 1866; The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, I;
      Statistical Returns for Mining, for 1864-1867, St. Petersburg,
      1864-1867, published by the Mining Scientific Committee.—Lenin

[6]
Statistical Returns for the Mining and Metallurgical Industries in
      1890, St. Petersburg, 1892. According to this source the total for
      European Russia is 342,166, and if we subtract the number of workers at
      the kerosene refineries (included in the Directory ) and correct
      certain minor errors, the total will be 340,912.—Lenin

[7]
      Among the other branches of mining industries there are some in which the
      number of workers has probably increased slightly (salt mining), there are
      some in which the number must have increased very considerably
      (coal-mining, stone-quarrying), and some which did not exist at all in the
      1860s (such as quicksilver-mining).—Lenin

[8]
Statistical Survey of Railways and Inland Waterways,
      St. Petersburg, 1893, p. 22. Published by Ministry of
      Communications. Unfortunately, we lack the data to separate European
      Russia. Under railway workers we include, not only permanent, but
      temporary (10,447) and day labourers (74,504). The average annual pay of a
      temporary worker is 192 rubles, and of a day labourer 235 rubles. The
      average daily pay is 78 kopeks. Consequently, both the temporary and the
      day workers are engaged for the greater part of the year, so that to
      disregard them, as Mr. N.–on does (Sketches, p. 124), is wrong.—Lenin

[9]
      The number of workers per verst employed on the railways in 1886 was 9.0,
      in 1890 —9.5; in 1893—10.2 in 1894—10.6; in
      1895—10.9; thus the number obviously tends to grow. See Returns
      for Russia for 1890 and 1896, and Vestnik Finansov, 1897,
      No. 39.—Let us make the reservation that in this section we are
      concerned exclusively with comparing the data for 1865 and 1890, it is
      therefore absolutely immaterial whether we take the number of railway
      workers for the whole of the Empire or only for European Russia; whether
      we take 9 workers per verst or fewer, or whether we take all branches of
      mining or only those for which data exist for 1865.—Lenin

[10]
      In European Russia the urban population in 1863 was 6.1 million, and in
      1897, 12.0 million.—Lenin

[11]
      The latest data on the number of workers in large capitalist enterprises
      are as follows for 1900 data exist regarding the number of factory workers
      in non-excise-paying enterprises; for 1903, data are available for
      excise-paying enterprises. On workers in the mining and metallurgical
      industries data exist for 1902. The number of railway workers may be
      determined by reckoning 11 men per verst (information as of January 1,
      1904). See Yearbook of Russia, 1906, and Returns for the
      Mining and Metallurgical Industries, for 1902.  Summing up these
      data, we get the following: in the 50 gubernias of European Russia in
      1900-1903 there were 1,261,571 factory workers 477,025 mining workers;
      468,941 railway workers. Total, 2,207,537. In the entire Russian Empire
      there were 1,509,516 factory workers 626,929 mining workers, 655,929
      railway workers. Total, 2,792,374. These figures, too, fully bear out what
      is said in the text. (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[12]
      N.–on, loc. cit., 326 and others.—Lenin

[13]
Lectures on Agricultural Economics, Moscow, 1897, p. 14.—Lenin

[14]
The Statesman’s Yearbook, 1897, p. 472.—Lenin

[15]
St. Petersburg According to the Census of 1890. St. Petersburg,
1893. We have taken the total of groups II to XV. The total number of
persons engaged in industrial occupations is 551,700, of whom 200,748
are engaged in commerce, carting and innkeeping.—“One man
producers” refers to small producers who employ no workers.—Lenin

[16]
General Summary for the Empire of the Results of the Examination of
the First General Population Census, January 28,
1897. Published by the Central Statistical Committee, Vol. II,
Table XXI, p. 296. I have arranged the groups of occupations as follows:
a) 1, 2 and 4; b) 3 and 5-12; c) 14 and 15; d) 16 and 63-65; e) 46-62;
f) 41-45; g) 13; h) 17-21; i) 22-40.—Lenin

[17]
      These number not less than 22 million. See further on.—Lenin

[18]
Wide World.—Ed.

[19]
      This is not the place to go into details concerning the statistics on
      workers and servants used by Mr. Lositsky. These statistics evidently err
      in very considerably understating the number of workers.—Lenin
 

 
  

IV. The Development of the Mining Industry

|

VI. Steam-Engine Statistics

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Steam-Engine Statistics.




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: VI. Steam-Engine Statistics








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      VI. Steam-Engine Statistics
    

      The employment of steam-engines in production is one of the most
      characteristic features of large-scale machine industry. It will be
      interesting therefore to examine the data available on this subject. For
      the years 1875-1878 the number of steam-engines is supplied by
      Material for the Statistics of Steam-Engines in the Russian
      Empire (St. Petersburg, 1882. Published by the Central Statistical

      Committee).[1]

      For 1892 we have the figures of Collection
of Data on Factory Industry, which cover all factory
      and mining trades.

    
      Here are these data compared:
    







      In 16 years the total h.p. capacity of steam-engines in Russia increased
      threefold and in European Russia 2 1/2 times. The number
      of steam-engines increased to a lesser degree, so that the average
      capacity per steam-engine rose considerably: in European Russia from 18
      h.p. to 24 h.p., and in the Kingdom of Poland from 18 h.p. to 41
      h.p. Large scale machine industry, consequently, developed very rapidly
      during this period. As regards steam-power capacity, the following
      gubernias, in 1875-1878, were in the lead: St. Petersburg (17,808 h.p.),
      Moscow (13,668), Kiev (8,363), Perm (7,348) and Vladimir (5,684)—the
      total for these five gubernias being 52,871 h.p. or about 3/5 of the total
      for European Russia. Then follow the Podolsk (5,480), Petrokov (5,071) and
      Warsaw (4,760) gubernias. In 1892 the order changed: Petrokov (59,063),
      St. Petersburg (43,961), Ekaterinoslav (27,839), Moscow (24,704), Vladimir
      (15,857) and Kiev (14,211)—the total for the last five gubernias
      being 126,572 h.p., or nearly 1/2 the total for European Russia. Then
      follow the gubernias of Warsaw (11,310) and Perm (11,245). These figures
      clearly indicate the formation of two new industrial centres: in Poland
      and in the South. In Petrokov Gubernia, the total capacity increased
      11.6-fold, and in the Ekaterinoslav and Don gubernias taken

      together,[2]

 from
      2,834 to 30,932 h.p. or 10.9-fold. These industrial centres, which have
      grown so rapidly,

 

      have moved up from the bottom to the top places and have supplanted the
      old industrial centres. Let us observe that these data, too, reveal the
      particularly rapid growth of the industries producing articles of
      productive consumption, namely, the mining and metallurgical
      industries. In 1875-78 these industries employed 1,040 steam-engines with
      a total of 22,966 h.p. (in European Russia) and in 1890 1,960 steam
      engines with a total of 74,204 h.p., i.e., an increase in 14 years that
      exceeds the increase in the total number of steam-engines in industry as a
      whole in 16 years. The industries producing means of production constitute
      an ever-growing part of industry as a

      whole.[3]

 

Notes
 

[1]
      Of the 13 groups of trades we omit, for purposes of comparison with 1892,
      the following groups: I (agriculture), XII (printing and lithography) and
      XIII (“plumbing,” etc.). Locomobiles are counted with
      steam-engines.—Lenin

[2]
      We combine these gubernias because their boundaries have changed since
      1878.—Lenin

[3]
      The progress made in the employment of steam-engines in Russia since 1892
      may be seen from the fact that in 1904, according to the factory
      inspectors’ reports, there were in 64 gubernias 27,579 factory
      steam-boilers; the total, not including those employed in agriculture, was
      31,887. (Note to 2nd edition.—Ed.)—Lenin
 

 
  

V. Is the Number of Workers in Large Capitalist Enterprises Growing?

|

VII. The Growth of Large Factories

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Growth of Large Factories




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: VII. The Growth of Large Factories








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      VII. The Growth of Large Factories
    

      The unsatisfactory nature of our factory statistics, as demonstrated
      above, has compelled us to resort to more complex calculations in order to
      determine the development of large-scale machine industry in Russia since
      the Reform. We have selected data for 1866, 1879, 1890 and 1894-95 on the
      largest factories, namely, those with 100 and more workers per

      establishment.[1]

      Outside workers are strictly separated only in the data of the
      List for 1894-95;

 

      hence, the data for previous years (particularly 1866 and 1879) may still
      be somewhat exaggerated, notwithstanding the corrections referred to in
      the footnote.
    

      We give the returns on these largest factories (p.  510).
    






      Let us commence our analysis of this table with the data for the years
      1866, 1879 and 1890. The total number of large factories changed during
      these years as follows: 644, 852, 951, or in percentages: 100, 132,
      147. In the course of 24 years the number of large factories increased,
      consequently, by nearly fifty per cent. Moreover, if we take the data for
      the different categories of large factories, we shall see that the larger
      the factories, the faster their number grows (A: 512, 641, 712 factories;
      B: 90, 130, 140; C: 42, 81, 99). This indicates a growing concentration of
      production.

    
      The number of mechanised establishments grows more rapidly than the total
      number of factories; in percentages as follows: 100, 178, 226. An
      increasing number of large factories introduce steam-engines. The larger
      the factories, the greater the number of mechanised establishments among
      them; if we calculate the percentage of these establishments to the total
      number of factories in the given category, we obtain the following: A)
      39%, 53%, 63%; B) 75%, 91%, 100%; C) 83%, 94%, 100%. The employment of
      steam-engines is closely bound up with the expansion of the volume of
      output, with the expansion of co-operation in production.

    
      The number of workers in all large factories changed in percentages as
      follows: 100, 168, 200. During the 24 years the number of workers doubled,
      i.e., exceeded the increase in the total number of “factory
      workers.” The average number of workers per large factory was by
      years: 359, 458, 488, and by categories: A) 213, 221, 220; B) 665, 706,
      673; C) 1,495, 1,935, 2,154. An increasing number of workers are thus
      being concentrated in the largest factories. In 1866, factories with 1,000
      workers and over employed 27% of the total number of workers in large
      factories; in 1879, 40%; in 1890, 46%.

    
      The change in the output of all large factories expressed in percentages
      will be: 100, 243, 292; and by categories: A) 100, 201, 187; B) 100, 245,
      308; C) 100, 323, 479. Hence, the volume of output of all large factories
      increased almost threefold, and the larger the factory, the more rapid the

 

      increase. But if we compare the productivity of labour for each separate
      year according to the different categories, we shall get a somewhat
      different picture. The average output per worker in all large factories
      will be: 866 rubles, 1,250, 1,260; and by categories: A) 901, 1,410,
      1,191; B) 800, 1,282, 1,574; C) 841, 1,082, 1,188. Thus, for each separate
      year we observe no increase in output (per worker) as we pass from the
      bottom category to the top. This is because the various categories
      include, in unequal proportions, factories in industries using raw
      materials of different value and obtaining, therefore, an annual output
      per worker of different

      value.[2]

      We do not think it worth while to examine in equal detail the data for the
      years 1879-1890 and for the years 1879-1890-1894-1895, since this would
      mean repeating all that has been said above for somewhat different
      percentages.

    
      Latterly, the Collection of Factory Inspectors’ Reports has
      supplied data on the distribution of factories and works into groups
      according to the number of workers employed. Here are the data for 1903:
    







Russia[9]




      A comparison of these with the afore-cited data will involve a certain
      inaccuracy, a slight one, it is true. At all events, they show that the
      number of large factories (those with over 99 or over 100 workers) and the
      number of workers employed in them are rapidly increasing. The
      concentration of workers and, consequently, of production, also increases
      in the largest of these large factories.
    





      Comparing the data on the large factories with those on all
      “factories and works” given in our of official statistics,

 

      we see that in 1879 the large factories, constituting 4.4% of all
      “factories and works” concentrated 66.8% of the total number
      of factory workers and 54.8% of the total output. In 1890 they constituted
      6.7% of the total number of “factories and works,” and
      concentrated 71.1% of all factory workers and 57.2% of the total
      output. In 1894-95 they constituted 10.1% of all “factories and
      works,” and concentrated 74% of all factory workers and 70.8% of the
      total output. In 1903, the large factories in European Russia, those with
      over 100 workers, constituted 17% of the total number of factories and
      works and concentrated 76.6% of the total number of factory

      workers.[3]

 Thus, the
      large, mostly steam-powered, factories, despite their small numbers,
      concentrate an overwhelming and ever-growing proportion of the workers and
      output of all “factories and works.” The tremendous rapidity
      with which these large factories have been growing in the post-Reform
      period has already been noted. Let us now cite data on the equally large
      enterprises in the mining

      industry.[4]










      In the mining industry the concentration of workers in large enterprises
      is still greater (although the percentage of enterprises employing
      steam-engines is smaller); 258,000 workers out of 305,000, i.e., 84.5%,
      are concentrated in enterprises with 100 and more workers; almost half of
      the mine workers (145,000 out of 305,000) are employed in a few very large
      establishments each employing 1,000 and more workers. And of the total
      number of factory and mining workers in European Russia (1,180,000 in
      1890), three-fourths (74.6%) are concentrated in enterprises
      employing 100 workers and over; nearly half (570,000 out of 1,180,000) are
      concentrated in enterprises each employing 500 and more

      workers.[5]



      We think it worth while to deal here with the question raised by
      Mr. N.–on concerning a “slowing down” of the development of
      capitalism and of the growth of the “factory population” in
      the period of 1880-1890, as compared with that of

      1865-1880.[6]

 From
      this remarkable discovery Mr. N.–on contrived, thanks to the original
      logic that distinguishes him, to draw the conclusion that “the facts
      fully confirm” the assertion made in Sketches that
      “capitalism, after reaching certain limits of its development,
      effects a shrinkage of its own home market.”—Firstly, it is
      absurd to argue that a “slowing down in the rate of increase”
      indicates

 

      a shrinkage of the home market. If the number of factory workers is
      growing faster than the population (and this is precisely the case
      according to Mr. N.–on’s own data; an increase between 1880 and
      1890 of 25%), this shows that the population is being diverted from
      agriculture and that the home market is growing even for articles of
      personal consumption. (We say nothing of the market for means of
      production.) Secondly, a “decline in the growth,” expressed in
      percentages always has to take place in a capitalist country at a certain
      stage of development, for small magnitudes always grow faster, in
      percentages, than big ones. The only deduction one can draw from the fact
      that the initial steps in the development of capitalism are particularly
      rapid is that the young country is striving to overtake the older ones. It
      is wrong, however, to take the percentage increase in the initial period
      as a standard for subsequent periods. Thirdly, the fact itself of a
      “decline in the growth” is not proved at all by comparing the
      periods taken by Mr. N.–on. The development of capitalist industry
      cannot proceed except in cycles; therefore, to compare different periods,
      one must take data for a whole number of

      years,[7]

 so that the
      particularly prosperous, boom years and the slump years may stand out
      distinctly. Mr. N.–on did not do this and slipped into profound error,
      for he overlooked the fact that the year 1880 was a high boom
      year. Moreover, Mr. N.–on did not even hesitate to “concoct”
      the opposite assertion. “We must also note,” he argues,
      “that the intervening year (between 1865 and 1890) of 1880 was a
      year of crop failure, so that the number of workers registered in that
      year was below the normal”!!  (ibid.,
      pp. 103-104). Mr. N.–on had only to glance at the text of the very
      publication from which he plucked the figures for 1880
      (Directory, 3rd edition), to read there that 1880 was marked by a
      “spurt” in industry, particularly in leather and machine
      building (p. IV), and that this was due to the enhanced demand for goods
      after the war and to increased government orders. It is sufficient to look
      through the

 

      Directory for 1879 to get a clear idea of the extent of this

      spurt.[8]

 But
      Mr. N.–on does not hesitate completely to distort the facts to suit his
      romantic theory.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Sources: The Ministry of Finance Yearbook, I (data only for 71
      trades)- Directories, first and third editions—data for all
      trades, as well as those in the List ; but for a comparison of
      the data in the List and in the Directory, the
      manufacture of rails must be omitted from the trades given in the latter
      establishments for which home workers were included among the factory
      workers are omitted. In some cases the inclusion of home workers is
      specifically indicated in footnotes in the publications mentioned; in
      others the fact emerges from a comparison of the data for different years:
      cf., for instance, the data on cotton weaving in Saratov Gubernia for
      1879, 1890, and 1894-95. (Cf. Chapter VI, § II, 1.)—Sinzheimer
      (Ueber die Grenzen der Weiterbildung des fabrikm\"assigen Grossbetriebes
      in Deutschland, Stuttgart, 1893) [On the Limits of Extension of
      Large-Scale Factory Production in Germany, Stuttgart,
      1893. –Ed.] classifies under large factories enterprises with 50
      and more workers. We do not think this standard low, but owing to the
      difficulties involved in calculating Russian data, we have had to limit
      ourselves to the largest factories.—Lenin

[2]
      Thus, in 1866, category A included 17 sugar-refineries, where the average
      annual output per worker was about 6,000 rubles, whereas in the textile
      factories (included in the top categories) the average annual output per
      worker ranged from 500 to 1,500 rubles.—Lenin

[3]
      The total figures for our factory industry as given by the
      Directory and the List were quoted above, in § II
      [Cf. Studies, p. 276 (See present edition, Vol. 4 “On the
      Question of Our Factory Statistics.” –Ed.)]. We would
      point out that the rise in the percentage of large factories in the total
      number of “factories and works” indicates above all that this
      latter term is gradually acquiring a more restricted meaning in our
      statistics.—Lenin

[4]
      These data have been compiled from Statistical Returns for

the Mining and Metallurgical Industries. In 1890, enterprises
      enumerated in the Directory having been excluded. By this
      exclusion, the total number of mining workers in European Russia is
      reduced by 35,000 (340,000-35,000 = 305,000).—Lenin

[5]
      The industrial census for 1895 for the whole of German industry,
      including mine development, which is not registered in Russia, recorded a
      total of 248 establishments with 1,000 and more workers; the aggregate
      number of workers in these establishments was 430,286. Hence, the largest
      factories in Russia are larger than those in Germany.—Lenin

[6]
Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1894, No. 6, p. 101 and foll. The data for
      large factories which we have given above also indicate a lower percentage
      of growth in 1879-1890 as compared with 1866-1879.—Lenin

[7]
      As Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky, for example, did in his Factory, p. 307
      and chart. The chart clearly shows that 1879, and especially 1880 and
      1881, were years of particular boom.—Lenin

[8]
      See, for instance, felt cloth production— increased output of army
      cloth; tanning—enormous activity, leather goods— a large
      factory produces goods to the amount of 2.5 million rubles “for the
      War Department” (p. 288). The Izhevsk and the Sestroretsk works turn
      out artillery supplies to the value of 7 1/2 million rubles, as against 1
      1/4 million rubles in 1890. In copper-working one notes the production of
      supplies for the troops and of military instruments pp. 388-389);
      explosive factories work at full capacity, etc.—Lenin
 


[9]
      154: Lenin supplemented this table later with the corresponding figures
      for 1908 (see illustration on p. 513). The data entered by Lenin were
      taken from Collection of Factory Inspectors’ Reports for
      1908 (no. 50-51), published in 1910. Consequently. Lenin’s
      entries were made either in 1910 or in 1911.  [p. 512]
    

 
  

VI. Steam-Engine Statistics

|

VIII. The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: VIII. The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      VIII. The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry
    

      Besides the concentration of production in very large establishments, the
      concentration of production in separate factory industrial centres and the
      different types of factory centres are also important in characterising
      large-scale machine industry. Unfortunately, our factory statistics not
      only supply unsatisfactory and incomparable material, but arrange it in a
      far from adequate manner. For example, in contemporary publications the
      distribution of industry is shown only by gubernias (and not by towns and
      uyezds as was done in the best publications of the 60s, which, in
      addition, illustrated the distribution of factory industry with maps). But
      in order to present an accurate picture of the distribution of large-scale
      industry, the data must be taken for separate centres, i.e., for separate
      towns, industrial settlements, or groups of industrial settlements
      situated close together; gubernias or uyezds are too big as territorial

      units.[1]

 In view of
      this, we thought it

 

      advisable to compute from the Directory for 1879 and 1890 data on
      the concentration of our factory industry in the most important
      centres. The table given in the appendix (Appendix III) contains data for
      103 factory centres in European Russia, centres in which about half the
      total number of factory workers are

      concentrated.[2]

      The table shows three main types of factory centres in Russia. 1) The
      towns. These take first place, being distinguished for the greatest
      concentration of both workers and establishments. Particularly outstanding
      in this respect are the large towns. In each of the metropolitan cities
      (including the suburbs) about 70,000 factory workers are concentrated;
      Riga has 16,000, Ivanovo-Voznesensk 15,000 and Bogorodsk had 10,000 in
      1890; the other towns have fewer than 10,000 each. It is sufficient to
      take a cursory glance at the official figures on factory workers in
      several large cities (Odessa—8,600 in 1890, Kiev—6,000, Rostov
      on-Don—5,700, etc.) to be convinced that these figures are
      ridiculously low. The instance of St. Petersburg given above shows how
      many times these figures would have to be multiplied for the correct
      number of industrial workers in these centres to be obtained. In addition
      to the towns, the suburbs must also be indicated. The suburbs of large
      towns are very often big industrial centres, but from the data we possess
      we have been able to separate only one such centre, the suburbs of
      St. Petersburg, where in 1890 the number of workers was 18,900. Several of
      the settlements in the Moscow Uyezd included in our table are also
      actually

      suburbs.[3]




      The second type of centre is the factory villages, which are particularly
      numerous in the Moscow, Vladimir and Kostroma gubernias (of the 63 most
      important rural centres included in our table, 42 are in these
      gubernias). These centres are headed by the township of Orekhovo-Zuyevo
      (in the table, Orekhovo and Zuyevo are given separately, but they are
      actually one centre); as to the number of workers, it comes second only to
      the capitals (26,800 in

      1890).[4]

 In the
      three gubernias indicated, as also in the Yaroslavl and Tver gubernias,
      the majority of the rural factory centres are formed by huge textile mills
      (cotton-spinning and weaving, linen, wool-weaving, etc.). Formerly, there
      were almost always work-distributing offices in such villages, i.e.,
      centres of capitalist manufacture, which held sway over masses of
      neighbouring hand weavers. In those cases where the statistics do not
      confuse home workers with factory workers, the data on the development of
      such centres clearly reveal the growth of large-scale machine industry
      which attracts thousands of peasants from the surrounding areas and
      transforms them into factory workers. Further, a considerable number of
      rural factory centres are formed by large mining and metallurgical plants
      (Kolomna Works in the village of Bobrovo, Yuzovka Works, Bryansk Works,
      and others); the majority of these are classified under mining, and for
      that reason were not included in our table. The beet sugar refineries
      situated in the villages and townships of the south-western gubernias also
      form quite a number of village factory centres; for our example we have
      taken one of the largest, the township of Smela, in Kiev Gubernia.

    


      The third type of factory centre is the “handicraft” villages,
      the largest establishments in which are often classified as
      “factories and works.” In our table, the villages of Pavlovo,
      Vorsma, Bogorodskoye and Dubovka serve as examples of such centres. A
      comparison between the number of factory workers in such centres and the
      total of their industrial population was made above in the case of
      Bogorodskoye village.

    
      If we group the centres given in our table according to number of workers
      in each centre and according to the type of centre (town or village), we
      get the following data (see next page).
    





      The table shows that in 1879 there were 356,000 workers (out of a total of
      752,000) concentrated in these 103 centres, while in 1890 there were
      451,000 (out of 876,000). Accordingly, the number of workers increased by
      26.8%, whereas in the large factories in general (of 100 and more workers)
      the increase was only 22.2%, while the total number of workers increased
      over this period by only 16.5%. Thus the workers are being concentrated in
      the largest centres. In 1879, only 11 centres had over 5,000 workers; in
      1890 there were 21. Particularly striking is the increase in the number of
      centres with from 5,000 to 10,000 workers. This occurred for two reasons:
      1) because of the exceptional growth of factory industry in the South
      (Odessa, Rostov-on-Don, etc.); and 2) because of the growth of the factory
      villages in the central gubernias.

    
      A comparison between the urban and the rural centres shows that in 1890
      the latter embraced about one-third of the total number of
      workers in the leading centres (152,000 out of 451,000). For the whole of
      Russia this proportion should be higher, i.e., more than one-third of the
      factory workers must be outside of the towns. Indeed, all the outstanding
      urban centres are included in our table, whereas rural centres with
      several hundred workers each, apart from those we have mentioned, exist in
      exceedingly large numbers (settlements with glass-works, brickworks,
      distilleries, beet-sugar refineries, etc.). Mining workers are also to be
      found mainly outside of towns. One may consider, therefore, that of the
      total number of factory and mining workers in European Russia not less
      (and maybe more) than half are to

 

      be found outside of towns. This conclusion is very important, for it shows
      that the industrial population in Russia greatly exceeds the
      urban

      population.[5]

      If we now turn to the pace at which factory industry develops in urban and
      in rural centres, we see that it is undoubtedly faster in the latter. The
      number of urban centres with 1,000 workers and over in the period taken
      grew very slightly (from 32 to 33), while the number of rural centres in
      this category grew very considerably (from 38 to 53). The number of
      workers in the 40 urban centres grew by only 16.1 % (from 257,000 to
      299,000), while in the 63 rural centres it grew by 54.7% (from 98,500 to
      152,500). The average number of workers per urban centre rose only from
      6,400 to 7,500, whereas the average number per rural centre rose from
      1,500 to 2,400. Thus, factory industry evidently tends to spread with
      particular rapidity outside the towns, to create new factory centres and
      to push them forward faster than the urban centres, and to penetrate deep
      into remote rural areas that would seem to be isolated from the world of
      big capitalist enterprises. This supremely important circumstance shows
      us, firstly, the rapidity with which large-scale machine industry
      transforms social and economic relationships. What formerly took ages to
      take shape now springs up in a decade or so. We have only to compare, for
      instance, the formation of such non-agricultural centres as the
      “handicraft villages” indicated in the previous
      chapter—Bogorodskoye, Pavlovo, Kimry, Khoteichi, Velikoye and
      others—with the process of the establishment of new centres by the
      modern factory, which at once draws the rural population by the thousands
      into industrial

      settlements.[6]

      Social division of labour

 

      receives a tremendous impetus. Mobility of the population replaces the
      former immobility and isolation as a necessary condition of economic
      life. Secondly, the transfer of factories into the rural districts shows
      that capitalism is surmounting the obstacles which the social-estate
      seclusion of the peasant community creates for it, and is even deriving
      benefit from this seclusion. While the erection of factories in the
      countryside involves quite a few inconveniences, it does, however,
      guarantee a supply of cheap labour. The muzhik is not allowed to go to the
      factory, so the factory goes to the

      muzhik.[7]

 The muzhik
      lacks complete freedom (thanks to the collective-responsibility system and
      the obstacles to his leaving the community) to seek the employer who gives
      the greatest advantage; but the employer has a perfect way of seeking out
      the cheapest worker. Thirdly, the large number of rural factory centres
      and their rapid growth proves groundless the opinion that the Russian
      factory is isolated from the mass of the peasantry, that it exercises
      little influence over them. The specific character

 

      of the distribution of our factory industry shows, on the contrary, that
      its influence is very widespread, and that it is far from being confined
      to the walls of the

      factory.[8]

 On the
      other hand, however, this specific character of the distribution of our
      factory industry cannot but result in a temporary retardation of the
      transforming influence of large-scale machine industry on the population
      it employs. By converting the backwoodsman-muzhik into a factory worker
      at one stroke, the factory may for a time ensure for itself a
      supply of the cheapest, least developed and least exacting
      “hands.” It is obvious, however, that such retardation cannot
      go on for long, and that it is purchased at the price of a still greater
      expansion of the area subjected to the influence of large-scale machine
      industry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      “. . . In the uyezds (of Moscow Gubernia) the factories and works
      are far from evenly distributed: in highly industrialised uyezds side by
      side with localities which, because of the more or less considerable
      concentration there of factory establishments, can be called real factory
      centres, one comes across entire volosts almost wholly devoid of factory
      industry; and, on the contrary, in uyezds generally poor in factories and
      works, there are districts with a more or less considerable development of
      one industry or another; side by side with handicraft cottages and
      workrooms larger establishments have arisen possessing all the attributes
      of large-scale production.” (Statistical Returns for Moscow
      Gubernia, Section of sanitation Statistics, vol. IV, Sec.1, Moscow,
      1890, p. 141.) This publication, the

 

best in contemporary factory
      statistical literature, illustrates the distribution of large-scale
      industry with the aid of a detailed map. The only thing lacking for a
      complete picture of the distribution of factory industry is a
      classification of centres according to the number of factories, workers
      and total output.—Lenin

[2]
      The table includes only establishments with a minimum output of 2,000
      rubles, and of the flour-mills only the steam-powered ones. Outside
      workers are excluded wherever it has been stated that they are included
      among factory workers; such exclusions are indicated by an asterisk
      (*). The industrial boom of 1879 could not but affect these data, too.—Lenin

[3]
      “. . . The large village of Cherkizovo in the vicinity of Moscow is,
      according to the local inhabitants, one large factory, and is a
      continuation

 

of Moscow in the literal sense of the word. . . . Nearby,
      beyond the Semyonovskaya Tollgate . . . again a large number of diverse
      factories are clustered. . . . At no great distance from here we see the
      village of Izmailovo, with its weaving sheds, and the enormous Izmailovo
      Textile Mill.” That is to the north of Moscow. To the south,
      “beyond the Serpukhov Tollgate, what we meet first is the immense
      Danilov Textile Mill, in itself a whole township. . . . Further on, at no
      great distance from each other, are a whole ring of large brick
      works,” etc. (Statistical Returns, IV, Sec. I,
      pp. 143-144). Thus, the concentration of factory industry is actually more
      considerable than we were able to indicate in our table.—Lenin

[4]
      In 1879, only 10,900 were recorded here. Evidently, different methods of
      registration were employed.—Lenin

[5]
      The population census of January 28, 1897, fully confirmed this
      conclusion. The urban population throughout the Empire was given as
      16,828,395 persons of both sexes. The commercial and industrial
      population, as we showed above, is 21.7 millions. (Note to 2nd
      edition.—Ed.)—Lenin

[6]
      “In the township of Krivoi Rog the population grew between 1887 and
      1896 from 6,000 to 17,000, at the Kamenka Works of the Dnieper
      Company—from 2,000 to 18,000; near Druzhkovka station, where as late
      as 1892 there was nothing but station buildings, there is now a settlement
      of 6,000 people; at the Gdantsevka Works there

 

are nearly 3,500 people;
      near Konstantinovka station, where a number of works have been erected, a
      new settlement is being formed; Yuzovka is now a town with a population of
      29,000. . . . On the sandy wasteland at Nizhne-Dnieprovsk, near
      Ekaterinoslav, where a number of factories are now situated, a new
      settlement has sprung up with a population of 6,000. The works at Mariupol
      has attracted a new population of 10,000, etc. Populated centres are
      springing up around the coal mines” (Vestnik Finansov,
      1897, No. 50). According to the Russkiye Vedomosti (November 21,
      1897, No. 322), the Bakhmut Uyezd Zemstvo Assembly has filed an
      application for the status of townships to be granted to commercial
      settlements with a population of 1,000 and the status of towns to those
      with a population of 5,000. . . . “There is to be observed here
      . . . an unparalleled growth of commercial and factory
      settlements. . . . Altogether, there are by now as many as thirty
      settlements, which have been springing up and growing at a truly American
      pace. . . . In Volyntsevo, where a huge metallurgical works with 2 blast
      furnaces, a foundry and a rolling mill is nearing completion and will be
      started in the beginning of November, there is a population of from 5,000
      to 6,000, which has settled on what only recently was almost uninhabited
      steppe. With the influx of a factory population we also observe an influx
      of traders, handicraftsmen and small industrialists in general, who
      anticipate an easy and rapid sale to the working population of all kinds
      of goods.”—Lenin

[7]
      “The factory seeks cheap weavers, and finds them in their native
      villages. . . . The factory must follow the weaver. . . .”
      (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 63.)—Lenin

[8]
      Let us recall the fact cited above (Chapter III, § IV, p.  208, footnote)
      of the influence exerted by the mining industry in Bakhmut Uyezd,
      Ekaterinoslav Gubernia, on the local agricultural
      system.—Characteristic also are the common complaints of landowners
      about the factories “spoiling” the population.—Lenin
 

 
  

VII. The Growth of Large Factories

|

IX. The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: IX. The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      IX. The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries
    

      One of the necessary conditions for the growth of large-scale machine
      industry (and a highly characteristic concomitant of its advance) is the
      development of the industry for the supply of fuel and building materials,
      as well as of the building industry. Let us begin with the lumber
      industry.

    
      The felling and preliminary dressing of trees for their own needs has been
      an occupation of the peasantry from time immemorial, one that nearly
      everywhere forms part of the tiller’s round of work. By the lumber
      industry, however, we mean exclusively the preparation of lumber for
      sale. Characteristic of the post-Reform period is a particularly
      rapid growth of this industry, the demand for timber having grown rapidly
      both for personal consumption (the growth of towns, the increase of the
      non-agricultural population in the villages, and the loss of woodland by
      the peasants upon their emancipation) and, particularly, for

 

      productive consumption. The development of commerce, industry, urban life,
      military requirements, railroads, etc., etc., has led to an enormous
      increase in the demand for timber to be used, not by human beings, but by
      capital. In the industrial gubernias, for instance, the price of wood fuel
      has risen “by leaps and bounds”: “in the last five years
      (up to 1881) the price of wood fuel has more than

      doubled”.[1]

      “The price of timber has begun to rise

      enormously.”[2]

      In Kostroma Gubernia “with the huge consumption of wood fuel by the
      factories the price has doubled in the past seven

      years,”[3]

      etc. Timber exports rose from 5,947,000 rubles in 1856 to 30,153,000
      rubles in 1881 and 39,200,000 rubles in 1894, i.e., in the ratio

100 : 507 : 659.[4]

 The amount of
      building timber and wood fuel transported along 1he inland waterways of
      European Russia in 1866-1868 averaged 156 million poods per

      year[5]

 and in
      1888-1890, 701 million poods per

      year,[6]

 i.e., there
      was a more than fourfold increase. The amount transported by railway in
      1888-1890 averaged 290 million

      poods,[7]

 whereas in
      1866-1868 it was probably no more than 70 million

      poods.[8]

 That is to
      say, total timber freights in the 60s amounted to about 226 million poods,
      and in 1888-1890 to 991 million poods—a more than fourfold
      increase. The vast growth of the lumber industry in precisely the post
      Reform period is thus beyond doubt.

    
      How is this industry organised? On purely capitalist lines. Forestland is
      bought from landowners by entrepreneurs—“lumber
      industrialists,” who hire workers to fell and saw the timber, to
      float it, etc. In Moscow Gubernia,

 

      for example, the Zemstvo statisticians listed only 337 lumber
      industrialists out of 24,000 peasants engaged in lumber

      industries.[9]

 In
      Slobodskoi Uyezd, Vyatka Gubernia, 123 lumber industrialists were listed
      (“the small ones are mostly subcontractors of the big ones,”
      of whom there were only 10), while the number of workers engaged in
      lumbering was 18,865, with average earnings of 19 1/2 rubles per

      worker.[10]

      Mr. S. Korolenko calculated that in the whole of European Russia as many
      as 2 million peasants were engaged in

      lumbering,[11]

 and
      this figure is hardly an exaggeration if, for instance, in 9 uyezds of
      Vyatka Gubernia (out of 11) about 56,430 lumber workers were listed, and
      in the whole of Kostroma Gubernia, about

      47,000.[12]

      Lumbering is one of the worst paid occupations; the sanitary conditions
      are atrocious, and the workers’ health is severely affected. Left to
      toil in the remote forest depths, these workers are in a totally
      defenceless position, and in this branch of industry bondage, the truck
      system, and such-like concomitants of the “patriarchal”
      peasant industries prevail. In confirmation of this description, let us
      quote some opinions of local investigators. Moscow statisticians mention
      the “compulsory purchase of provisions,” which usually reduces
      to a marked degree the lumber workers’ earnings. The Kostroma
      lumbermen “live in teams in the forests, in hastily and badly
      erected shanties, where there are no stoves, and which are heated by open
      hearths. Bad food, consisting of bad soup and of bread which is like stone
      by the end of the week, fetid air . . . constantly damp clothes . . . all
      this is bound to have a disastrous effect upon the health of the lumber
      industrialists.” The people live in “much dirtier”
      conditions in the “lumber” volosts than in the industrial
      volosts (i.e., the volosts in which outside employment

      predominates).[13]
 

      Regarding Tikhvin Uyezd, Novgorod Gubernia, we read: “Agriculture
      . . . constitutes an auxiliary source of income, although in all official
      statistics you will find that the people engage in farming. . . . All that
      the peasant gets to meet his essential needs is earned in felling and
      floating lumber for the lumber industrialists. But a crisis will set in
      soon: in some five or ten years, no forests will be left. . . .”
      “The men who work in the lumber camps are more like

      boatmen[28]; they
      spend the winter in the forest-encircled lumber camps . . . and in the
      spring, having lost the habit of working at home, are drawn to the work of
      lumber floating; harvesting and haymaking alone make them return to their
      homes. . . .” The peasants are in “perpetual bondage” to
      the lumber

      industrialists.[14]

      Vyatka investigators note that the hiring season for lumbering is usually
      arranged to coincide with tax-paying time, and that the purchase of
      provisions from the employer greatly reduces earnings. . . . “Both
      the tree fellers and the wood-choppers receive about 17 kopeks per summer
      day, and about 33 kopeks per day when they work with their own
      horses. . . . This paltry pay is an inadequate remuneration for labour, if
      we bear in mind the extremely insanitary conditions under which it is

      done,”[15]

      etc., etc.

    
      Thus, the lumber workers constitute one of the big sections of the rural
      proletariat; they have tiny plots of land and are compelled to sell their
      labour-power on the most disadvantageous terms. The occupation is
      extremely irregular and casual. The lumbermen, therefore, represent that
      form of the reserve army (or relative surplus-population in

 

      capitalist society) which theory describes as

      latent[16];

a certain (and, as we have seen, quite large)
      section of the rural population must always be ready to undertake such
      work, must always be in need of it. That is a condition for the existence
      and development of capitalism. To the extent that the forests are
      destroyed by the rapacious methods of the lumber industrialists (which
      proceeds with tremendous rapidity), an ever-growing need is felt for
      replacing wood by coal, and the coal industry, which alone is capable of
      serving as a firm basis for large-scale machine industry, develops at an
      ever faster rate. Cheap fuel, obtainable at any time and in any quantity,
      at a definite and little fluctuating price—such is the demand of the
      modern factory. The lumber industry is not in a position to meet this

      demand.[17]

 That is
      why its predominance over the coal industry as a source of fuel supply
      corresponds to a low level of capitalist development. As for the social
      relations of production, in this respect the lumber industry is to the
      coal industry approximately what capitalist manufacture is to large-scale
      machine industry. The lumber industry means a technique of the most
      elementary kind, the exploitation of natural resources by primitive
      methods; the coal industry leads to a complete technical revolution and to
      the extensive use of machinery. The lumber industry leaves the producer a
      peasant; the coal industry transforms him into a factory hand. The lumber
      industry leaves all the old, patriarchal way of life practically intact,
      enmeshing in the worst forms of bondage the workers left to toil in the
      remote forest depths and taking advantage of their ignorance,
      defencelessness and isolation. The coal industry creates mobility of the
      population, establishes large industrial centres and inevitably leads to
      the introduction of public control over

 

      production. In a word, the change-over described is of the same
      progressive significance as the replacement of the manufactory by the

      factory.[18]

      Building was originally also part of the peasant’s round of domestic
      occupations, and it continues to be so to this day wherever semi-natural
      peasant economy is preserved. Subsequent development leads to the building
      workers’ turning into specialist artisans, who work to
      customers’ orders. In the villages and small towns the building
      industry is largely organised on these lines even today; the artisan
      usually maintains his connection with the land and works for a very narrow
      circle of small clients. With the development of capitalism, the retention
      of this system of industry becomes impossible. The growth of trade,
      factories, towns and railways creates a demand for types of buildings that
      are architecturally and dimensionally different from the old buildings of
      the patriarchal epoch. The new buildings require very diverse and costly
      materials, the co-operation of masses of workers of the most varied
      specialities and a considerable length of time for their completion; the
      distribution of these new buildings does not correspond at all to the
      traditional distribution of the population; they are erected in large
      towns or suburbs, in uninhabited places, along railways in process of
      construction, etc. The local artisan turns into a migratory worker and is
      hired by an entrepreneur contractor, who gradually thrusts
      himself in between

 

      the consumer and the producer and becomes a real capitalist. The spasmodic
      development of capitalist economy, the alternation of prolonged periods of
      bad business with periods of “building booms” (like the one we
      are experiencing now, in 1898) tremendously accelerate the expansion and
      deepening of capitalist relationships in the building industry.

    
      Such, according to the material of Russian economic literature, has been
      the post-Reform evolution of the industry under

      review.[19]

 This
      evolution finds particularly striking expression in the territorial
      division of labour, in the formation of large areas in which the working
      population specialises in some particular branch of

      building.[20]

 This
      specialisation of areas presupposes the formation of large markets for
      building work and, in this connection, the rise of capitalist
      relationships. To illustrate this point let us quote data for one such
      area. Pokrov Uyezd, Vladimir Gubernia, has long been celebrated for its
      carpenters, who already at the beginning of the century constituted more
      than half the total population. After the Reform carpentry continued to

      spread.[21]

 In
      “the carpenters’ area the contractors are an element analogous
      to the subcontractors and factory owners”; they are usually drawn
      from among the most enterprising members of carpenters’
      artels. “Cases are not rare of contractors in ten years accumulating
      from 50,000 to 60,000 rubles and more of clear profit. Some of the
      contractors employ from

 

      300 to 500 carpenters and have become real capitalists. . . . It is not
      surprising that the local peasants say that ‘nothing pays so
      well as trading in

carpenters.’”[22]

 It would be hard to give a more striking
      characterisation of the quintessence of the present organisation of the
      industry!  “Carpentry has left a deep impress upon the whole of
      peasant life in this locality. . . . The peasant carpenter devotes less
      and less time to agriculture, and eventually gives it up
      altogether.” Life in the cities has laid the impress of culture on
      the carpenter: he lives a much cleaner life than do the surrounding
      peasants, and is conspicuous for his “cultured appearance,”
      for “his relatively high mental

      development.”[23]

      The total number of building workers in European Russia must be very
      considerable, judging from the fragmentary data available. In Kaluga
      Gubernia the number of building workers in 1896 was estimated at 39,860,
      both local and migratory. In Yaroslavl Gubernia there were in
      1894-95—according to official data—20,170 migratory. In
      Kostroma Gubernia there were about 39,500 migratory. In 9 uyezds of Vyatka
      Gubernia (out of 11), there were about 30,500 migratory (in the 80s). In 4
      uyezds in Tyer Gubernia (out of 12), there were 15,585, both local and
      migratory. In Gorbatov Uyezd, Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia, there were 2,221,
      both local and migratory. The number of carpenters alone who left Ryazan
      Gubernia every year to work in other districts was, according to official
      figures for 1875 and 1876, not less than 20,000. In Orel Uyezd, Orel
      Gubernia, there are 2,000

 

      building workers. In 3 uyezds of Poltava Gubernia (out of 15), there are
      1,440. In Nikolayevsk Uyezd, Samara Gubernia, there are

      1,339.[24]

 Judging
      by these figures, the number of building workers in European Russia must
      be not less than one

million.[25]

      This figure must rather be considered a minimum, for all the sources show
      that the number of building workers has grown rapidly in the post-Reform

      period.[26]

 The
      building workers are industrial proletarians in the making, whose
      connection with the land—already very slight

      today[27]

—is

      becoming slighter every year. The conditions of building workers are very
      different from those of lumber workers and are more like those of factory
      workers. They work in large urban and industrial centres, which, as we
      have seen, considerably raise their cultural standards. While the
      declining lumber industry typifies weakly developed forms of a capitalism
      that still tolerates the patriarchal way of life, the developing building
      industry typifies a higher stage of capitalism, leads to the formation of
      a new class of industrial workers, and marks a deep-going differentiation
      of the old peasantry.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, I, 61.—Lenin

[2]
Ibid., IV, 80.—Lenin

[3]
      Zhbankov, The Influence of Industries Employing Migratory Workers on
      the Movement of the Population, Kostroma, 1887, p. 25.—Lenin

[4]
Productive Forces. Russia’s Foreign Trade, p. 39. Timber
      exports in 1902—55.7 million rubles; in 1903—66.3 million
      rubles. (Note to 2nd edition.—Ed)—Lenin

[5]
Military Statistical Abstract, pp. 486-487.—Lenin

[6]
Statistical Survey of Railways and Inland Waterways,
      St. Petersburg, 1893 (published by Ministry of Communications), p. 40.—Lenin

[7]
Ibid.,
      p. 26.—Lenin

[8]
      Assuming that it amounted approximately to 1/5, of total railway freights
      (Military Statistical Abstract, p. 511; cf. 518-519).—Lenin

[9]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt. I,
      Sec. 2. Frequently in this country no distinction is made in lumbering
      between masters and workers, the latter also being described as lumber
      industrialists.—Lenin

[10]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, XI, 397.—Lenin

[11]
Hired Labour.—Lenin

[12]
      Calculated from Transactions of the Handicraft Commission.—Lenin

[13]
Loc. cit., pp. 19-20 and 39. Cf. a quite analogous
      opinion in Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, XII, 265.—Lenin

[14]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, VIII, pp. 1372-1373,
      1474. “Thanks to the requirements of the lumber industry there have
      developed in Tikhvin Uyezd the blacksmith, tanning, fur and partly the
      boot trades; the first makes boat-hooks, and the others boots, sheepskin
      coats and mittens.” Incidentally, we see here an example of how the
      making of means of production (i.e., the growth of Department I in
      capitalist economy) gives an impetus to the making of articles of
      consumption (i.e., Department II). It is not production that follows
      consumption, but consumption that follows production.—Lenin

[15]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, XI, pp. 399-400, 405,
      147. Cf. the numerous references in the Zemstvo Returns for Trubchevsk
      Uyezd, Orel Gubernia, to the fact that “agriculture is of secondary
      importance,” and that the principal part is played by industries,
      particularly lumbering (Statistical Returns for Trubchevsk Uyezd,
      Orel, 1887, particularly remarks on villages).—Lenin

[16]
Das Kapital, I2, S.

      668.[29]—Lenin

[17]
      Here is an illustration of this taken from the Report of the Members
      of the Commission of Inquiry into Factory Industry in the Kingdom of
      Poland (St. Petersburg, 1888, Pt. I). Coal in Poland costs half the
      Moscow price. The average expense of fuel per pood of yarn in Poland is 16
      to 37 kopeks, and in the Moscow area—50 to 73 kopeks. In the Moscow
      area fuel is stocked for 12 to 20 months, in Poland for not more than 3
      months, and in most cases for 1 to 4 weeks.—Lenin

[18]
      Mr. N.–on, in dealing with the replacement of the lumber by the coal
      industry (Sketches, 211, 243), confined himself, as usual, to
      mere lamentations. Our romanticist tries not to notice the trifling fact
      that behind the capitalist coal industry stands the equally capitalist
      lumber industry, which is marked by incomparably worse forms of
      exploitation. But he dwells at length on the “number of
      workers”! What are some 600,000 British miners compared to the
      millions of unemployed peasants? —he asks (211). To this we reply:
      that capitalism creates a relative surplus-population is beyond doubt, but
      Mr. N.–on has absolutely failed to see the connection between this and
      the requirements of large-scale machine industry. To compare the number of
      peasants engaged in various occupations even casually and irregularly with
      the number of specialist miners engaged exclusively in coal extraction, is
      absolutely senseless. Mr. N.–on resorts to such devices only in order to
      hide the fact of the rapid growth in Russia of both the number of factory
      and mine workers, and of the commercial and industrial population in
      general, since that mars his theory.—Lenin

[19]
      As we have had occasion to state above, it is difficult to establish this
      evolution because in our literature building workers in general are often
      called “artisans,” wage-workers being quite incorrectly
      classified in this category.—Regarding the analogous development of
      the organisation of the building industry in the West see, for instance
      Webb, Die Geschichte des britischen Trade Unionismus, Stuttgart,
      1895,

S. 7.[30]—Lenin

[20]
      In Yaroslavl Gubernia, for instance, Danilov Uyezd is particularly famous
      for its stove builders, plasterers and bricklayers its different volosts
      mainly supplying specialists in one or other of these trades. Quite a
      large number of painters come from the Trans-volga part of Yaroslavl
      Uyezd; carpenters come from the central part of Mologa Uyezd,
      etc. (Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia, Vol II, Yaroslavl, 1896,
      p. 135 and others.)—Lenin

[21]
      At the end of the 50s, about 10,000 carpenters used to leave the Argunovo
      district (Argunovo Volost is the centre of the industry). In the 60s, out
      of 548 villages in the Pokrov Uyezd, 503 were engaged in carpentry
      (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, IV, p. 161, and foll.).—Lenin

[22]
Ibid., pp. 164-165. Our italics.—Lenin

[23]
Ibid., 165-166. Similar descriptions may be found in other
      sources. See Zhbankov: The Influence of Industries Employing Migratory
      Workers on the Movement of the Population of Kostroma Gubernia in
      1866-1883, Kostroma, 1887.—Urban Peasant Employments in
      Soligalich Uyezd, Kostroma Gubernia, in Yuridichesky
      Vestnik, 1890, No.9.—Women’s Country, Kostroma,
      1891.—Essay in Drafting a General Programme for the
      Investigation of Peasant Outside Employments.— Industries
      Employing Migratory Workers in Smolensk Gubernia in 1892-1895,
      Smolensk, 1896.—The Influence of Industries Employing Migratory
      Workers on the Movement of the Population, in Vrach
      (Physician ), 1895, No. 25.—See also above-mentioned
      Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia, Transactions of the Handicraft
      Commission, Statistical Survey of Kaluga Gubernia for 1896,
      Kaluga, 1897; Agricultural Survey of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia for
      1896, Nizhni-Novgorod, 1897, and other Zemstvo statistical
      publications.—Lenin

[24]
      Sources, apart from those mentioned in the preceding foot note, are
      Zemstvo returns. Mr. V. V. (Essays on Handicraft Industry, 61)
      cites data for 13 uyezds in Poltava, Kursk and Tambov gubernias. The total
      number of building workers (Mr. V. V. classifies them all; and wrongly so,
      as “small industrialists”) is 28,644, ranging from 2.7% to
      22.1% of the total adult male population of the uyezds. If we take the
      average percentage (8.8%) as the standard, the number of building workers
      in European Russia would be 1 1/3 million (counting 15 million adult male
      workers). The gubernias mentioned occupy a position midway between those
      where the building industries are most developed and those where they are
      least developed.—Lenin

[25]
      The census of January 28, 1897 (General Summary, 1905), gives the
      number of the independent population (those earning their own
      livelihood) engaged in the building industry throughout the Empire as
      717,000, plus 469,000 cultivators occupied in this industry as a side
      line. (Note to 2nd edition.—Ed.)—Lenin

[26]
      Fire insurance figures may, to some extent, help us to gauge the
      dimensions of the building industry. The value of buildings covered by
      fire insurance amounted to 5,968 million rubles in 1884, and to 7,854
      million rubles in 1893. (Productive Forces, XII, 65.) This shows
      an annual increase of 188 million rubles.—Lenin

[27]
      In Yaroslavl Gubernia, for example, 11 to 20% of the total population, or
      30 to 56%, of the male workers, leave their homes in search of work- 68.7%
      of those who leave are away all the year round (Survey of
      Yaroslavl Gubernia ). Obviously, all these are “peasants only
      by official designation ” (p. 117).—Lenin
 


[28]
Boatmen—workers who towed river craft by rope, or rowed
      them.  [p. 528]
    


[29]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 642.  [p.  529]
    


[30]
      While in exile in the village of Shushenskoye, Lenin, assisted by
      Krupskaya, translated volume one and edited the translation of volume two
      of The History of Trade Unionism, by Sidney and Beatrice
      Webb. Volume one of the Webbs’ book “translated from the
      English by Vladimir Ilyin” (i.e., Lenin) was published in
      St. Petersburg in 1900 by O. N. Popova. Volume two appeared in 1901.  [p.
      531]
    

 
  

VIII. The Distribution of Large-Scale Industry

|

X. The Appendage to the Factory

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Appendage to the Factory




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: X. The Appendage to the Factory








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      X. The Appendage to the Factory
    

      By the appendage to the factory we mean those forms of wage-labour and
      small industry whose existence is directly connected with the
      factory. These include, first of all (in part), the lumber and building
      workers, of whom we have spoken and who in some cases directly form part
      of the industrial population of factory centres, and in others belong to
      the population of surrounding

      villages.[1]

 Further,
      they include workers employed on peat bogs—which are sometimes
      worked by factory owners

      themselves[2];

      carters, loaders, packers, and so-called labourers generally, who always
      constitute a fairly considerable part of the population of industrial
      centres. In St. Petersburg, for instance, the census of December 15, 1890,
      registered 44,814 persons (of both sexes) in the group of “day
      labourers and labourers”; then 51,000 persons (of both sexes) in the
      carting industry, of whom 9,500 are specially engaged in carting heavy and
      miscellaneous loads. Further, certain auxiliary work is done for factories
      by small “independent” industrialists; in factory centres or
      their environs such industries spring up as barrel-making for oil-mills
      and

      distilleries,[3]

      basket-making for packing

      glassware,[4]

      packing-case making for hardware, the making of wooden

 

      handles for joiners’ and fitters’

      tools,[5]

 the making
      of brads for footwear factories, and of “tanning” for leather
      works,

      etc.,[6]

 the weaving
      of bast-matting for the packing of factory wares (in the Kostroma and
      other gubernias), the making of “sticks” for matches (in the
      Ryazan, Kaluga and other gubernias), cardboard-box making for tobacco
      factories (in the environs of

St. Petersburg),[7]

 the
      making of wood-dust for vinegar

      factories,[8]

 the
      spinning of waste yarn in small spinning sheds (in Lodz), which has
      developed owing to the demand created by the big

      mills,[9]

 etc.,
      etc. All these small industrialists, like the wage-workers referred to
      above, belong either to the industrial population of factory centres, or
      to the semi-agricultural population of the surrounding
      villages. Furthermore, when a factory’s work is limited to the
      production of a semi-manufactured article, small industries are sometimes
      called into existence which engage in treating it further; for example,
      machine spinning has given an impetus to handicraft weaving, and
      “handicraft” producers of metal goods cluster around
      ironworks, etc. Finally, capitalist domestic industry is often an
      appendage to the

      factory.[10]

 The
      epoch of large-scale machine industry is marked in all countries by the
      extensive development of capitalist domestic industry in such branches as,
      for

 

      example, ready-made clothing. We have spoken above of the wide extent of
      such industry in Russia, of the conditions peculiar to it and of the
      reason for considering it more correct to describe it in the chapter on
      manufacture.

    
      In order to give anything like a full description of the appendage to the
      factory one needs complete statistics on the occupations of the
      population, or monographic descriptions of the entire economic life of
      factory centres and their environs. But even the fragmentary data with
      which we have had to content ourselves show the incorrectness of the
      opinion widespread here that factory industry is isolated from other forms
      of industry, that the factory population is isolated from the population
      not employed in factories. The development of forms of industry, like that
      of all social relationships in general, cannot but proceed very gradually,
      among a mass of interlocking, transitional forms and seeming reversions to
      the past. Thus, the growth of small industries may express (as we have
      seen) the progress of capitalist manufacture; now we see that the factory,
      too, may sometimes develop small industries. Work for the
      “buyer-up,” is also an appendage to both the manufactory and
      the factory. To give a proper assessment of the significance of such
      phenomena, we must consider them in conjunction with the whole structure
      of industry at the given stage of its development and with the main trends
      of this development.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      For instance, in Ryazan Gubernia “at the Khludov factory
      alone” (1894-95—4,849 workers, output 6 million rubles),
      “as many as 7,000 horses are engaged in the winter in wood-carting,
      most of them belonging to peasants of the Yegoryevsk

      Uyezd”[11]
      (Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, VII, pp. 1109-1110).—Lenin

[2]
      Chaos also reigns in the statistics for the peat industry. As a rule this
      industry is not classified among the “factory” trades
      (cf. Kobelyatsky, Handbook, p. 15), although at times it is. For
      instance, the List gives 12 peat fields employing 2,201 workers
      in Vladimir Gubernia and in that gubernia alone, although peat is
      extracted in other gubernias as well. According to Svirsky (Factories
      and Works of Vladimir Gubernia ), in 1890 there were 6,038 persons
      employed in extracting peat in Vladimir Gubernia. The total number of
      workers in Russia employed in the extraction of peat must be many times
      greater.—Lenin

[3]
Transactions of the Handicraft Commission, Vol. VI.—Lenin

[4]
Ibid.,
      Vol. VIII, in Novgorod Gubernia.—Lenin

[5]
Ibid., Vol. IX, in the suburban volosts of Tula Uyezd.—Lenin

[6]
      In Perm Gubernia, near the town of Kungur, in Tver Gubernia in the village
      of Kimry, etc.—Lenin

[7]
      See Report of the Zemstvo Board of the St. Petersburg Uyezd for
      1889. Mr. Voinov’s report on Medical District V.—Lenin

[8]
Reports and Investigations, I, p. 360.—Lenin

[9]
Reports of Inquiry into Factory Industry in the Kingdom of
      Poland, St. Petersburg, 1888, p. 24.—Lenin

[10]
      In the List we counted 16 factories, each employing 1,000 and
      more workers on their premises, which had additionally a total of 7,857
      outside workers. Fourteen factories, each with from 50.0 to 999 workers,
      employed 1,352 outside workers. The registration of outside work by the
      List is quite haphazard and full of gaps. The Collection of
      Factory Inspectors’ Reports estimates for 1903 a total of 632
      work-distributing offices, giving work to 65,115 workers. These data are
      very incomplete, of course; nevertheless, it is characteristic that the
      overwhelming majority of these offices, and the workers they employ,
      relate to centres of factory industry (Moscow area: 503 offices 49,345
      workers; Saratov Gubernia—Sarpinka fabrics—33 offices, 10,000
      workers). (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin
 


[11]
      The “Khludov Factory,” the property of the brothers A. and
      G. Khludov was situated in the town of Yegoryovsk Ryazan Gubernia. The
      firm’s full title was: “Yegoryevsk Cotton-Spinning Factory
      Co., A. and G. Khludov.” The bracketed data (showing the number of
      workers and the value of output) given in Lenin’s footnote were
      taken from the List of Factories, St. Petersburg, 1897, Issue
      No. 763.  [p.  534]
    

 
  

IX. The Development of the Lumber and Building Industries

|

XI. The Complete Separation of Industry From Agriculture

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Complete Separation of Industry from Agriculture




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: XI. The Complete Separation of Industry From Agriculture








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      XI. The Complete Separation of Industry From Agriculture
    

      The complete separation of industry from agriculture is effected only by
      large-scale machine industry. The Russian facts fully confirm this thesis,
      which was established by the author of Capital for other

      countries,[1]

 but
      which is usually ignored by the Narodnik economists. Mr. N.–on in his
      Sketches talks in and out of season about “the separation
      of industry from agriculture,” without, however, taking the trouble
      to examine, on the basis of precise data,

 

      how this process is actually taking place and what different forms it
      assumes. Mr. V. V. points to the connection of our industrial worker with
      the land (in manufacture ; our author does not think it necessary
      to distinguish the various stages of capitalism, although he pretends he
      is following the theory of the author of Capital !) and declaims
      in this regard about the “shameful (sic !)
      dependence” “of our (author’s italics)
      capitalist industry” upon the worker farmer, etc. (Destiny of
      Capitalism, p. 114 and others). Mr. V. V. has apparently not heard,
      or has forgotten if he has beard, that not only in “our
      country” but everywhere in the West, capitalism failed to bring
      about the complete separation of the workers from the land before
      large-scale machine industry was established. Finally, Mr. Kablukov has
      quite recently presented his students with the following amazing
      distortion of the facts: “Whereas in the West work in the factory is
      the sole means of livelihood for the worker, in our country, with
      relatively few exceptions (sic !!!), the worker regards work
      in the factory as a subsidiary occupation, he is more attracted to the

land.”[2]

      A factual analysis of this question has been made in Mr. Dementyev’s
      essay on the “factory workers’ connection with
      agriculture” in the Moscow sanitary

      statistics.[3]

      Systematically collated statistics embracing about 20,000 workers have
      shown that only 14.1% of the factory workers leave for agricultural
      employment. But far more important is the fact, proved in the greatest
      detail in the work mentioned, that it is precisely machine production
      that divorces the workers from the land. Of a whole series of figures
      quoted in proof of this fact we select the following most striking

      ones.[4]







      We have supplemented the author’s table by dividing 8 of the trades
      into those carried on by hand and those by machinery. As regards the
      ninth, felt cloth production, let us note that it is conducted partly by
      hand and partly by machinery. Of the weavers in hand-loom factories about
      63% leave for field-work, while of those working on power-looms not one
      leaves; of the workers in departments of cloth mills that are mechanised
      3.3% leave. “Thus, the most important reason for factory workers
      breaking their ties with the land is the transition from hand to machine
      production. Despite the still relatively considerable number of factories
      with hand production, the number of workers employed in them, as compared
      with the number in factories with machine production, is quite negligible,
      that is why, of those who leave for field-work, we get proportions as
      small as 14.1% of adult workers in general and 15.4% of adult workers
      belonging exclusively to the peasant social

      estate.”[5]

 Let
      us recall that the returns of the sanitary inspection of factories in
      Moscow Gubernia gave the following figures: mechanical factories, 22.6% of
      the total (including 18.4% using steam-engines); in these, 80.7% of the
      total number of workers are concentrated. Hand-labour factories constitute
      69.2%, employing only 16.2% of the total number of workers. At the 244
      mechanised factories there are 92,302 workers (378 workers per factory),
      while at the 747 hand labour factories there are 18,520 workers (25
      workers per

 

      factory).[6]

 We have
      shown above the considerable concentration of all Russian factory workers
      in the largest enterprises, mostly mechanised, which have an average of
      488 and more workers per establishment. Mr. Dementyev has studied in
      detail the influence of the workers’ place of birth on their
      separation from the land, differences between local-born and migrant
      workers, differences in social estate (burgher or peasant), etc., and it
      turned out that all these differences are eclipsed by the influence of the
      main factor: the transition from hand to machine

      production.[7]

      “Whatever causes may have helped to turn the former cultivator into
      a factory worker, these special workers already exist. They are merely
      counted as peasants, but their only connection with the village is by way
      of the taxes they pay when renewing their passports, for actually they
      have no farm in the village, and very often not even a house, which has
      usually been sold. Even their right to land they retain only juridically,
      so to speak, and the disorders that took place in 1885-1886 at many
      factories showed that these workers themselves feel totally alien to the
      village, just as the peasants in their turn regard them, offspring of
      their fellow-villagers, as strangers. We are consequently faced with an
      already crystallised class of workers, possessing no homes of their own
      and virtually no property, a class bound by no ties and living from hand
      to mouth. And its origin does not date from yesterday. It has its factory
      genealogy, and a fairly large section of it is already in its third

      generation.”[8]

      Lastly, interesting material on the separation of the factory from
      agriculture

 

      is provided by the latest factory statistics. The List of Factories
      and Works (data for 1894-95) gives information on the number of days
      in the year during which each factory operates. Mr. Kasperov hastened to
      use these data in support of the Narodnik theories when he calculated that
      “on the average, the Russian factory works 165 days a year,”
      that “35% of the factories in this country work less than 200 days a

      year.”[9]

 It
      goes without saying that in view of the vagueness of the term
      “factory,” such overall figures are practically valueless,
      since they do not indicate how many workers are employed for specific
      numbers of days in the year. We have computed the appropriate figures of
      the List for those large factories (with 100 and more workers)
      which, as we have seen above (§ VII), employ about 3/4 of the total number
      of factory workers. It turns out that the average number of working days
      per year in the different categories was as follows: A) 242; B) 235;

C) 273,[10]

 and for
      all the large factories, 244. If we calculate the average number of
      working days per worker we will get 253 working days per year as the
      average number per worker of a large factory. Of the 12 sections into
      which the various trades are divided in the List, only in one is
      the average number of working days, for the bottom categories, below 200,
      namely in section XI (food products): A) 189; B) 148; C) 280. Factories in
      categories A and B in this section employ 110,588
      workers, which is 16.2% of the total number of workers in the large
      factories (655,670). We would point out that this section combines quite
      diverse trades, e.g., beet-sugar and tobacco, distilling and
      flour-milling, etc. For the remaining sections the average number of
      working days per factory is as follows: A) 259; B) 271; C) 272. Thus, the
      larger the factories the greater the number of days they operate in the
      course of the year. The general data for all the biggest factories in
      European Russia, therefore, confirm the conclusions of the Moscow sanitary
      statistical returns

 

      and prove that the factory creates a class of permanent factory workers.

    
      So then, the data on Russian factory workers fully confirm the theory of
      Capital that it is large-scale machine industry that brings about
      a complete and definite revolution in the conditions of life of the
      industrial population, separating it once and for all from agriculture and
      from the century-old traditions of patriarchal life connected with
      it. But, by destroying patriarchal and petty-bourgeois relationships,
      large-scale machine industry creates, on the other hand, conditions which
      draw wage-workers in agriculture and industry closer together: firstly, it
      introduces into the rural districts generally the commercial and
      industrial way of life which has first arisen in the non-agricultural
      centres; secondly, it creates mobility of the population and large markets
      for the hiring of both agricultural and industrial workers; thirdly, by
      introducing machinery into agriculture, large-scale machine industry
      brings into the rural districts skilled industrial workers, distinguished
      for their higher standard of living.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Das Kapital, I2,

S. 779-780.[11]—Lenin

[2]
Lectures on Agricultural (sic !)  Economics,
      edition for students, Moscow, 1897, p, 13. Perhaps our learned
      statistician thinks that we may regard as “relatively few
      exceptions” 85% of all cases (see further in text)?—Lenin

[3]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Section of Sanitation
      Statistics, Vol. IV, Sec. II, Moscow, 1893. Reprinted in
      Mr. Dementyev’s well-known work: The Factory, etc.—Lenin

[4]
Statistical Returns, loc. cit., p. 292. The
      Factory, 2nd ed., p. 36.—Lenin

[5]
Returns, p. 280. The Factory, p. 26.—Lenin

[6]
Returns, Vol. IV, Sec. I, pp. 167, 170, 177.—Lenin

[7]
      Mr, 

      Zhbankov, in his Sanitary Investigation of Factories and Works of
      Smolensk Gubernia (Smolensk, 1894-1896), estimates the number of
      workers who leave for field-work at approximately a mere 10 to 15% at the
      Yartsevo Textile Mill only (Vol II, pp. 307, 445, in 1893-1894 the
      Yartsevo Mill employed 3,106 out of the 8,810 factory workers in Smolensk
      Gubernia). Of the men 28% (average for all factories, 29%) and of the
      women 18.6% (average for all factories, 21%) employed in this factory were
      casual workers, (See Vol. II, p. 469.) It should be noted that the casual
      workers include 1) those employed at the factory for less than a year; 2)
      those who leave for summer work in the fields, 3) those “who for
      various reasons ceased work at the factory for several years” (II,
      445).—Lenin

[8]
Returns, p. 296. The Factory, pp. 44-46.—Lenin

[9]
Statistical Summary of Russia’s Industrial Development. A
      paper read by M. 1. Tugan-Baranovsky, member of the Free Economic Society,
      and the debate on this paper at the sessions of section
      III. St. Petersburg, 1898, p. 41.—Lenin

[10]
      Let us recall that category A includes factories with 100 to 499
      workers, B, with 500 to 999, and C, with 1,000 and more.—Lenin
 


[11]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 747-749.  [p.  536]
    

 
  

X. The Appendage to the Factory

|

XII. Three Stages in the Development of Capitalism in Russian Industry

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Three Stages in the Development of Capitalism in Russian Industry




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Seven: XII. Three Stages in the Development of Capitalism in Russian Industry








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VII. The Development of Large-Scale Machine Industry




      XII. Three Stages in the Development of Capitalism in
      Russian Industry
    

      Let us now sum up the main conclusions to be drawn from the data on the
      development of capitalism in our

industry.[1]

      There are three main stages in this development: small
      commodity-production (small, mainly peasant industries); capitalist
      manufacture; and the factory (large-scale machine industry). The facts
      utterly refute the view widespread here in Russia that
      “factory” and “handicraft” industry are isolated
      from each other. On the contrary, such a division is purely
      artificial. The connection and continuity between the forms of industry
      mentioned is of the most direct and intimate kind. The facts quite clearly
      show that the main trend of small commodity-production is towards the
      development of capitalism, in particular, towards the rise of manufacture;
      and manufacture is

 

      growing with enormous rapidity before our very eyes into large-scale
      machine industry. Perhaps one of the most striking manifestations of the
      intimate and direct connection between the consecutive forms of industry
      is the fact that many of the big and even the biggest factory owners were
      at one time the smallest of small industrialists and passed through all
      the stages from “popular production” to
      “capitalism.” Savva Morozov was a peasant serf (he purchased
      his freedom in 1820), a cowherd, a carter, a worker weaver, a handicraft
      weaver who used to journey to Moscow on foot in order to sell his goods to
      buyers-up; then he became the owner of a small establishment, a
      work-distributing office, a factory. When he died in 1862, he and his
      numerous sons owned two large factories. In 1890, the 4 factories
      belonging to his descendants employed 39,000 workers, producing goods to
      the value of 35 million

      rubles.[2]

 In the
      silk industry of Vladimir Gubernia, a number of big factory owners were
      formerly worker weavers or “handicraft”

      weavers.[3]

 The
      biggest factory owners in Ivanovo-Voznesensk (the Kuvayevs, Fokins,
      Zubkovs, Kokushkins, Bobrovs and many others) were formerly

      handicraftsmen.[4]

      The brocade factories in Moscow Gubernia all grew out of handicraft

      workrooms.[5]

      The factory owner Zavyalov, of Pavlovo district, still had in 1864
      “a vivid recollection of the time when he was a plain employee of
      craftsman

      Khabarov.”[6]

      Factory owner Varypayev used to be a small handicrafts

      man.[7]

 Kondratov was
      a handicraftsman who used to walk to Pavlovo carrying his wares in a

      bag.[8]

 Millowner
      Asmolov used to be a pedlars’ horse-driver, then a small trader,
      then proprietor of a small tobacco workshop, and finally owner of a
      factory with a turnover of many

      millions.[9]
 

      And so on and so forth. It would be interesting to see how, in these and
      similar cases, the Narodnik economists would determine where
      “artificial” capitalism begins and
      “people’s” industry ends.

    
      The three main forms of industry enumerated above differ first of all in
      their systems of technique. Small commodity-production is characterised by
      its totally primitive, hand technique that remained unchanged almost from
      time immemorial. The small producer in industry remains a peasant who
      follows tradition in his methods of processing raw material. Manufacture
      introduces division of labour, which effects a substantial change in
      technique and transforms the peasant into a factory-hand, a
      “labourer performing one detailed operation.” But production
      by hand remains, and, on its basis, progress in methods of production is
      inevitably very slow. Division of labour springs up spontaneously and is
      passed on by tradition just as peasant labour is. Large-scale machine
      industry alone introduces a radical change, throws manual skill overboard,
      transforms production on new, rational principles, and systematically
      applies science to production. So long as capitalism in Russia did not
      organise large-scale machine industry, and in those industries in which it
      has not done so yet, we see almost complete stagnation in technique, we
      see the employment of the same hand-loom and the same watermill or
      windmill that were used in production centuries ago. On the other hand, in
      industries subordinated to the factory we observe a complete technical
      revolution and extremely rapid progress in the methods of machine
      production.

    
      We see that the different stages of the development of capitalism are
      connected with different systems of technique. Small commodity-production
      and manufacture are characterised by the prevalence of small
      establishments, from among which only a few large ones emerge. Large-scale
      machine industry completely eliminates the small
      establishments. Capitalist relationships arise in the small industries too
      (in the form of workshops employing wage-workers and of merchant’s
      capital), but these are still poorly developed and are not crystallised in
      sharp oppositions between the groups participating in production. Neither
      big capital nor extensive proletarian strata as yet exist.

 

In manufacture
      we see the rise of both. The gulf between the one who owns the means of
      production and the one who works now becomes very
      wide. “Wealthy” industrial settlements spring up, the bulk of
      whose inhabitants are poor working people. A small number of merchants,
      who do an enormous business buying raw materials and selling finished
      goods, and a mass of detail workers living from hand to mouth—such
      is the general picture of manufacture. But the multitude of small
      establishments, the retention of the tie with the land, the adherence to
      tradition in production and in the whole manner of living— all this
      creates a mass of intermediary elements between the extremes of
      manufacture and retards the development of these extremes. In large-scale
      machine industry all these retarding factors disappear; the acuteness of
      social contradictions reaches the highest point. All the dark sides of
      capitalism become concentrated, as it were: the machine, as we know, gives
      a tremendous impulse to the greatest possible prolongation of the working
      day; women and children are drawn into industry; a reserve army of
      unemployed is formed (and must be formed by virtue of the conditions of
      factory production), etc. However, the socialisation of labour effected on
      a vast scale by the factory, and the transformation of the sentiments and
      conceptions of the people it employs (in particular, the destruction of
      patriarchal and petty-bourgeois traditions) cause a reaction: large-scale
      machine industry, unlike the preceding stages, imperatively calls for the
      planned regulation of production and public control over it (a
      manifestation of the latter tendency is factory

      legislation).[10]

      The very character of the development of production changes at the various
      stages of capitalism. In the small industries this development follows in
      the wake of the development of peasant economy; the market is extremely
      narrow, the distance between the producer and the consumer is short, and
      the insignificant scale of production easily adapts itself to the slightly
      fluctuating local demand. That

 

is why industry at this stage is
      characterised by the greatest stability, but this stability is tantamount
      to stagnation in technique and the preservation of patriarchal social
      relationships tangled up with all sorts of survivals of medieval
      traditions. The manufactories work for a big market— sometimes for
      the whole country—and, accordingly, production acquires the
      instability characteristic of capitalism, an instability which attains the
      greatest intensity under factory production. Large-scale machine industry
      can only develop in spurts, in alternating periods of prosperity and of
      crisis. The ruin of small producers is tremendously accelerated by this
      spasmodic growth of the factory; the workers are drawn into the factory in
      masses during a boom period, and are then thrown out. The formation of a
      vast reserve army of unemployed, ready to undertake any kind of work,
      becomes a condition for the existence and development of large-scale
      machine industry. In Chapter II we showed from which strata of the
      peasantry this army is recruited, and in subsequent chapters we indicated
      the main types of occupations for which capital keeps these reserves
      ready. The “instability” of large-scale machine industry has
      always evoked, and continues to evoke, reactionary complaints from
      individuals who continue to look at things through the eyes of the small
      producer and who forget that it is this “instability” alone
      that replaced the former stagnation by the rapid transformation of methods
      of production and of all social relationships.

    
      One of the manifestations of this transformation is the separation of
      industry from agriculture, the liberation of social relations in industry
      from the traditions of the feudal and patriarchal system that weigh down
      on agriculture. In small commodity-production the industrialist has not
      yet emerged at all from his peasant shell; in the majority of cases he
      remains a farmer, and this connection between small industry and small
      agriculture is so profound that we observe the interesting law of the
      parallel differentiation of the small producers in industry and in
      agriculture. The formation of a petty bourgeoisie and of wage-workers
      proceeds simultaneously in both spheres of the national economy, thereby
      preparing the way, at both poles of differentiation, for the industrialist
      to break with agriculture.

 

Under manufacture this break is already very
      considerable. A whole number of industrial centres arise that do not
      engage in agriculture. The chief representative of industry is no longer
      the peasant, but the merchant and the manufactory owner on the one hand,
      and the “artisan” on the other. Industry and the relatively
      developed commercial intercourse with the rest of the world raise the
      standard of living and the culture of the population; the peasant is now
      regarded with disdain by the manufactory workman. Large-scale machine
      industry completes this transformation, separates industry from
      agriculture once and for all, and, as we have seen, creates a special
      class of the population totally alien to the old peasantry and differing
      from the latter in its manner of living, its family relationships and its
      higher standard of requirements, both material and

      spiritual.[11]

 In
      the small industries and in manufacture we always find survivals of
      patriarchal relations and of diverse forms of personal dependence, which,
      in the general conditions of capitalist economy, exceedingly worsen the
      condition of the working people, and degrade and corrupt them. Large-scale
      machine industry, which concentrates masses of workers who often come from
      various parts of the country, absolutely refuses to tolerate survivals of
      patriarchalism and personal dependence, and is marked by a truly
      “contemptuous attitude to the past.” It is this break with
      obsolete tradition that is one of the substantial conditions which have
      created the possibility and evoked the necessity of regulating production
      and of public control over it. In particular, speaking of the
      transformation brought about by the factory in the conditions of life of
      the population, it must be stated that the drawing of women and juveniles
      into

      production[12]

 is,
      at bottom, progressive. It is

 

indisputable that the capitalist factory
      places these categories of the working population in particularly hard
      conditions, and that for them it is particularly necessary to regulate and
      shorten the working day, to guarantee hygienic conditions of labour, etc.;
      but endeavours completely to ban the work of women and juveniles in
      industry, or to maintain the patriarchal manner of life that ruled out
      such work, would be reactionary and utopian. By destroying the patriarchal
      isolation of these categories of the population who formerly never emerged
      from the narrow circle of domestic, family relationships, by drawing them
      into direct participation in social production, large-scale machine
      industry stimulates their development and increases their independence, in
      other words, creates conditions of life that are incomparably superior to
      the patriarchal immobility of pre-capitalist

      relations.[13]




      The settled character of the population is typical of the first two stages
      of industrial development. The small industrialist, remaining a peasant,
      is bound to his village by his farm. The artisan under manufacture is
      usually tied to the small, isolated industrial area which is created by
      manufacture. In the very system of industry at the first and second stages
      of its development there is nothing to disturb this settled and isolated
      condition of the producer. Intercourse between the various industrial
      areas is rare. The transfer of industry to other areas is due only to the
      migration of individual small producers, who establish new small
      industries in the outlying parts of the country. Large-scale machine
      industry, on the other hand, necessarily creates mobility of the
      population; commercial intercourse between the various districts grows
      enormously; railways facilitate travel. The demand for labour increases on
      the whole—rising in periods of boom and falling in periods of
      crisis, so that it becomes a necessity for workers to go from one factory
      to another, from one part of the country to another. Large-scale machine
      industry creates a number of new industrial centres, which grow up with
      unprecedented rapidity, sometimes in unpopulated places, a thing that
      would be impossible without the mass migration of workers. Further on we
      shall speak of the dimensions and the significance of the so-called
      outside non-agricultural industries. At the moment we shall limit
      ourselves to a brief presentation of Zemstvo sanitation statistics for
      Moscow Gubernia. An inquiry among 103,175 factory workers showed that
      53,238, or 51.6% of the total, were born in the uyezd in which they
      worked. Hence, nearly half the workers had migrated from one uyezd to
      another. The number of workers who were born in Moscow Gubernia was
      66,038, or

      64%.[14]

 More than
      a third of the workers came from other gubernias (chiefly from gubernias
      of the central industrial zone adjacent to Moscow

 

Gubernia). A comparison
      of the different uyezds shows the most highly industrialised ones to be
      marked by the lowest percentage of locally-born workers. For example, in
      the poor]y 

      industrialised Mozhaisk and Volokolamsk uyezds from 92 to 93%
      of the factory workers are natives of the uyezd where they work. In the
      very highly industrialised Moscow, Kolomna and Bogorodsk uyezds the
      percentage of locally born workers drops to 24%, 40% and 50%. From this
      the investigators draw the conclusion that “the considerable
      development of factory production in an uyezd encourages the influx of
      outside

      elements.”[15]

 These facts show also (let us add) that the
      movement of industrial workers bears the same features that we observed in
      the movement of agricultural workers. That is to say, industrial workers,
      too, migrate not only from localities where there is a surplus of labour,
      but also from those where there is a shortage. For example, the Bronnitsi
      Uyezd attracts 1,125 workers from other uyezds of Moscow Gubernia and from
      other gubernias, while at the same time providing 1,246 workers for the
      more highly industrialised Moscow and Bogorodsk uyezds. Hence, workers
      leave not only because they do not find “local occupations at
      hand,” but also because they make for the places where conditions
      are better. Elementary as this fact is, it is worth while giving the
      Narodnik economists a further reminder of it, for they idealise local
      occupations and condemn migration to industrial districts, ignoring the
      progressive significance of the mobility of the population created by
      capitalism.

    
      The above-described characteristic features which distinguish large-scale
      machine industry from the preceding forms of industry may be summed up in
      the words—socialisation of labour. Indeed, production for an
      enormous national and international market, development of close
      commercialties with various parts of the country and with different
      countries for the purchase of raw and auxiliary materials, enormous
      technical progress, concentration of production and of the population in
      colossal enterprises, demolition of the worn-out traditions of patriarchal
      life,

 

creation of mobility of the population, and improvement of the
      worker’s standard of requirements and his development—all
      these are elements of the capitalist process which is increasingly
      socialising production in the country, and with it those who participate
      in

      production.[16]

      On the problem of the relation of large-scale machine industry in Russia
      to the home market for capitalism, the data given above lead to the
      following conclusion. The rapid development of factory industry in Russia
      is creating an enormous and ever-growing market for means of production
      (building materials, fuel, metals, etc.) and is increasing with particular
      rapidity the part of the population engaged in

 

making articles of
      productive and not personal consumption. But the market for articles of
      personal consumption is also growing rapidly, owning to the growth of
      large-scale machine industry, which is diverting an increasingly large
      part of the population from agriculture into commercial and industrial
      occupations. As for the home market for factory-made products, the process
      of the formation of that market was examined in detail in the early
      chapters of this book.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      Confining ourselves, as stated in the preface, to the post-Reform period,
      we leave aside the forms of industry that were based on the labour of the
      serf population.—Lenin

[2]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, IV,
      5-7. —Directory for 1890.—Shishmaryov: A Brief
      Sketch of Industry in the Region of the Nizhni-Novgorod and Shuya-Ivanow
      Railways, St. Petersburg, 1892, pp. 28-32.—Lenin

[3]
Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, p. 7 and foll.—Lenin

[4]
      Shishmaryov, 56-62.—Lenin

[5]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Vol. VII, Pt. III,
      Moscow, 1883, pp. 27-28.—Lenin

[6]
      A. Smirnov, Pavlovo and Vorsma, p. 14.—Lenin

[7]
      Labzin, loc. cit., p. 66.—Lenin

[8]
      Grigoryev, loc. cit., p. 36.—Lenin

[9]
Historico-Statistical Survey, Vol. II, p. 27.—Lenin

[10]
      On the connection between factory legislation and the conditions and
      relationships brought into being by large-scale machine industry, see
      Mr. Tugan-Baranovsky’s book, The Russian Factory, Chapter
      II, Part 2, and especially the article in Novoye Slovo of July
      1897.—Lenin

[11]
      Regarding the “factory hand” type cf. above, Chapter VI, § II,
      5, pp. 404-405.— Also Statistical Returns for Moscow
      Gubernia, Vol VII, Pt. III, Moscow, 1883, p. 58 (the factory hand is
      a moralist, a “smart alec”).— Nizhni-Novgorod
      Handbook, I, pp. 42-43- Vol. IV, p. 335.— Industries of
      Vladimir Gubernia, III, 113-114 and elsewhere.— Novoye
      Slovo, Oct. 1897, p. 63.—Cf. also the above-mentioned works of
      Mr. Zhbankov which describe the workers who go off to the towns to
      commercial and industrial occupations.—Lenin

[12]
      According to the Directory, the factories and works of European
      Russia in 1890 employed a total of 875,764 workers of whom 210,207 (24%)
      were women, 17,793 (2%) boys, and 8,216 (1%) girls.—Lenin

[13]
      “The poor woman-weaver follows her father and husband to the factory
      and works alongside of them and independently of them. She is as much a
      breadwinner as the man is.” “In the factory . . . the woman is
      quite an independent producer, apart from her husband.” Literacy
      spreads among the women factory workers with remarkable
      rapidity. (Industries of Vladimir Gubernia, III, 113, 118, 112
      and elsewhere.)  Mr. Kharizomenov is perfectly right in drawing the
      following conclusion: industry destroys “the economic dependence of
      the woman on the family . . . and on the husband. . . . At the factory,
      the woman is the equal of the man; this is the equality of the
      proletarian. . . . The capitalisation of industry is an important factor
      in woman’s struggle for her independence in the family.”
      “Industry creates a new position for the woman in which she is
      completely independent of her family and husband.” (Yuridichesky
      Vestnik, 1883, No. 12, pp. 582, 596.) In the Statistical Returns
      for Moscow Gubernia (Vol. VII, Pt. II, Moscow, 1882, pp. 152,
      138-139), the investigators compare the position of women engaged in
      making stockings by hand and by machine. The daily earnings of hand
      workers are about 8 kopeks, and of machine workers, 14 to 30 kopeks. The
      working woman’s conditions under machine production are described as
      follows: “. . . Before us is a free young woman, hampered by no
      obstacles, emancipated from the family and from all that constitutes the
      peasant woman’s conditions of life, a young woman who at any moment
      may leave one place for another, one employer for another, and may at any
      moment find herself without a job . . . without a crust of
      bread. . . . Under hand production, the knitter’s earnings are very
      meagre, insufficient to cover the cost of her food, earnings only
      acceptable if she, as a member of an allotment-holding and farming family,
      enjoys in part the product of that land; under machine production the
      working woman, in

 

addition to food and tea, gets earnings which enable
      . . . her to live away from the family and to do without the
      family’s income from the land. . . . Moreover, the woman
      worker’s earnings in machine industry, under present conditions, are
      more secure.”—Lenin

[14]
      In the less industrialised Smolensk Gubernia, an inquiry among 5,000
      factory workers showed that 80% of them were natives of that gubernia
      (Zhbankov, loc. cit., II, 442).—Lenin

[15]
Statistical Returns for Moscow Gubernia, Sanitary Statistical
      Section, Vol. IV, Sec. I (Moscow, 1890), p. 240.—Lenin

[16]
      The data quoted in the last three chapters show, in our opinion, that the
      classification of the capitalist forms and stages of industry given by
      Marx is more correct and sound than the now current classification which
      confuses the manufactory with the factory and regards working for a
      buyer-up as a special form of industry (Held, B\"ucher). To confuse the
      manufactory with the factory is to make purely superficial features the
      basis for classification and to ignore the essential features of
      technique, economy and social life which distinguish manufacture from the
      machine period of capitalism. As to capitalist domestic industry, it
      undoubtedly plays a very important part in the mechanism of capitalist
      industry. Just as undoubtedly, work for the buyer-up is particularly
      characteristic of pre-machine capitalism; but it is also to be met with
      (and on no small scale) in the most diverse periods of capitalist
      development. The significance of work for the buyer-up is not to be
      understood unless studied in connection with the whole structure of
      industry in the given period, or at the given stage of capitalist
      development. The peasant who weaves baskets to the order of the village
      shopkeeper, the Pavlovo artisan who makes knife-handles in his home to the
      order of Zavyalov, the woman worker who makes clothes, footwear, gloves or
      boxes to the order of big mill owners or merchants—all work for
      buyers-up, but in all these instances capitalist domestic industry bears a
      different character and has a different significance. We do not, of
      course, in the least deny the merits of B\"ucher, for example, in studying
      pre-capitalist forms of industry, but we think his classification of
      capitalist forms of industry is wrong.—We cannot agree with the
      views of Mr. Struve (see Mir Bozhy, 1898, No. 4) inasmuch as he
      adopts B\"ucher’s theory (in the part mentioned) and applies it to
      Russian “handicraftism.” (Since these lines were written, in
      1899, Mr. Struve has managed to complete the cycle of his scientific and
      political development. From a person oscillating between B\"ucher and Marx,
      between liberal and socialist economics, he has become a liberal bourgeois
      of the purest water. The writer of these lines is proud of having helped,
      as far as has been in his power, to purge Social-Democracy of such
      elements. (Note to 2nd edition.—Ed.)—Lenin
 

 
  

XI. The Complete Separation of Industry From Agriculture

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 552-600
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






I. The Growth of Commodity Circulation
  552



II. The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population
  557



III. The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour
  581



IV. The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power
  586



V. The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign Market?
  591



VI. The “Mission” of Capitalism
  596

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Growth of Commodity Circulation




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Eight: I. The Growth of Commodity Circulation








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




      We now have to sum up the data examined in the preceding chapters and to
      try to give an idea of the interdependence of the various spheres of the
      national economy in their capitalist development.
    


      I. The Growth of Commodity Circulation
    

      It is well known that commodity circulation precedes commodity production
      and constitutes one of the conditions (but not the sole condition) of the
      rise of the latter. In the present work we have confined ourselves to an
      examination of data on commodity and capitalist production, and for that
      reason do not intend to deal in detail with the important problem of the
      growth of commodity circulation in post-Reform Russia. In order to give a
      general idea of how rapidly the home market has grown, the following brief
      data will suffice.

    
      The length of the Russian railway system increased from 3,819 kilometres
      in 1865 to 29,063 km. in

      1890,[1]

 i.e., more
      than 7-fold. Similar progress was made by Britain in a longer period
      (1845–4,082 km.; 1875–26,819 km., a 6-fold increase), by Germany in a
      shorter period (1845– 2,143 km.; 1875–27,981 km., a 12-fold
      increase). The length of new railway opened per year differed considerably
      in different periods; for example, in the 5 years 1868-1872

 

      8,806 versts of new railway were opened and in the 5 years 1878-1882, only

      2,221.[2]

 The extent
      of this fluctuation enables us to judge what an enormous reserve army of
      unemployed is required by capitalism, which now expands, and then
      contracts the demand for labour. There have been two boom periods in
      railway development in Russia: the end of the 60s (and the beginning of
      the 70s), and the latter half of the 90s. From 1865 to 1875, the average
      annual increase in the length of the Russian railway system was 1,500
      kilometres, and from 1893 to 1897, about 2,500 kilometres.

    
      The amount of railway freight carried was as follows: 1868–439 million
      poods; 1873—1,117 million poods; 1881—2,532 million poods;
      1893—4,846 million poods; 1896—6,145 million poods;
      1904— 11,072 million poods. No less rapid has been the growth of
      passenger traffic: 1868—10.4 million passengers; 1873–22.7;
      1881–34.4; 1893—49.4; 1896— 65.5; 1904—123.6

      million.[3]

      The development of water transport is as follows (data for the whole of

      Russia):[4]







      The amount of freight carried on inland waterways in European Russia in
      1881 was 899.7 million poods; in 1893—1,181.5 million poods; in
      1896—1,553 million poods. The value of these freights was 186.5
      million rubles; 257.2 million rubles; 290 million rubles.

    
      Russia’s merchant marine in 1868 consisted of 51 steamers with a
      capacity of 14,300

      lasts,[12] and of 700
      sailing ships with a capacity of 41,800 lasts; and in 1896 of 522 steamers
      with a capacity of 161,600

      lasts.[5]


      The development of mercantile shipping at all ports on the outer seas was
      as follows: during the five years 1856-1860 the number of homeward plus
      outward bound vessels averaged 18,901, with a total capacity of 3,783,000
      tons; for the period 1886-1890 it averaged 23,201 vessels (+23%) with a
      total capacity of 13,845,000 tons (+266%). Capacity, therefore, increased
      3 2/3 times. In 39 years (from 1856 to 1894) capacity grew 5.5-fold, and
      if we take Russian and foreign vessels separately, it is seen that during
      these 39 years the number of the former grew 3.4-fold (from 823 to 2,789),
      while their capacity grew 12.1-fold (from 112,800 tons to 1,368,000 tons),
      whereas the number of the latter grew by 16% (from 18,284 to 21,160) and
      their capacity 5.3-fold (from 3,448,000 tons to 18,267,000

      tons).[6]

 Let us
      remark that the capacity of homeward and outward bound vessels also
      fluctuates very considerably from year to year (e.g., 1878—13
      million tons; 1881—8.6 million tons), and these fluctuations enable
      us to gauge in part the fluctuations in the demand for unskilled
      labourers, dockers, etc. Here, too, capitalism requires the existence of a
      mass of people always in want of work and ready at the first call to
      accept it, however casual it may be.

    

      The development of foreign trade can be seen from the following

      data:[7]







      The following data give a general idea of the volume of bank turnover and
      capital accumulation. Total withdrawals from the State Bank rose from 113
      million rubles in 1860-1863 (170 million rubles in 1864-1868) to 620
      million rubles in 1884-1888, and total deposits on current account from
      335 million rubles in 1864-1868 to 1,495 million rubles in

      1884–1888.[8]

 The
      turnover of loan and savings societies and banks (rural and industrial)
      grew from 2 3/4 million rubles in 1872 (21.8 million rubles in 1875) to
      82.6 million rubles in 1892., and 189.6 million rubles in

      1903.[9]

 Mortgages
      increased from 1889 to 1894 as follows: the assessment of mortgaged land
      rose from 1,395 million rubles to 1,827 million rubles, and total loans
      from 791 million rubles to 1,044 million

      rubles.[10]

 The
      operations of savings banks grew particularly in the 80s and 90s. In 1880
      there were 75 savings banks, in 1897—4,315 (of which 3,454 were
      post-office banks). In 1880, deposits amounted to 4.4 million rubles, in
      1897 to 276.6 million rubles. Balance on account at the end of the year
      totalled 9.0 million rubles in 1880, and 494.3 million rubles in 1897. The
      annual capital increase is particularly striking in the famine years 1891
      and 1892 (52.9 and 50.5 million rubles), and in the last two years
      (1896—51.6 million rubles; 1897—65.5 mil lion

      rubles).[11]



      The latest statistics show an even greater development of the savings
      banks. In 1904, over the whole of Russia there were 6,557 savings banks
      with 5.1 million depositors and total deposits of 1,105.5 million
      rubles. Incidentally, in this country both the old Narodniks and the new
      opportunists in the socialist movement have frequently been very na\"ive (to
      put it mildly) in talking about the increase in the number of savings
      banks constituting a sign of the “people’s”
      well-being. It will perhaps not be out of place, therefore, to compare the
      distribution of savings-bank deposits in Russia (1904) with that of France
      (1900. Information from Bulletin de l’Office du travail,
      1901, No. 10).
    





      What a wealth of material there is here for Narodnik-Revisionist-Cadet
      apologists! It is interesting, in passing, to note that in Russia deposits
      are also divided into 12 groups according to the occupations and
      professions of depositors. It appears that the largest sum of
      deposits—228.5 million rubles—is that of persons engaged in
      agriculture and rural industries, and these deposits are growing with
      particular rapidity. The village is becoming civilised, and to make the

 

      muzhik’s ruin a source of business is becoming increasingly
      profitable.

    

      But let us return to our immediate theme. As we see, the data indicate an
      enormous growth of commodity circulation and capital accumulation. How the
      field for the employment of capital in all branches of the national
      economy was created and how merchant’s capital was transformed into
      industrial capital, i.e., was directed into production and created
      capitalist relationships between those taking part in production, has been
      shown above.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
Uebersichten der Weltwirtschaft (Surveys of World
      Economy. –Ed.), loc. cit. In 1904 the length was 54,878
      kilometres in European Russia (including the Kingdom of Poland, the
      Caucasus and Finland) and 8,351 in Asiatic Russia. (Note to 2nd
      edition.—Ed.)—Lenin

[2]
      V. Mikhailovsky, The Development of the Russian Railway System in
      Transactions of Free Economic Society, 1898, No. 2.—Lenin

[3]
Military Statistical Abstract, 511.– Mr. N.–on,
      Sketches, appendix to Productive Forces, XVII,
      p. 67.—Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No. 43.— Yearbook
      of Russia for 1905, St. Petersburg, 1906.—Lenin

[4]
Military Statistical Abstract, 445.— Productive
      Forces, XVII, 42.—Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No. 44.—Lenin

[5]
Military Statistical Abstract, 758, and The Ministry of
      Finance Yearbook, I, 363.—Productive Forces, XVII, 30.—Lenin

[6]
Productive Forces. Russia’s Foreign Trade, p. 56, and foll.—Lenin

[7]
Ibid., p. 17. Yearbook of Russia for 1904,
      St. Petersburg, 1905.—Lenin

[8]
Returns for Russia, 1890, CIX.—Lenin

[9]
Returns for Russia, 1896. Table CXXVII.—Lenin

[10]
Ibid.—Lenin

[11]
Vestnik Finansov, 1898, No. 26.—Lenin
 


[12]
Last—a term used on Russian merchant ships: equalled two
      tons. [p. 554]
    

 
  


|

II. The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Eight: II. The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




      II. The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population
    

      We have stated above that the growth of the industrial population at the
      expense of the agricultural is a requisite phenomenon of every capitalist
      society. In what way the separation of industry from agriculture steadily
      takes place has also been examined, and now all that remains is to sum up
      on this question.
    
 1) The Growth of the Towns 

      The most striking expression of the process under examination is the
      growth of the towns. Here are data on this growth in European Russia (50
      gubernias) in the post Reform

      period[1]:

    












      Thus, the percentage of urban population is constantly growing, that is,
      the population is being diverted from agriculture into commercial and
      industrial

      occupations.[2]

 The
      population of the towns is growing twice as fast as that of the rest of
      the country: from 1863 to 1897 the total population increased 53.3%, the
      rural 48.5%, while the urban increased 97%. Over a period of 11 years
      (1885-1897) “the influx, at a minimum, of the rural population into
      the towns” was 2 1/2 million persons, according to
      Mr. V. Mikhailovsky’s

      estimate,[3]

 i.e.,
      more than 200,000 per annum.

    

      The population of towns that are important industrial and commercial
      centres is growing much more rapidly than the urban population
      generally. The number of towns with 50,000 and more inhabitants more than
      trebled between 1863 and 1897 (13 and 44). In 1863, of the total urban
      population only about 27% (1.7 million out of 6.1) were concentrated in
      such large centres; in 1885 it was nearly 41% (4.1 million out of

      9.9),[4]

 and in 1897
      it was already more than half, about 53% (6.4 million out of 12
      million). In the 1860s, therefore, the smaller towns provided the general
      pattern of the urban population, but in the 1890s they were completely
      outweighed by the big cities. The population of the 14 towns that had been
      the biggest in 1863 increased from 1.7 million inhabitants to 4.3 million,
      i.e., by 153%, whereas the overall urban population increased by only 97%
      . Hence, the enormous growth of large industrial centres and the emergence
      of a large number of new centres is one of the most characteristic
      features of the post-Reform period.
    

 2) The Significance of Home Colonisation 

      As we have pointed out above (Chapter I, § II, p. 40), theory deduces the
      law that the industrial population grows at the expense of the
      agricultural from the fact that in industry variable capital increases
      absolutely (the growth of variable capital means a growth of the number of
      industrial workers and a growth of the total commercial and industrial
      population), whereas in agriculture the “variable capital required
      for the exploitation of a certain plot of land decreases
      absolutely.” “It can thus only increase,” Marx adds,
      “to the extent that new land is taken into cultivation, but this
      again requires as a prerequisite a still greater growth of the
      non-agricultural

      population.”[44]
      Hence it is clear that the growth of the industrial population is a
      phenomenon observable in its pure form only when we have before us an
      already populated territory in which all the land is already occupied. The
      inhabitants of such a territory, when forced-out of agriculture by
      capitalism, have no other alternative but to migrate to the industrial
      centres or to other countries. But the situation is essentially different
      when we have before us a territory in which not all the land is occupied,
      and which is not yet fully populated. The inhabitants of such a territory,
      when forced out of agriculture in a populated area, may remove to an
      unpopulated part of that territory and set about “taking new land
      into cultivation.” The result will be an increase in the
      agricultural population, and this increase may be (for some time) no less,
      if not more, rapid than the increase in the industrial population. In that
      case, we have before us two different processes: 1) the development of
      capitalism in the old, populated country or part of the country; 2) the
      development of capitalism on “new land.” The first process
      expresses the further development of established capitalist relationships;
      the second, the rise of new capitalist relationships on new territory. The
      first process means the development of capitalism in depth, the second, in
      breadth. Obviously, to confuse these two processes must inevitably lead to
      a wrong conception of the process which diverts the population from
      agriculture to commercial and industrial occupations.
    


      Post-Reform Russia affords us an example of the two processes going on
      simultaneously. At the beginning of the post-Reform period, in the 60s,
      the southern and eastern outer regions of European Russia were largely
      unpopulated, and there was an enormous influx into those areas of migrants
      from the central agricultural part of Russia. It was this formation of a
      new agricultural population on new territory that to some extent obscured
      the parallel process of the diversion of the population from agriculture
      to industry. To get a clear picture, from data on the urban population, of
      the specific feature of Russia here described, we must divide the 50
      gubernias of European Russia into separate groups. We give data on the
      urban population in 9 areas of European Russia in 1863 and in 1897 (see
      p. 564).
    






      As far as the question that interests us is concerned, the greatest
      importance attaches to three areas: 1) the non-agricultural industrial
      area (the 11 gubernias in the first two groups, including the 2
      metropolitan

      gubernias).[5]

 This
      is an area from which migration to other areas has been very slight. 2)
      The central agricultural area (the 13 gubernias in group 3). Migration
      from this area has been very consider able, partly to the previous area,
      but mainly to the next. 3) The agricultural outer regions (the 9 gubernias
      in group 4) constitute an area that has been colonised in the post-Reform
      period. The percentage of urban population in all these 33 gubernias
      differs very little, as the table shows, from the percentage of urban
      population in European Russia as a whole.

    

      In the first area, the non-agricultural or industrial, we observe a
      particularly rapid rise in the percentage of urban population: from 14.1%
      to 21.1%. The growth of the rural population is here very slight, being
      little more than half of that for the whole of Russia. The growth of the
      urban

 

      population, on the other hand, is considerably above the average (105% as
      against 97%). If Russia is to be compared with West-European industrial
      countries (as is often done here), then these countries should be compared
      with just this one area, for it alone has conditions approximately similar
      to those of the industrial capitalist countries.

    

      In the second, the central agricultural area, we see a different
      picture. The percentage of urban population here is very low and grows
      with less than average rapidity. The increase in the population between
      1863 and 1897, both urban and rural, was much below the average for
      Russia. This is to be explained by the vast stream of migrants from this
      area to the border regions. According to Mr. V. Mikhailovsky’s
      calculations, between 1885 and 1897 nearly 3 million people, or
      more than one-tenth of the population left these

      parts.[6]


      In the third area, the outer regions, we see that the percentage of urban
      population underwent an increase that was slightly below the
      average (from 11.2% to 13.3%, i.e., in the proportion of 100 : 118,
      whereas the average is from 9.94 to 12.76, i.e., in the proportion of 100
      : 128). And yet the absolute growth of the urban population here, far from
      being less, was considerably above the average (+130% as against
      +97%). The diversion of population from agriculture to industry has,
      consequently, been very intense, but it is hidden by the enormous growth
      of the agricultural population as a result of influx: in this area the
      rural population increased by 87%, as against an average for Russia of
      48.5%. In certain gubernias this obscuring of the process of the
      industrialisation of the population is still more striking. For instance,
      in Taurida Gubernia the percentage of urban population was the same in
      1897 as in 1863 (19.6%), and in Kherson Gubernia actually declined (from
      25.9% to 25.4%), although the growth of the towns in both the gubernias
      was not far behind that of the metropolitan cities (+131%, +135%, as
      against +141% in the two metropolitan gubernias). The rise of a new
      agricultural population on new territory thus leads, in turn, to a still
      greater growth of the non-agricultural population.
    

 3) The Growth of Factory and of Commercial and
Industrial Townships and Villages 

      In addition to the towns, the following have the significance of
      industrial centres: firstly, suburbs, which are not always counted with
      the towns and which are spreading in an increasing area around the big
      towns; and secondly, factory townships and villages. Such industrial

      centres[7]

 are
      particularly numerous in the industrial gubernias where the percentage of
      urban population is extremely

      low.[8]

 The above
      table containing the data, by areas, of the town population shows that in
      the 9 industrial gubernias the percentage in 1863 was 7.3% and in 1897,
      8.6%. The fact is that the commercial and industrial population of these
      gubernias is concentrated mainly, not in towns, but in industrial
      villages. Among the “towns” of Vladimir, Kostroma,
      Nizhni-Novgorod and other gubernias there are not a few with less than
      3,000, 2,000 or even 1,000 inhabitants, where as there are numerous
      “villages” in each of which there are 2,000, 3,000 or 5,000
      factory workers alone. In the post-Reform period, rightly observes the
      compiler of the Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia (Vol. II.,
      191),“the towns have begun to grow still faster, and in addition
      there has been the growth of settlements of a new type, a type of factory
      centre midway between the town and the village.” We have cited data
      showing the enormous growth of these centres and the number of factory
      workers concentrated in them. We have seen that there are quite a few
      centres of this kind throughout Russia, not only in the industrial
      gubernias, but also in the South. In the Urals the percentage of urban
      population is lowest: in Vyatka and Perm gubernias it was 3.2% in 1863 and
      4.7% in 1897. But here is an example of the relative size of the
      “urban” and the industrial populations: in Krasnoufimsk Uyezd,
      Perm Gubernia, the urban population numbers 6,400 (1897), whereas
      according to the Zemstvo census of 1888-1891, the population of the

 

      industrial section of the uyezd numbers 84,700, of whom 56,000 do not
      engage in agriculture at all, and only 5,600 obtain their livelihood
      mainly from the land. In Ekaterinburg Uyezd, according to the Zemstvo
      census, 65,000 inhabitants are landless and 81,000 have only meadow
      land. Hence, the industrial non-urban population of two uyezds alone is
      larger than the urban population of the whole gubernia (in 1897 it was
      195,600!).

    

      Finally, in addition to factory settlements, the significance of
      industrial centres attaches to the trading and industrial villages, which
      are either at the head of large handicraft districts, or have developed
      rapidly since the Reform, owing to their situation on the banks of rivers,
      near railway stations, etc. Several examples of such villages were given
      in Chapter VI, § II, and we saw that, like the towns, they attract the
      rural population, and that they are usually marked by a level of literacy
      among the population above the

      average.[9]

 As a
      further example let us quote data on Voronezh Gubernia in order to show
      the relative importance

 

      of urban and non-urban industrial and commercial centres of
      population. The Combined Returns for Voronezh Gubernia gives a
      combined table classifying the villages in 8 uyezds of the gubernia. In
      these uyezds there are 8 towns, with a population of 56,149 (in 1897). Of
      the villages, on the other hand, 4 stand out with 9,376 households, and
      with 53,732 inhabitants, i.e., they are much bigger than the towns. In 5
      these villages there are 240 commercial and 404 industrial
      establishments. Of the total households, 60% do not cultivate at all, 21%
      cultivate by neighbour-hire or on a half-crop basis, 71% have neither
      draught animals nor implements, 63% buy grain all year round, 86% engage
      in industries. By placing the entire population of these centres in the
      category of commercial and industrial, we not only do not exaggerate, but
      rather minimise, the size of the latter, for altogether in these 8 uyezds
      21,956 households cultivate no land at all. Nevertheless, in the
      agricultural gubernia we have taken, the commercial and industrial
      population outside the towns turns out to be not less than that inside the
      towns.
    
 4) Non-Agricultural Outside Employments 

      But even if we add to the towns the factory and commercial and industrial
      villages and townships we are far from exhausting the total industrial
      population of Russia. The lack of freedom of movement and the
      social-estate exclusiveness of the village community fully explain the
      remarkable characteristic of Russia that we have to include no small part
      of the rural population in its industrial population, that part which
      obtains its livelihood by working in industrial centres and spends part of
      the year in these centres. We refer to the so-called non-agricultural
      “outside employments.” From the official point of view, these
      “industrialists” are peasant farmers who merely have
      “subsidiary employments,” and the majority of the Narodnik
      economists have, without further ado, adopted that viewpoint. There is no
      need, after what has been said above, to prove in detail how unsound it
      is. At all events, however much opinions on it may vary, there cannot be
      the slightest doubt that it

 

      indicates a diversion of the population from agriculture into
      commercial and industrial

occupations.[10]

 How far this fact changes our idea of the size
      of the industrial population in the towns may be seen from the following
      example. In Kaluga Gubernia the percentage of urban population is much
      lower than the average for Russia (8.3%, as against 12.8%). Now the
      Statistical Survey of that gubernia for 1896 calculates, on the
      basis of passport data, the total number of months during which migratory
      workers were absent from their homes. It appears that the total is
      1,491,600 months; divided by 12 this will give an absent population of
      124,300 persons, i.e., “nearly 11% of the total population
      ” (loc. cit., 46)! Add this number to the
      urban population (in 1897—97,900), and the percentage of industrial
      population will be a very considerable one.

    

      Of course, a certain part of the migratory non-agricultural workers are
      registered among the existing town population, and are also part of the
      population of the non-urban industrial centres to which we have already
      referred. But only a part, for owing to the mobile character of this
      section of the population, it is difficult to cover them by any local
      census; furthermore, population censuses are usually taken in the winter,
      whereas most of these industrial workers leave their homes in the
      spring. Here are data for some of the principal gubernias of
      non-agricultural

      migration.[11]








      The number of passports issued reaches the maximum everywhere in the
      spring. Hence, a large part of the temporarily absent workers are not
      included in the censuses of the

      towns.[12]

 But
      these temporary town-dwellers may also more legitimately be assigned to
      the urban rather than the rural population. “A family which gets its
      livelihood throughout the year, or during the greater part of it, in the
      town has far more reason to regard the town, which provides its
      subsistence, as its place of domicile than the village, with which it has
      only family and fiscal

      ties.”[13]

      The enormous significance these fiscal ties have to this day can be seen
      from the fact, for instance, that among migratory

 

      Kostroma people “it is a rare thing for peasants to get for it [the
      land] some small part of the taxes to be paid; usually they lease it on
      the sole condition that the tenants put it to use, the owner himself
      paying all the taxes” (D. Zhbankov, Women’s Country,
      Kostroma, 1891, p. 21). In the Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia
      (Vol. II, Yaroslavl, 1896), we also find repeated references to migratory
      industrial workers having to purchase their release from their villages
      and allotments (pp. 28, 48, 149, 150, 166 and

      others).[14]


      How many migratory non-agricultural workers are there? The number of
      people engaged in all kinds of industries employing migratory workers is
      not less than from 5 to 6 millions. In fact, in 1884, about 4.67
      million passports and

 

      identity cards were issued in European

      Russia,[15]

 and
      passport revenue grew between 1884 and 1894 by more than one-third (from
      3.3 to 4.5 million rubles). In 1897 the total number of passports and
      cards issued in Russia was 9,495,700 (of which 9,333,200 were issued in
      the 50 gubernias of European Russia). In 1898 the number was 8,259,900
      (European Russia,

      7,809,600).[16]

 The
      number of workers superfluous (as compared with local demand) in European
      Russia has been estimated by Mr. S. Korolenko at 6.3 million. Above we
      have seen (Chapter III, § IX, p. 239) that in 11 agricultural gubernias
      the number of passports issued exceeded Mr. Korolenko’s estimate (2
      million as against 1.7 million). Now we can add the data for 6
      non-agricultural gubernias: Mr. Korolenko sets the number of superfluous
      workers in these at 1,287,800, while the number of passports issued was

      1,298,600.[17]

      Thus, in 17 gubernias of European Russia (11 black-earth, plus 6 non-black
      earth) there are, according to Mr. Korolenko, 3 million workers who are
      superfluous (as against the local demand). In the 90s, however, the number
      of passports and cards issued in these 17 gubernias was 3.3 million. In
      1891, these gubernias provided 52.2% of the total passport revenue. Hence,
      the number of migratory workers in all probability exceeds 6
      million. Finally, Zemstvo statistical data (most of which are
      obsolete) led Mr. Uvarov to the conclusion that Mr. Korolenko’s
      figure was close to the truth, and that the figure of 5 million migratory
      workers was “very highly

      probable.”[18]



      The question now arises: how large is the number of non-agricultural and
      of agricultural migratory workers?  Mr. N.–on very boldly and quite
      mistakenly asserts that “the overwhelming majority of peasant
      outside employments are agricultural” (Sketches,
      p. 16). Chaslavsky, whom Mr. N.–on cites, expresses himself much more
      cautiously; he cites no data and limits himself to general remarks about
      the size of the areas which provide workers of one type or another. On the
      other hand, Mr. N.–on’s railway passenger traffic data prove
      absolutely nothing, for non-agricultural workers also leave their homes
      mainly in spring and, moreover, use the railways much more than
      agricultural workers

      do.[19]

 We presume,
      on the contrary, that the majority (although not the
      “overwhelming” majority) of the migratory workers are probably
      non-agricultural workers. This view is based, firstly, on data concerning
      the distribution of passport revenue, and, secondly, on Mr. Vesin’s
      data. Years ago Flerovsky, on the basis of the returns for 1862-63 showing
      the distribution of revenue from “miscellaneous duties” (more
      than one-third of which was obtained from the issue of passports), drew
      the conclusion that the greatest movement of peasants in search of work
      was from the metropolitan and the non-agricultural

      gubernias.[20]

 If
      we take the 11 non-agricultural gubernias which we combined above (part 2
      of this section) into a single area, and which non-agricultural workers
      leave in large numbers, we shall see that these gubernias in 1885
      contained only 18.7% of the population of all European Russia (in
      1897— 18.3%), whereas they accounted for 42.9% of the passport
      revenue in 1885 (in

      1891—40.7%).[21]

 Non-agricultural workers are provided by very
      many other gubernias, and we must there fore conclude that agricultural
      workers constitute less than half of the migrants. Mr. Vesin divides 38
      gubernias of European Russia (which account for 90% of the departure

 

      permits) into groups according to the different types of migration that
      predominate, and obtains the following

      results.[22]






      “These figures show that industries employing migratory workers are
      more prevalent in the first group than in the third. . . . These figures
      also show that there is a

 

      diversity in the duration of absence to secure employment corresponding to
      the difference in the groups. Where non-agricultural industries employing
      migratory workers predominate, the length of absence is much
      greater” (Dyelo, 1886, No. 7, p. 134).

    

      Finally, the statistics given above for excise-paying trades, etc., enable
      us to classify the residential permits issued in all the 50 gubernias of
      European Russia. Making the indicated corrections to Mr. Vesin’s
      classification, and distributing among these same groups the 12 gubernias
      for which figures are lacking for 1884 (Olonets and Pskov gubernias to
      group I; the 9 Baltic and North-West gubernias to group II; and Astrakhan
      Gubernia to group III), we get the following picture:
    




1898[23]



      Migration for work away from home, according to these data, is much more
      prevalent in group I than in group III.

    
      Thus, there can be no doubt that the mobility of the population is far
      greater in Russia’s non-agricultural zone than in the
      agricultural. The number of non-agricultural migratory workers must be
      greater than that of the agricultural, and must be not less than three
      million.

    

      The enormous and ever-increasing growth of migration is confirmed by all
      sources. Passport revenue increased

 

      from 2.1 million rubles in 1868 (1.75 million rubles in 1866) to 4.5
      million rubles in 1893-94, i.e., it more than doubled. The number of
      passports and identity cards issued increased in Moscow Gubernia between
      1877 and 1885 by 20% (males) and 53% (females); in Tver Gubernia, between
      1893 and 1896 by 5.6%, in Kaluga Gubernia, between 1885 and 1895 by 23%
      (and the number of months of absence by 26%); in Smolensk Gubernia, from
      100,000 in 1875 to 117,000 in 1885 and 140,000 in 1895; in Pskov Gubernia,
      from 11,716 in 1865-1875 to 14,944 in 1876 and to 43,765 in 1896
      (males). In Kostroma Gubernia, in 1868, 23.8 passports and cards per 100
      males were issued and 0.85 per 100 females, and in 1880—33.1 and
      2.2. And so on and so forth.

    

      Like the diversion of the population from agriculture to the towns,
      non-agricultural migration is a progressive phenomenon. It tears
      the population out of the neglected, backward, history-forgotten remote
      spots and draws them into the whirlpool of modern social life. It
      increases literacy among the

      population,[24]

      heightens their

      understanding,[25]

      and gives them civilised habits and

      requirements.[26]
 

      The peasants are induced to migrate by “motives of a higher
      order,” i.e., by the greater smartness and polish of the
      Petersburger; they look for places where “things are better.”
      “Life and work in Petersburg are considered to be easier than in the

      country.”[27]

      “All country-folk are called raw, and the strange thing is that they
      are not in the least offended at this, but refer to themselves as such and
      complain that their parents did not send them to St. Petersburg to
      study. It should be stated, however, that these raw country
      people are not nearly so raw as those in the purely agricultural
      districts; they unconsciously copy the outward appearance and the habits
      of the Petersburgers; the light of the metropolis falls indirectly on

      them.”[28]

 In
      Yaroslavl Gubernia (apart from examples of people growing rich)
      “there is still another cause which drives everyone from his
      home. That is—public opinion, which dubs a bumpkin to the end of his
      days anybody who has not lived in Peters burg, or somewhere else, but
      engages in agriculture or some handicraft, and such a man finds it hard to
      get a wife” (Survey of Yaroslavl Gubernia, II,
      118). Migration to the town elevates the peasant as a citizen, releasing
      him from the host of patriarchal and personal relationships of dependence
      and social-estate divisions so strongly entrenched in the rural

      districts....[29]

      “A prime factor that fosters migration is the growing sense of human
      dignity among the people. Liberation from serf dependence, and the
      long-standing association of the more active section of the rural
      population with town life, have long since roused the desire in the
      Yaroslavl peasant to uphold his ‘ego,’ to get away from the
      state of poverty and dependence to which rural life has doomed him, to a
      state of sufficiency, independence and respect. . . . The peasant who
      lives on outside earnings feels freer and more on a level of equality with
      people belonging to other social estates, which is why the rural

 

      youth are so eager to go to the town” (Survey of Yaroslavl
      Gubernia, II, 189-190).

    

      Migration to the towns loosens the old patriarchal family ties and places
      women in a more independent position, on an equal footing with
      men. “Compared with those in the localities of no migration, the
      families of Soligalich and Chukhloma” (the uyezds of Kostroma
      Gubernia where migration is greatest) “are much less closely knit,
      not only in the sense of the patriarchal authority of the older, but even
      in the relations between parents and children, husband and wife. One
      cannot, of course, expect strong affection for their parents and
      attachment to the parental home from sons who are sent to Petersburg from
      the age of 12; unconsciously they become cosmopolitans: ‘where it is
      well, there is my

      country.’”[30]

 “Accustomed to dispense with the authority
      and assistance of her husband, the Soligalich woman is quite unlike the
      downtrodden peasant woman of the agricultural zone: she is independent and
      self-reliant. . . . Wife-beating is a rare exception here. . . . Generally
      speaking, equality between women and men is to be observed almost
      everywhere and in all

      things.”[31]


      Last but not

      least,[32]

      non-agricultural migration raises the
      wages not only of the wage-workers who migrate but also of those
      who stay behind.

    
      This fact is most strikingly reflected in the general circumstance that
      the non-agricultural gubernias where wages are higher than in the
      agricultural gubernias, attract agricultural workers from the

      latter.[33]

 Here
      are some interesting data for Kaluga Gubernia:
    






      “These figures fully illustrate the phenomena . . . 1) that
      migration for work in industry helps to raise wages in agriculture, and 2)
      that it attracts the best forces of the

      population.”[34]

 Not only money wages, but real wages also
      rise. In the group of uyezds from which not fewer than 60 out of every 100
      working people migrate the average wage of the farm labourer employed by
      the year is 69 rubles, or 123 poods of rye; in the uyezds where from 40 to
      60% migrate, it is 64 rubles, or 125 poods of rye; in the uyezds which
      supply less than 40% of the migrants, it is 59 rubles, or 116 poods of

      rye.[35]

 In these
      same groups of uyezds the percentage of letters of complaint about a
      shortage of labour steadily drops: 58%, 42% and 35%. In manufacturing
      industry wages are higher than in agriculture, and “the industries,
      according to the statements of numerous correspondents, help to develop
      new requirements (tea, calico, boots, clocks, etc.) among the peasant
      population, raise their general standard of living, and in this way bring
      about a rise in

      wages.”[36]

      Here is a typical view by a correspondent: “The shortage [of labour]
      is always acute, and the reason is that the suburban population is spoilt,
      it works in the railway workshops and serves on the railways. The nearness
      of Kaluga and its markets always attract the surrounding inhabitants, who
      come to sell eggs, milk, etc., and then engage in orgies of drunkenness in
      the taverns; the reason is that everybody wants to get the highest pay for
      the least work. To be an agricultural labourer is considered a
      disgrace : all strive to get to the town, where they swell the
      ranks of the proletariat and the riff-raff; the countryside, on the other
      hand, suffers from a shortage of capable and healthy

      labourers.”[37]

 We would be quite justified in describing this
      appraisal of industries employing migratory workers as
      Narodist. Mr. Zhbankov, for instance, while pointing out that
      those who migrate are not superfluous but “necessary” workers
      whose places are taken by entering peasants, considers it
      “obvious” that “such mutual replacements are

 

      very

      disadvantageous.”[38]

 For whom, dear Mr. Zhbankov?  “Life in the
      capitals cultivates many civilised habits of the lower order and
      an inclination to luxury and showiness, and this results in a useless
      (sic !!) waste of

      money”[39];

      the expenditure on this showiness, etc., is largely

      “unproductive” (!!)[40]

 Mr. Hertzenstein positively howls about the
      “sham culture,” “the riotous living,” “wild
      carousing,” “orgies of drunkenness and filthy
      debauchery,”

      etc.[41]

 From the
      fact of wholesale migration the Moscow statisticians draw the outright
      conclusion that it is necessary to take “measures that would
      diminish the need for migratory

      labour.”[42]

      Mr. Karyshev argues about migratory labour as follows: “Only an
      increase in the peasants’ holdings to a size sufficient to provide
      the main (!) requirements of their families can solve this most serious
      problem of our national

      economy.”[43]


      And it does not occur to any of these serene-spirited gentlemen that
      before talking about “solving most serious problems,” one must
      see to it that the peasants obtain complete freedom of movement, freedom
      to give up their land and leave the community, freedom to settle (without
      having

 

      to pay “riddance” money) in any community, urban or rural,
      whatsoever!
    


      And so the diversion of the population from agriculture is expressed, in
      Russia, in the growth of the towns (a growth partly obscured by home
      colonisation), suburbs, factory and commercial and industrial villages and
      townships, as well as in non-agricultural migration. All these processes,
      which have been and are rapidly developing in breadth and depth in the
      post-Reform period, are necessary components of capitalist development and
      are profoundly progressive as compared with the old forms of life.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      For 1863 the figures are from the Statistical Chronicle (I, 1866)
      and the Military Statistical Abstract. The figures of the urban
      population of the Orenburg and Ufa gubernias have been corrected according
      to the tables of towns. That is why our figure for the total urban
      population is 6,105,100 and not 6,087,100 as given in the Military
      Statistical Abstract.—For 1885 the data are from Returns
      for Russia for 1884-85.—For 1897 the figures are those of the
      returns of the census of January 28, 1897. (First General Census of
      the Population of the Russian Empire, 1897, Central Statistical
      Committee, St. Petersburg, 1897 and 1898, Pts. 1 and 2.) The permanent
      urban population, according to the 1897 census, was 11,830,500, i.e.,
      12.55%. We have taken the existing population of the towns.—Let us
      observe that we cannot vouch for the figures for 1863, 1885 and 1897 being
      absolutely uniform and comparable. For that reason we limit our comparison
      to the most general proportions and give the data for the big towns
      separately.—Lenin

[2]
      “The number of urban settlements of an agricultural character is
      extremely small and the number of their inhabitants is quite insignificant
      compared with the total number of town-dwellers.” (Mr Grigoryev in
      The Influence of Harvests and Grain Prices, Vol. II; p. 126.)—Lenin

[3]
Novoye Slovo, June 1897, p. 113.—Lenin

[4]
      Mr. Grigoryev gives a table (loc, cit., 140) which shows that in 1885 of
      all towns 85.6% had less than 20,000 inhabitants each; 38% of all
      town-dwellers were living in them; 12.4% of the towns (82 out of 660) had
      less than 2,000 inhabitants each, and only 1.1% of all town-dwellers
      (110,000 out of 9,962,000) were living in them.—Lenin

[5]
      That we are right in combining with the metropolitan gubernias the
      non-agricultural gubernias taken by us is borne out by the fact that the
      population of the metropolitan cities is augmented chiefly by migrants
      from these gubernias. According to the Petersburg census of December
      15,1890, there were in that city 726,000 members of the peasant and the
      burgher estates, of these, 544,000 (i.e., three fourths) were members of
      the peasant and the burgher estates from the 11 gubernias out of which we
      constituted area No. 1.—Lenin

[6]
Loc. cit., p. 109. “This movement has no parallel
      in the modern history of Western Europe” (110-111).—Lenin

[7]
      See above, Chapter VII, § VIII, and Appendix III to Chapter VII.—Lenin

[8]
      On the significance of this circumstance, to which Korsak in his day drew
      attention, compare the just remarks of Mr. Volgin
      (loc. cit., pp. 215-216).—Lenin

[9]
      How numerous in Russia are villages that constitute very big centres of
      population may be judged from the following (though obsolete) data of the
      Military Statistical Abstract : in 25 gubernias of European
      Russia there were in the 60s a total of 1,334 villages with over 2,000
      inhabitants each. Of them, 108 had from 5,000 to 10,000 inhabitants, 6
      from 10,000 to 15,000, 1 from 15,000 to 20,000 and 1 over 20,000
      (p. 169). The development of capitalism in all countries, not only in
      Russia, has led to the rise of new industrial centres not officially
      classified as towns. “Differences between town and country are
      obliterated, near growing industrial towns this takes place due to the
      removal of industrial enterprises and workers’ dwellings to the
      suburbs and outskirts of the towns; near declining small towns it takes
      place due to the merging of the latter with the surrounding villages and
      also to the development of large industrial villages. . . . Differences
      between the urban and rural populated areas are eliminated due to numerous
      transitional formations. Statisticians have recognised this long ago, and
      instead of the historico-juridical concept of the town have adopted the
      statistical concept, which distinguishes centres of population solely
      according to the number of inhabitants” (B\"ucher, Die Entstehung
      der Volkswirtschaft, T\"ubingen, 1893, S. 296-297 and 303-304). In this
      respect also Russian statistics lag far behind European statistics. In
      Germany and in France (Statesman’s Yearbook, pp. 536, 474)
      under towns are placed centres of population having more than 2,000
      inhabitants, and in England “net urban sanitary districts,”
      i.e., also factory villages, etc. Hence, Russian data on the
      “urban” population are not at all comparable with European.—Lenin

[10]
      Mr. N.–on has not noticed at all in Russia the process of the
      industrialisation of the population!  Mr. V. V. observed it and admitted
      that the growth of migration expresses a diversion of the population from
      agriculture (The Destiny of Capitalism, 149); however, far from
      including this process in the sum-total of his views on the “destiny
      of capitalism,” he tried to hush it up with lamentations about the
      point that “there are people who find all this very natural”
      (for capitalist society? Can Mr. V. V. imagine capitalism without this
      phenomenon?) “and almost desirable” (ibid.). It is
      desirable without the “almost,” Mr. V. V.!—Lenin

[11]
Residential Permits Issued to the Peasant Population of Moscow
      Gubernia in 1880 and 1885.—Statistical Yearbook of Tver
      Gubernia for 1897.—Zhbankov: Industries Employing Migratory
      Workers in Smolensk Gubernia, Smolensk, 1896.—Same
      author’s: The Influence of Industries Employing Migratory
      Workers, etc., Kostroma, 1887.—Industries of the
      Peasant Population of Pskov Gubernia, Pskov, 1898.—Mistakes in
      the percentages for Moscow Gubernia could not be corrected because there
      were no absolute figures.—For

 

Kostroma Gubernia only uyezd figures
      are available, and then only in percentages. We had, therefore, to take
      the average of the uyezd figures, and for this reason we give the data for
      Kostroma Gubernia separately. As regards Yaroslavl Gubernia, it is
      estimated that of the migratory industrialists 68.7% are absent all year
      round: 12.6% in the autumn and winter, and 18.7% in the spring and
      summer. We would observe that the data for Yaroslavl Gubernia (Survey
      of Yaroslavl Gubernia, Vol. II, Yaroslavl, 1896) are not comparable
      with the preceding ones, since they are based on the statements of
      priests, etc., and not on passport data.—Lenin

[12]
      It is known, for instance, that in the suburbs of St. Petersburg the
      population increases very considerably in the summer.—Lenin

[13]
Statistical Survey of Kaluga Gubernia for 1896, Kaluga, 1897,
p. in Sec. II.—Lenin

[14]
      “Industries employing migratory workers . . . are a form that
      obscures the uninterrupted growth of the towns. . . . Communal land tenure
      and various peculiarities of the financial and administrative life of
      Russia do not allow the peasant to become a town-dweller as easily as in
      the West. . . . Legal threads sustain his (the migratory worker’s)
      tie with the village, but actually by occupation, habits and tastes he has
      become completely assimilated with the town and often regards this tie
      with his village as irksome” (Russkaya Mysl, 1896, No. 11,
      p. 227). That is very true, but for a publicist is not enough. Why did not
      the author declare definitely for complete freedom of movement, for the
      freedom of the peasant to leave the village community? Our liberals are
      still afraid of our Narodniks. But they have no reason to be.
    

      And here, for purposes of comparison, are the views of a sympathiser with
      Narodism, Mr. Zhbankov: “Migration to the towns is, as it were, a
      lightning conductor (sic!) against the rapid growth of the
      capitals and big cities and the increase of the urban and landless
      proletariat. Both from the sanitary and from the social and economic
      points of view, this influence of industries employing migratory workers
      should be regarded as beneficial: so long as the masses of the people are
      not completely divorced from the land, which provides the migratory
      workers with some security” (a “security” they pay money
      to break with!), “these workers cannot become the blind instruments
      of capitalist production, and the hope remains of organising
      agricultural-industrial communes” (Yuridichesky Vestnik,
      1890, No. 9 p 145). Is not the retention of petty-bourgeois hopes really
      beneficial? As for “blind instruments,” the
      experience of Europe and all the facts observed in Russia show that this
      description is far more applicable to the worker who retains his ties with
      the land and with patriarchal relationships than to the one who has broken
      these ties. The figures and facts given by Mr. Zhbankov himself show that
      the migratory “Petersburger” is more literate, cultured and
      developed than the settled Kostromer in some “backwoods”
      uyezd.—Lenin

[15]
      L. Vesin, The Significance of Industries Employing Migratory
      Workers, etc., Dyelo (Business ), 1886,
      No. 7, and 1887, No. 2.—Lenin

[16]
Statistics of Excise-Paying Trades, etc., for 1897-1898,
      St. Petersburg, 1900. Published by Head Office of Non-Assessed Taxes
      Department.—Lenin

[17]
      Gubernias: Moscow (1885, obsolete data), Tver (1896), Kostroma (1892),
      Smolensk (1895), Kaluga (1895), Pskov (1896). The sources have been
      indicated above. The data refer to all departure permits, male and female.—Lenin

[18]
Vestnik obshchestvennoi gigieny, sudebnoi i prakticheskoi
      meditsiny (Journal of Public Hygiene and of Forensic and
      Practical Medicine ), July, 1896. M. Uvarov: The Influence of
      Industry Employing Migratory Workers on the Sanitary Conditions of
      Russia. M. Uvarov gathered the data for 126 uyezds of 20 gubernias.—Lenin

[19]
      Cf. above, p. 239, footnote.—Lenin

[20]
The Condition of the Working Class in Russia, St. Petersburg,
      1869, p. 400 and foll.—Lenin

[21]
      Data on passport revenue taken from Returns for Russia for
      1884-85 and for 1896. In 1885, passport revenue in European Russia
      amounted to 37 rubles per 1,000 inhabitants; in the 11 non-agricultural
      gubernias it was 86 rubles per 1,000 inhabitants.—Lenin

[22]
      The last two columns in the table have been added by us. Group 1 includes
      the following gubernias: Archangel, Vladimir, Vologda Vyatka, Kaluga,
      Kostroma, Moscow, Novgorod, Perm, St. Petersburg, Tver, Yaroslavl; group
      II: Kazan, Nizhni-Novgorod, Ryazan, Tula, Smolensk; group III: Bessarabia,
      Volhynia, Voronezh, Ekaterinoslav, Don, Kiev, Kursk, Orenburg, Orel,
      Penza, Podolsk, Poltava, Samara, Saratov, Simbirsk, Taurida, Tambov, Ufa,
      Kharkov, Kherson, Chernigov.—We must mention that this
      classification contains some inaccuracies exaggerating the proportion of
      migration for agricultural work. The gubernias of Smolensk,
      Nizhni-Novgorod and Tula should be included in group I
      (cf. Agricultural Survey of Nizhni-Novgorod Gubernia for 1896,
      Chapter XI—Tula Gubernia Handbook for 1895, Section VI,
      p. 10: the number of persons leaving for work away from their homes is
      given as 188,000—but Mr. Korolenko calculated that there were only
      50,000 superfluous workers!—the 6 northern, non-black-earth uyezds
      accounting for 107,000 migrants.) Kursk Gubernia should be included in
      group II (S. Korolenko, loc. cit.: from 7 uyezds the
      majority leave for handicraft, and from the remaining 8 all leave for
      agricultural industries). Unfortunately, Mr. Vesin does not give the
      number, by gubernias, of departure permits issued.—Lenin

[23]
      * Incidentally, the author of the survey of these data
      (loc. cit., Chapter VI, p. 639) ascribes the decrease in
      the number of passports issued in 1898 to the drop in the migration of
      summer workers to the southern gubernias resulting from the bad harvest
      and the widespread use of machinery in agriculture. This explanation is of
      no value whatever, since the number of residential permits issued declined
      least in group III and most in group I. Are the methods of registration in
      1897 and in 1898 comparable? (Note to 2nd edition.)—Lenin

[24]
      Zhbankov: The Influence of Industries Employing Migratory
      Workers, etc., p. 36 and foll. The percentage of literate
      males in the uyezds of Kostroma Gubernia from which there is migration is
      55.9%; in the factory uyezds, 34.9%, in the settled (forest) uyezds,
      25.8%; of literate females: 3.5%, 2.0% and 1.3%; school children: 1.44%,
      1.43%, and 1.07%. Children in uyezds from which there is migration also
      attend school in St. Petersburg.—Lenin

[25]
      “The literate Petersburgers take a positively better and more
      intelligent attitude to medical treatment” (ibid., 34), so
      that infectious diseases are not so fatal among them as in the
      “little-cultured ” volosts (author’s italics).—Lenin

[26]
      “The uyezds from which there is migration are much superior to the
      agricultural and forest localities in the arrangement of their
      lives. . . . The clothes of the Petersburgers are much cleaner, smarter
      and more hygienic. . . . The children are kept cleaner, and that is why
      the itch and other skin diseases are not so frequent among them”
      (ibid., 39. Cf. Industries Employing Migratory Workers in
      Smolensk Gubernia, p. 8). “The villages from which there is
      migration differ considerably from those from which there is none: houses,
      clothes, habits and amusements remind one more of town than of village
      life” (Industries Employing Migratory Workers in Smolensk
      Gubernia, p. 3). In the volosts of Kostroma Gubernia from which there
      is migration “you find paper, ink, pencils and pens in half the
      houses” (Women’s Country, 67-68).—Lenin

[27]
Women’s Country, 26-27, 15.—Lenin

[28]
Ibid., p. 27.—Lenin

[29]
      For example, the Kostroma peasants are prompted to become registered as
      burghers, among other things by possible “corporal
      punishment,” which is “even more awful to the flashy
      Petersburger than to the raw country dweller” (ibid., 58).—Lenin

[30]
Ibid., 88.—Lenin

[31]
Yuridichesky Vestnik, 1890, No. 9, p. 142.—Lenin

[32]
      This expression is in English in the original.—Ed.

[33]
      Cf. Chapter IV, § IV, pp. 270-271.—Lenin

[34]
Statistical Survey of Kaluga Gubernia for 1896, Sec. II, p. 48.—Lenin

[35]
Ibid., Sec. I, p. 27.—Lenin

[36]
Ibid., p. 41.—Lenin

[37]
Ibid., p. 40, author’s italics.—Lenin

[38]
Women’s Country, 39 and 8. “Will not these genuine
      peasants (newly-entered) exert a sobering influence, by the prosperous
      life they lead, upon the native population, who regard not the land but
      employment away from home as their main source of livelihood?” (p
      40). “Incidentally,” remarks the author sadly, “we have
      already cited an example of the opposite influence.” Here is the
      example. Vologda folk bought land and lived “very
      prosperously.” “In reply to the question I put to one of them
      as to why, though well-off, he let his son go to St. Petersburg, he said:
      ‘It’s true we are not poor, but life is very dull here, and my
      son, seeing others go, wanted to get educated himself; at home too he was
      the one with knowledge’” (p. 25). Poor Narodniks! How can they
      help deploring the fact that even the example of well-to-do,
      land-purchasing muzhik farmer cannot “sober” the youth, who,
      in their desire to “get educated,” flee from the
      “allotment that secures them their livelihood”!—Lenin

[39]
The Influence of Industries Employing Migratory Workers,
      etc., 33, author’s italics.—Lenin

[40]
Yuridichesky Vestnik, 1890, No. 9, 138.—Lenin

[41]
Russkaya Mysl (not Russky Vestnik, but Russkaya

Mysl),[45]
      1887, No. 9, p. 163.—Lenin

[42]
Residential Permits, etc., p. 7.—Lenin

[43]
Russkoye Bogatstvo, 1896, No. 7, p. 18. So then, the
      “main” requirements are to be met by the allotment, and the
      rest apparently by “local employments” secured in the
      “countryside,” which “suffers from a shortage of capable
      and healthy labourers”!—Lenin
 


[44]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. III, Moscow, 1959, p. 622.  [p. 562]
    


[45]
      In the 1890s Russkaya Mysl was a liberal publication and
      Russky Vestnik, a magazine expressing the reactionary view.
      [p. 580]
    

 
  

I. The Growth of Commodity Circulation

|

III. The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Eight: III. The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




      III. The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour
    

      In considering the development of capitalism, perhaps the greatest
      importance attaches to the extent to which wage-labour is
      employed. Capitalism is that stage in the development of
      commodity-production in which labour power, too, becomes a commodity. The
      main tendency of capitalism is to apply the sum-total of labour-power in
      the national economy to production only after it has been sold and has
      been purchased by the employers. Above, we made an attempt to show in
      detail how this tendency has manifested itself in post-Reform Russia; now,
      we must draw the necessary conclusions. Firstly, let us compute the data
      on the number of sellers of labour-power given in the preceding chapters
      and then (in the next section) describe the purchasers of labour-power.

    

      The sellers of labour-power are provided by the country’s working
      population engaged in the production of material values. It is estimated
      that this population numbers about 15.5 million adult male

      workers.[1]

 In
      Chapter II we showed

 

      that the bottom group of the peasantry is nothing else than a rural
      proletariat; and we stated (p. 177, footnote) that the forms in which this
      proletariat sells its labour-power would be examined later. Let us now
      combine the categories of wage-workers previously enumerated: 1)
      agricultural wage-workers. These number about 3 1/2 million (in European
      Russia). 2) Factory, mining and railway workers—about 1

      1/2 million. Total, five million professional wage-workers. Further: 3)
      building workers—about 1 million. 4) Lumber workers (tree-fellers,
      log trimmers, rafters, etc.), navvies, railway builders, goods loaders and
      unloaders, and in general all kinds of “unskilled” labourers
      in industrial centres. These number about

2 million.[2]

 5)
      Workers occupied at home for capitalists, and also those working for wages
      in the manufacturing industries not included in “factory
      industry.” These number about 2 million.

    

      Total—about ten million wage-workers. If we deduct the
      women and children, say

      one-fourth,[3]

 we get
      7 1/2 million adult male wage-workers, i.e., about half
      the total adult male population that is engaged in the production of
      material

      values[4]

 in the
      country. Part of this vast mass of wage-workers have completely broken
      with the land, and live entirely by the sale of their labour-power. They
      include the great majority of factory (undoubtedly also of mining and
      railway) workers, then a section of the building and shipbuilding workers,
      and unskilled labourers; finally, a fairly large section of the workers
      employed in capitalist

 

      manufactories and the inhabitants of non-agricultural centres engaged in
      home work for capitalists. The other, and larger, section has not yet
      broken with the land, covers its expenditures in part with the produce
      that comes from farming tiny plots of land, and, consequently, forms the
      type of allotment-holding wage-worker which we attempted to describe in
      detail in Chapter II. In earlier remarks it was shown that this vast mass
      of wage-workers has been formed mainly in the post-Reform period and that
      it continues to grow rapidly.

    

      It is important to note the significance of our conclusion regarding the
      relative surplus-population (or reserve army of unemployed) created by
      capitalism. The data regarding the total number of wage-workers in all
      branches of the national economy bring out very clearly the basic error
      committed by the Narodnik economists on this point. As we have had
      occasion to observe elsewhere (Studies,

pp. 38–42),[5]

 this error
      lies in the fact that the Narodnik economists (Messrs. V. V., N.–on and
      others), who have talked a great deal about capitalism
      “freeing” the workers, have not thought of investigating the
      concrete forms of capitalist over-population in Russia; as well as in the
      fact that they failed completely to understand that the very existence and
      development of capitalism in this country require an enormous mass of
      reserve workers. By means of paltry phrases and curious calculations as to
      the number of “factory”

      workers,[6]

 they have
      transformed one of the basic conditions for the development of capitalism
      into proof

      that capitalism is impossible, is an error, is devoid of foundation,
      etc. Actually, however, Russian capitalism could never have developed to
      its present level, could not have survived a single year, had the
      expropriation of the small producers not created an army of many millions
      of wage-workers ready at the first call to satisfy the maximum demand of
      the employers in agriculture, lumbering, building, commerce and in the
      manufacturing, mining, and transport industries, etc. We say the maximum
      demand, because capitalism can only develop spasmodically, and
      consequently, the number of producers who need to sell their labour-power
      must always exceed capitalism’s average demand for workers. We have
      now estimated the total number of the various categories of wage-workers,
      but in doing so do not wish to say that capitalism is in a position to
      give regular employment to them all. There is not, nor can there be, such
      regularity of employment in capitalist society, whichever category of
      wage-worker we take. Of the millions of migratory and resident workers a
      certain section is constantly in the reserve army of unemployed, and this
      reserve army now swells to enormous dimensions—in years of crisis,
      or if there is a slump in some industry in a particular district, or if
      there is a particularly rapid extension of machine production, which
      displaces workers— and now shrinks to a minimum, even causing that
      “shortage” of labour which is often the subject of complaint
      by employers in some industries, in some years, in some parts of the
      country. It is impossible to determine even approximately the number of
      unemployed in an average year, owing to the complete absence of anything
      like reliable statistics; but there is no doubt that the number must be a
      very large one, as is evidenced by both the tremendous fluctuations in
      capitalist industry, trade and agriculture, to which repeated reference
      was made above, and by the usual deficits in the budgets of the
      bottom-group peasants recorded by Zemstvo statistics. The increase in the
      number of peasants thrown into the ranks of the industrial and rural
      proletariat, and the increase in the demand for wage-labour, are two sides
      of one medal. As for the forms of wage-labour, they are extremely diverse
      in n capitalist society still everywhere enmeshed in survivals and
      institutions of the pre-capitalist

 

      regime. It is a profound error to ignore this diversity of forms, and that
      is the error of those who, like Mr. V. V., argue that capitalism has
      “fenced off a corner for itself with some one to one-and-a-half
      million workers and never emerges from

      it.”[7]

 Here we
      have large-scale machine industry instead of capitalism. But how
      arbitrarily and how artificially are these million and a half workers
      fenced off into a special “corner” that is supposedly in no
      way connected with the remaining spheres of wage-labour! As a matter of
      fact, the connection is a very close one, and it will be sufficient, in
      order to characterise it, to mention two basic features of the present
      economic system. Firstly, this system is based on money economy. The
      “power of money” manifests itself in full force in both
      industry and agriculture, in both town and country, but it reaches its
      full development, completely eliminates the remnants of patriarchal
      economy, is concentrated in a few gigantic institutions (banks) and is
      directly connected with large-scale social production only in the sphere
      of large-scale machine industry. Secondly, the economic system of today is
      based on the purchase and sale of labour-power. If we take even the
      smallest producers in agriculture or in industry, we will find that the
      one who does not hire himself out, or himself hire others, is the
      exception. But here again, these relationships reach full development and
      become completely separated from previous forms of economy only in large
      scale machine industry. Hence, the “corner” which seems so
      small to some Narodnik actually embodies the quintessence of modern social
      relationships, and the population of this “corner,” i.e., the
      proletariat, is, in the literal sense of the word, the vanguard of the
      whole mass of toilers and

      exploited.[8]
 

      Therefore, only by examining the whole of the present economic system from
      the angle of the relationships that have grown up in this
      “corner” can one become clear about the main relations between
      the various groups of persons taking part in production, and,
      consequently, trace the system’s main trend of development. On the
      other hand, whoever turns his back on this “corner” and
      examines economic phenomena from the angle of petty patriarchal
      production, is turned by the march of history into either an innocent
      dreamer or an ideologist of the petty bourgeoisie and the agrarians.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      The figure given in the Combined Statistical Material,
      etc. (published by Chancellory of the Committee of Ministers,
      1894), is 15,546,618. This figure was reached in the following way. The
      urban population was taken as equal to the population not participating in
      the production of material values. The adult male peasant population was
      reduced by 7% (4.5% on military service and 2.5% in civilian service).—Lenin

[2]
      Above we saw that lumber workers alone are estimated at about 2
      million. The number of workers employed in the last two groups of
      occupations we have indicated should be larger than the total number of
      non-agricultural migratory workers, for part of the building workers,
      unskilled labourers, particularly lumber workers are local and not
      migratory workers. And we have seen that the number of non-agricultural
      migratory workers is not less than 3 million.—Lenin

[3]
      In factory industry, as we have seen, women and children constitute a
      little over 1/4 of the total number of workers. In the mining, building
      and lumber industries, etc., few women and children are employed. In
      capitalist domestic industry, on the other hand, they are probably more
      numerous than men.—Lenin

[4]
      To avoid misunderstanding, let us make the reservation that we do not
      claim these figures to be statistically exact. We merely wish to show
      approximately the diversity of the forms of wage-labour and the numbers of
      those engaged in it.—Lenin

[5]
      Cf. present edition, Vol. 2, “A Characterisation of Economic
      Romanticism.”—Ed.

[6]
      Let us recall the argument of Mr. N.–on about the “handful”
      of workers, and also the following, truly classic, calculation by
      Mr. V. V. (Essays on Theoretical Economics, p. 131). In the 50
      gubernias of European Russia there are 15,547,000 adult male workers
      belonging to the peasant estate; of these, 1,020,000 (863,000 in factory
      industry + 160,000 railway workers) are “united by capital”;
      the rest are the “agricultural population.” With the
      “complete capitalisation of the manufacturing industries”
      “capitalist factory industry” will employ twice as many hands
      (13.3% in place of 7.6%, while the remaining 86.7% of the population
      “will remain on the land and be idle during half the
      year”). Obviously, comment could only spoil the impression created
      by this wonderful specimen of economic science and economic statistics.—Lenin

[7]
Novoye Slovo, 1896, No. 6, p. 21.—Lenin

[8]
Mutatis mutandis, the same may be said of the relation between
      wage-workers in large-scale machine industry and the rest of the
      wage-workers as the Webbs say of the relation between trade unionists in
      Britain and non-unionists: “The trade unionists number about 4 per
      cent of the total population . . . the trade unionists number about 20 per
      cent of the adult male manual working class.” But “Die
      Gewerkschaftler . . . zahlen . . . in der Regel die Elite des Gewerbes in
      ihren Reihen. Der moralische und geistige Einfluss, den sie auf die Masse
      ihrer Berufsgenossen ausuben, steht deshalb ausser jedem Verhaltniss zu
      ihrer numerischen Starke” (S. & B. Webb: Die Geschichte des
      britischen

Trade Unionismus, Stuttgart, Dietz, 1895,
      S. S. 363, 365, 381) [“the trade unionists . . . include, as a
      general rule, the picked men in each trade. The moral and intellectual
      influence which they exercise on the rest of their class is, therefore,
      out of all proportion to their numbers.” (S. and B. Webb: The
      History of Trade Unionism, London, 1902, pp. 409, 411,
      430). –Ed.]—Lenin
 

 
  

II. The Growth of the Commercial and Industrial Population

|

IV. The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Eight: IV. The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




      IV. The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power
    

      To sum up the data given earlier on this problem we shall confine
      ourselves to the picture of the movement of workers over the territory of
      European Russia. Such a picture is supplied by the Department of
      Agriculture’s

      publication[1]

 based
      on statements by employers. The picture of the movement of workers will
      give a general idea of how the home market for labour-power is being
      formed; using the material of the publication mentioned, we have only
      tried to draw a distinction between the movement of agricultural and
      non-agricultural workers, although the map appended to the publication and
      illustrating the movement of the workers does not show this distinction.

    
      The main movements of agricultural workers are the following: 1) From the
      central agricultural gubernias to

 

      the southern and eastern outer regions. 2) From the northern black-earth
      gubernias to the southern black-earth gubernias, from which, in turn, the
      workers go to the border regions (cf. Chapter III, § IX, pp.  237-238 and
      § X, pp.  242-243). 3) From the central agricultural gubernias to the
      industrial gubernias (cf. Chapter IV, § IV, pp.  270-271). 4) From the
      central and the south-western agricultural gubernias to the area of
      sugar-beet plantations (workers come in part to these places even from
      Galicia).

    

      The main movements of non-agricultural workers are: 1) To the
      metropolitan cities and the large towns, chiefly from the non-agricultural
      gubernias, but to a considerable degree also from the agricultural
      gubernias. 2) To the industrial area, to the factories of Vladimir,
      Yaroslavl and other gubernias from the same localities. 3) To new centres
      of industry or to new branches of industry, to centres of non-factory
      industry, etc. These include the movement: a) to the beet-sugar refineries
      of the south-western gubernias; b) to the southern mining area; c) to jobs
      at the docks (Odessa, Rostov-on-Don, Riga, etc.); d) to the peat beds in
      Vladimir and other gubernias; e) to the mining and metallurgical area of
      the Urals; f) to the fisheries (Astrakhan, the Black Sea, Azov Sea, etc.);
      g) to shipbuilding, sailoring, lumbering and rafting jobs, etc.; h) to
      jobs on the railways, etc.

    

      These are the main movements of the workers which, according to the
      evidence of employers, more or less materially affect the conditions of
      labour hire in the various localities. To appreciate more clearly the
      significance of these movements, let us compare them with the data on
      wages in the various districts from and to which the workers
      migrate. Confining ourselves to 28 gubernias in European Russia, we divide
      these into 6 groups according to the character of the movement of workers,
      and get the following

      data:[2]









      This table clearly shows us the basis of the process that creates the home
      market for labour-power and, consequently, the home market for
      capitalism. Two main areas, those most developed capitalistically, attract
      vast numbers of workers: the area of agricultural capitalism (the southern
      and the eastern outer regions), and the area of industrial capitalism (the
      metropolitan and the industrial gubernias). Wages are lowest in the area
      of departure, the central agricultural gubernias, where capitalism, both
      in agriculture and in industry, is least

      developed[3];

in the
      influx areas, on the other hand, wages rise for all types of work, as does
      also the percentage of money wage to total wage, i.e., money economy gains
      ground at the expense of natural economy. The intermediary areas, those
      between the areas of the greatest influx (and of the highest wages) and
      the area of departure (and of the lowest wages) reveal the mutual
      replacement of workers to which reference was made above: workers leave in
      such numbers that in the places of departure a shortage of labour is
      created which attracts workers from the more “poorly paid”
      gubernias.

    

      In essence, the two-sided process shown in our table—that of the
      diversion of population from agriculture to industry (industrialisation of
      the population) and of the development of commercial-industrial,
      capitalist agriculture (industrialisation of agriculture)—epitomises
      all that

 

      has been said above on the formation of a home market for capitalist
      society. The home market for capitalism is created by the parallel
      development of capitalism in agriculture and in

      industry,[4]

 by the
      formation of a class of rural and industrial employers, on the one hand,
      and of a class of rural and industrial wage-workers, on the other. The
      main streams of the movement of workers show the main forms of this
      process, but by far not all the forms; in what has gone before we have
      shown that the forms of this process differ in peasant and in landlord
      farming, in the different areas of commercial agriculture, in the
      different stages of the capitalist development of industry, etc.

    

      How far this process is distorted and confused by the representatives of
      Narodnik economics is seen most clearly in § VI of Part 2 of
      Mr. N.–on’s Sketches, which bears the significant heading:
      “The Influence of the Redistribution of the Social Productive Forces
      upon the Economic Position of the Agricultural Population.” Here is
      how Mr. N.–on pictures this “redistribution”: “. . . In
      capitalist . . . society, every increase in the productive power of labour
      entails the ‘freeing’ of a corresponding number of workers,
      who are compelled to seek some other employment; and since this occurs in
      all branches of production, and this ‘freeing’ takes place
      over the whole of capitalist society, the only thing left open to them is
      to turn to the means of production of which they have not yet been
      deprived, namely, the land” (p. 126). . . . “Our peasants have
      not been deprived of the land, and that is why they turn their efforts
      towards it. When they lose their employment in the factory, or are obliged
      to abandon their subsidiary domestic occupations, they see no other course
      but to set about the increased exploitation of the soil. All Zemstvo
      statistical returns

 

      note the fact that the area under cultivation is growing. . .”
      (128).

    

      As you see, Mr. N.–on knows of quite a special sort of capitalism that
      has never existed anywhere and that no economist could conceive
      of. Mr. N.–on’s capitalism does not divert the population from
      agriculture to industry, does not divide the agriculturists into opposite
      classes. Quite the contrary. Capitalism “frees” the workers
      from industry and there is nothing left for “them” to do but
      to turn to the land, for “our peasants have not been deprived of the
      land”!! At the bottom of this “theory,” which originally
      “redistributes” in poetic disorder all the processes of
      capitalist development, lie the ingenious tricks of all Narodniks which we
      have examined in detail previously: they lump together the peasant
      bourgeoisie and the rural proletariat; they ignore the growth of
      commercial farming; they concoct stories about
      “people’s” “handicraft industries” being
      isolated from “capitalist” “factory industry,”
      instead of analysing the consecutive forms and diverse manifestations of
      capitalism in industry.
    
 

Notes
 

[1]
      “Agricultural and statistical information based on material obtained
      from farmers. Vol. V. Hired Labour on private-landowner farms and
      the movement of workers, according to a statistical and economic survey of
      agriculture and industry in European Russia.” Compiled by
      S. A. Korolenko. Published by Department of Agriculture and Rural
      Industries, St. Petersburg, 1892.—Lenin

[2]
      The other gubernias are omitted in order not to complicate our exposition
      with data that contribute nothing new to the subject under examination;
      furthermore, the other gubernias are either untouched by the main, mass,
      movements of workers (Urals, the North) or have their specific
      ethnographical, administrative and juridical features (the Baltic
      gubernias, the gubernias in the Jewish Pale of

 

Settlement, the
      Byelorussian gubernias, etc.). Data from the publication cited above. Wage
      figures are the average for the gubernias in the respective groups; the
      day labourer’s summer wage is the average for three seasons: sowing,
      haymaking and harvesting. The areas (1 to 6) include the following
      gubernias: 1) Taurida, Bessarabia and Don; 2) Kherson, Ekaterinoslav,
      Samara, Saratov, Orenburg; 3) Simbirsk, Voronezh, Kharkov; 4) Kazan,
      Penza, Tambov, Ryazan, Tula, Orel, Kursk; 5) Pskov, Novgorod, Kaluga,
      Kostroma, Tver, Nizhni-Novgorod; 6) St. Petersburg, Moscow, Yaroslavl,
      Vladimir.—Lenin

[3]
      Thus, the peasants flee in mass from the localities where patriarchal
      economic relationships are most prevalent, where labour-service and
      primitive forms of industry are preserved to the greatest extent, to
      localities where the “pillars” are completely decayed. They
      flee from “people’s production” and pay no heed to the
      chorus of voices from “society” following in their wake. In
      this chorus two voices can be clearly distinguished: “They have
      little attachment!” comes the menacing bellow of the Black-Hundred

      Sobakevich.[5]
      “They have insufficient allotment land!” is the polite
      correction of the Cadet Manilov.—Lenin

[4]
      Theoretical economics established this simple truth long ago. To say
      nothing of Marx, who pointed directly to the development of capitalism in
      agriculture as a process that creates a “home market for industrial
      capital” (Das Kapital, I 2, S. 776, Chapter 24,

Sec. 5), [6] let us refer
      to Adam Smith. In chapter XI of Book I and Chapter IV of Book III of
      The Wealth of Nations, he pointed to the most characteristic
      features of the development of capitalist agriculture and noted the
      parallelism of this process with the process of the growth of the towns
      and the development of industry.—Lenin
 


[5]
Sobakevich– a character in Gogol’s Dead Souls,
  the personification of the bullying, tight-fisted landlord.  [p. 589]
    


[6]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, Chapter 30 (p. 745).
  [p.  590]
    

 
  

III. The Growth of the Employment of Wage-Labour

|

V. The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign Market?

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign Market?




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Eight: V. The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign Market?








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




      V. The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign
      Market?
    

      In Chapter I we pointed to the erroneous character of the theory that
      links the problem of a foreign market for capitalism with that of the
      realisation of the product (pp. 64-65 and foll.). Capitalism’s need
      of a foreign market is by no means to be explained by the impossibility of
      realising the product on the home market, but by the circumstance that
      capitalism is in no position to go on repeating the same processes of
      production on the former scale, under unchanging conditions (as was the
      case under pre-capitalist regimes), and that it inevitably leads to an
      unlimited growth of production which overflows the old, narrow limits of
      earlier economic units. With the unevenness of development inherent in
      capitalism, one branch of production outstrips the others and strives to
      transcend the bounds of the old field of economic relations. Let us take,
      for example, the textile industry at the beginning of the post-Reform
      period. Being fairly

 

well developed capitalistically (manufacture
      beginning to pass into factory industry), it had gained complete command
      of the market of Central Russia. But the big factories, growing so
      rapidly, could no longer be satisfied with the former dimensions of the
      market; they began to seek a market further afield, among the new
      population colonising Novorossia, the south-east Transvolga region, North
      Caucasus, then Siberia, etc. The efforts of the big factories to reach out
      beyond the old markets are undoubted. Does it mean that the areas which
      served as these old markets could not, in general, consume a larger
      quantity of the products of the textile industry? Does it mean, for
      example, that the industrial and central agricultural gubernias cannot, in
      general, absorb a larger quantity of wares? No, it does not. We know that
      the differentiation of the peasantry, the growth of commercial agriculture
      and the increase in the industrial population have also expanded, and
      continue to expand, the home market of this old area. But this expansion
      of the home market is retarded by many factors (chief among them the
      retention of obsolete institutions which hinder the development of
      agricultural capitalism); and the factory owners will not, of course, wait
      until the capitalist development of other branches of the national economy
      catches up with that of the textile industry. The mill owners need a
      market at once, and if the backwardness of other branches of the national
      economy restricts the market in the old area, they will seek for a market
      in another area, or in other countries, or in the colonies of the old
      country.

    

      What is a colony in the politico-economic sense? It was stated above that,
      according to Marx, the main features of this concept are the following: 1)
      the existence of unoccupied, free lands, easily accessible to settlers; 2)
      the existence of an established world division of labour, of a world
      market, thanks to which the colonies can specialise in the mass production
      of agricultural produce, receiving in exchange finished industrial goods
      “which they would have to produce themselves under other
      circumstances” (see above, p.  258, footnote, Chapter IV,
    § II). Reference has been made elsewhere to the fact that the
    southern and
      the eastern border regions of European Russia, which have been settled in
      the post-Reform period, bear the

 

distinctive features mentioned and
      constitute, in the economic sense, colonies of Central European

      Russia.[1]

 The term
      colony is still more applicable to the other outer regions, for example,
      the Caucasus. Its economic “conquest” by Russia took place
      much later than the political conquest; and to this day this economic
      conquest has not been completed to the full. In the post-Reform period
      there has been, on the one hand, an intensive colonisation of the

      Caucasus,[2]

 an
      extensive ploughing up of the land (particularly in the North Caucasus) by
      colonists producing wheat, tobacco, etc., for sale, and attracting masses
      of rural wage-workers from Russia. On the other hand, native age-old
      “handicraft” industries, which are declining due to the
      competition of wares from Moscow, are being eliminated. There has been a
      decline in the ancient gunsmith’s craft due to the competition of
      imported Tula and Belgian wares, a decline in handicraft iron-work due to
      the competition of the imported Russian products, as well as in the
      handicraft processing of copper, gold and silver, clay, fats and soda,
      leather,

      etc.[3]

 These
      products are turned out more cheaply in Russian factories, which supply
      the Caucasus with their wares. There has been a decline in the making of
      drinking-horns because of the decay of the feudal system in Georgia and of
      the steady disappearance of her memorable feasts; there has been a decline
      in the headgear industry due to the replacement of Asiatic dress by
      European; there has been a decline in the production of wine-skins and
      pitchers for local wine, which for the first time is now being sold
      (giving rise to the barrel-making trade) and has in turn captured the
      Russian

 

market. Russian capitalism has thus been drawing the Caucasus into
      the sphere of world commodity circulation, obliterating its local
      peculiarities— the remnants of ancient patriarchal
      isolation—and providing itself with a market for its
      factories. A country thinly populated at the beginning of the post-Reform
      period, or populated by mountaineers living outside world economy and even
      outside history, has been turning into a land of oil industrialists, wine
      merchants, big wheat and tobacco growers, and

Mr. Coupon[6] has been
      ruthlessly divesting the proud mountaineer of his picturesque national
      costume and dressing him in the livery of a European flunkey (Gleb

      Uspensky).[7] The
      process of rapid colonisation in the Caucasus and of the rapid growth of
      its agricultural population has been accompanied by a process (obscured by
      this growth) of the diversion of the population from agriculture to
      industry. The urban population of the Caucasus increased from 350,000 in
      1863 to about 900,000 in 1897 (the total population increased between 1851
      and 1897 by 95%). There is no need to add that the same thing has taken
      place and continues in both Central Asia and Siberia, etc.

    

      Thus, the question naturally arises, where is the border line between the
      home and the foreign market? To take the political boundaries of the state
      would be too mechanical a solution—and would it be a solution? If
      Central Asia is the home market and Persia the foreign market, to which
      category do Khiva and Bokhara belong? If Siberia is the home market and
      China the foreign market, to which category does Manchuria belong? Such
      questions are not of great importance. What is important is that
      capitalism cannot exist and develop without constantly expanding the
      sphere of its domination, without colonising new countries and drawing old
      non-capitalist countries into the whirlpool of world economy. And this
      feature of capitalism has been and continues to be manifested with
      tremendous force in post-Reform Russia.

    

      Hence, the process of the formation of a market for capitalism has two
      aspects, namely, the development of capitalism in depth, i.e., the further
      growth of capitalist agriculture and industry in the given, definite and
      enclosed territory—and the development of capitalism in breadth,

 

      i.e., the extension of the sphere of the capitalist domination to new
      territory. In accordance with the plan of the present work, we have
      confined ourselves almost exclusively to the first aspect of the process,
      and for this reason we consider it particular]y necessary to stress the
      point here that its other aspect is of exceptionally great
      importance. Anything like a complete study of the process of colonisation
      of the border regions and of the expansion of Russian territory, from the
      point of view of capitalist development, would require a special
      work. Suffice it to mention here that Russia is in a particularly favoured
      position as compared with other capitalist countries, due to the abundance
      of free land accessible for colonisation in her border

      regions.[4]

 To say
      nothing of Asiatic Russia we have also in European Russia border regions
      which, because of their exceeding remoteness and bad means of
      communication, are still very poorly connected economically with central
      Russia. Let us take, for instance, the “Far North”
      —Archangel Gubernia; the boundless stretches of territory and their
      natural resources are still exploited very slightly. One of the principal
      local products, timber, was until recently exported mainly to England. In
      this respect, therefore, that part of European Russia was a foreign market
      for Britain without being a home market for Russia. The Russian
      entrepreneurs

 

naturally envied the British, and now, with the extension of
      the railway line to Archangel, they are jubilant at the prospect of
      “elevated moods and business activity in various branches of
      industry in the

      region.”[5]

 

Notes
 

[1]
      “. . . It was thanks exclusively to them, thanks to these forms of
      people’s production, and on the basis of them that the whole of
      South Russia was colonised and settled.” (Mr. N.–on,
      Sketches, 284). How wonderfully broad and comprehensive is the
      term: “forms of people’s production”! It covers whatever
      you like: patriarchal peasant farming, labour-service, primitive
      handicrafts, small commodity-production, and those typically capitalist
      relations within the peasant community that we saw above in the data on
      the Taurida and Samara gubernias (Chapter II, etc., etc.—Lenin

[2]
      Cf. articles by Mr. P. Semyonov in Vestnik Finansov, 1897,
      No. 21, and by V. Mikhailovsky in Novoye Slovo, June 1897.—Lenin

[3]
      See article by K. Khatisov in Vol. II of Reports and Investigations of
      Handicraft Industry, and by P. Ostryakov in Vol. V. of
      Transactions of the Handicraft Commission.—Lenin

[4]
      The circumstance indicated in the text has another aspect. The development
      of capitalism in depth in the old, long-inhabited territories is retarded
      because of the colonisation of the outer regions. The solution of the
      contradictions inherent in, and produced by, capitalism is temporarily
      postponed because of the fact that capitalism can easily develop in
      breadth. Thus, the simultaneous existence of the most advanced forms of
      industry and of semi-medieval forms of agriculture is undoubtedly a
      contradiction. If Russian capitalism had possessed no range for expansion
      beyond the bounds of the territory already occupied at the beginning of
      the post-Reform period, this contradiction between capitalist large-scale
      industry and the archaic institutions in rural life (the tying of the
      peasants to the land, etc.) would have had to lead quickly to the complete
      abolition of these institutions, to the complete clearing of the path for
      agricultural capitalism in Russia. But the possibility (for the mill
      owner) of seeking and finding a market in the outer regions in process of
      colonisation and the possibility (for the peasant) of moving to new
      territory, mitigates the acuteness of this contradiction and delays its
      solution. It goes without saying that such a deceleration of the growth of
      capitalism is equivalent to preparing its even greater extension in the
      near future.—Lenin

[5]
Productive Forces, XX, 12.—Lenin
 


[6]
Mr. Coupon—a term adopted in the 1880s and 1890s
  to indicate capital and capitalists. The expression
  “Mr. Coupon” was put in circulation by the writer Gleb
  Uspensky in his articles “Grave Sins.” [p. 594]
    


[7]
      See Gleb Uspensky’s article “In the Caucasus.”
  Works, Vol. II, 1918.  [p. 594]
    

 
  

IV. The Formation of a Home Market for Labour-Power

|

VI. The “Mission” of Capitalism

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The "Mission" of Capitalism




Lenin: 1899: Development of Capitalism in Russia: Chapter Eight: VI. The 'Mission' of Capitalism








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
The DEVELOPMENT of CAPITALISM in RUSSIA
Chapter VIII. The Formation of the Home Market




      VI. The “Mission” of Capitalism
    

      We still have, in conclusion, to sum up on the question which in
      literature has come to be known as that of the “mission” of
      capitalism, i.e., of its historical role in the economic development of
      Russia. Recognition of the progressiveness of this role is quite
      compatible (as we have tried to show in detail at every stage in our
      exposition of the facts) with the full recognition of the negative and
      dark sides of capitalism, with the full recognition of the profound and
      all-round social contradictions which are inevitably inherent in
      capitalism, and which reveal the historically transient character of this
      economic regime. It is the Narodniks—who exert every effort to show
      that an admission of the historically progressive nature of capitalism
      means an apology for capitalism—who are at fault in underrating (and
      some times in even ignoring) the most profound contradictions of Russian
      capitalism, by glossing over the differentiation of the peasantry, the
      capitalist character of the evolution of our agriculture, and the rise of
      a class of rural and industrial allotment-holding wage-labourers, by
      glossing over the complete predominance of the lowest and worst forms of
      capitalism in the celebrated “handicraft” industries.

    

      The progressive historical role of capitalism may be summed up in two
      brief propositions: increase in the productive forces of social labour,
      and the socialisation of that labour. But both these facts manifest
      themselves in extremely diverse processes in different branches of the
      national economy.

    

      The development of the productive forces of social labour is to be
      observed in full relief only in the epoch of large-scale machine
      industry. Until that highest stage of capitalism was reached, there still
      remained hand production and primitive technique, which developed quite
      spontaneously and exceedingly slowly. The post-Reform epoch differs
      radically

 

      in this respect from previous epochs in Russian history. The Russia of the
      wooden plough and the flail, of the water-mill and the hand-loom, began
      rapidly to be transformed into the Russia of the iron plough and the
      threshing machine, of the steam-mill and the power-loom. An equally
      thorough transformation of technique is seen in every branch of the
      national economy where capitalist production predominates. This process of
      transformation must, by the very nature of capitalism, take place in the
      midst of much that is uneven and disproportionate: periods of prosperity
      alternate with periods of crisis, the development of one industry leads to
      the decline of another, there is progress in one aspect of agriculture in
      one area and in another aspect in another area, the growth of trade and
      industry outstrips the growth of agriculture, etc. A large number of
      errors made by Narodnik writers spring from their efforts to prove that
      this disproportionate, spasmodic, feverish development is not

      development.[1]


      Another feature of the development by capitalism of the social productive
      forces is that the growth of the means of production (productive
      consumption) outstrips by far the growth of personal consumption: we have
      indicated on more than one occasion how this is manifested in agriculture
      and in industry. This feature springs from the general

 

      laws of the realisation of the product in capitalist society, and fully
      conforms to the antagonistic nature of this

      society.[2]


      The socialisation of labour by capitalism is manifested in the following
      processes. Firstly, the very growth of commodity-production destroys the
      scattered condition of small economic units that is characteristic of
      natural economy and draws together the small local markets into an
      enormous national (and then world) market. Production for oneself is
      transformed into production for the whole of society; and the greater the
      development of capitalism, the stronger becomes the contradiction between
      this collective character of production and the individual character of
      appropriation. Secondly, capitalism replaces the former scattered
      production by an unprecedented concentration both in agriculture and in
      industry. That is the most striking and outstanding, but not the only,
      manifestation of the feature of capitalism under review. Thirdly,
      capitalism eliminates the forms of personal dependence that constituted an
      inalienable component of preceding systems of economy. In Russia, the
      progressive character of capitalism in this respect is particularly
      marked, since the personal dependence of the producer existed in our
      country (and partly continues to exist to this day), not only in
      agriculture, but in manufacturing industry (“factories”
      employing serf labour), in the mining and metallurgical industries, in the
      fishing industry,

 

      etc.[3]

 Compared with
      the labour of the dependent or bonded peasant, the labour of the hired
      worker is progressive in all branches of the national economy. Fourthly,
      capitalism necessarily creates mobility of the population, something not
      required by previous systems of social economy and impossible under them
      on anything like a large scale. Fifthly, capitalism constantly reduces the
      proportion of the population engaged in agriculture (where the most
      backward forms of social and economic relationships always prevail), and
      increases the number of large industrial centres. Sixthly, capitalist
      society increases the population’s need for association, for
      organisation, and lends these organisations a character distinct from
      those of former times. While breaking down the narrow, local,
      social-estate associations of medieval society and creating fierce
      competition, capitalism at the same time splits the whole of society into
      large groups of persons occupying different positions in production, and
      gives a tremendous impetus to organisation within each such

      group.[4]

 Seventhly,
      all the above-mentioned changes effected in the old economic system by
      capitalism inevitably lead also to a change in the mentality of the
      population. The spasmodic character of economic development, the rapid
      transformation of the methods of production and the enormous concentration
      of production, the disappearance of all forms of personal dependence and
      patriarchalism in relationships, the mobility of the population, the
      influence of the big industrial centres, etc.—all this cannot but
      lead to a profound change in the very character of the producers,

 

      and we have had occasion to note the corresponding observations of Russian
      investigators.
    

      Turning now to Narodnik economics, with whose representatives we have
      constantly had to polemise, we may sum up the causes of our differences
      with them as follows. First, we cannot but regard as absolutely wrong the
      Narodniks’ very conception of the process of capitalist development
      in Russia, and their notion of the system of economic relationships that
      preceded capitalism in Russia; and what is particularly important, from
      our point of view, is their ignoring of the capitalist contradictions in
      the structure of peasant economy (both agricultural and
      industrial). Furthermore, whether the development of capitalism in Russia
      is slow or rapid, depends entirely on what we compare this development
      with. If we compare the pre-capitalist epoch in Russia with the capitalist
      (and that is the comparison which is needed for arriving at a correct
      solution of the problem), the development of social economy under
      capitalism must be considered as extremely rapid. If, however, we compare
      the present rapidity of development with that which could be achieved with
      the general level of technique and culture as it is today, the present
      rate of development of capitalism in Russia really must be considered as
      slow. And it cannot but be slow, for in no single capitalist country has
      there been such an abundant survival of ancient institutions that are
      incompatible with capitalism, retard its development, and immeasurably
      worsen the condition of the producers, who “suffer not only from the
      development of capitalist production, but also from the incompleteness of
      that

      development.”[5] Finally, perhaps the profoundest cause of
      disagreement with the Narodniks is the difference in our fundamental views
      on social and economic processes. When studying the latter, the Narodnik
      usually draws conclusions that point to some moral; he does not regard the
      diverse groups of persons taking part in production as creators of various
      forms of life; he does not set out to present the sum-total of social and
      economic relationships as the result of the mutual relations between these
      groups, which have different interests and different historical
      roles. . . . If the writer of these lines has succeeded in providing some
      material for clarifying these problems, he may regard his labours as not
      having been fruitless.
    

 

Notes
 

[1]
      “Let us see what the further development of capitalism could bring
      even if we succeeded in sinking Britain to the bottom of the sea and in
      taking her place” (Mr. N.–on, Sketches, 210). The cotton
      industry of Britain and America, which meets 2/3 of the world’s
      demand, employs only a little over 600,000 people all told. “And it
      follows, that even if we got a considerable part of the world market...
      capitalism would still be unable to exploit the whole mass of labouring
      people which it is now continuously depriving of employment. What, indeed,
      are some 600,000 British and American workers compared with millions of
      peasants left for months on end without employment?” (211).
    

      “History has gone on till now, but goes on no longer.” Till
      now every step in the development of capitalism in the textile industry
      has been accompanied by the differentiation of the peasantry, by the
      growth of commercial agriculture and agricultural capitalism, by the
      diversion of population from agriculture to industry, by “millions
      of peasants” turning to building, lumbering and all sorts of other
      non-agricultural work for hire, by the migration of masses of people to
      the outer regions and by the conversion of these regions into a market for
      capitalism. All this, however, has only gone on till now; nothing of the
      sort occurs any longer!—Lenin

[2]
      His ignoring of the significance of the means of production and his
      careless attitude to “statistics” have led to the following
      utterly untenable statement by Mr. N.–on: “. . . all (!)
      capitalist production in the sphere of manufacturing industry at most
      produces new values to the amount of not more than 400 to 500 million
      rubles” (Sketches, 328). Mr. N.–on bases this calculation
      on the returns of the three-per-cent tax and the extra profits tax,
      without stopping to think whether such returns can cover “all
      capitalist production in the sphere of manufacturing industry.”
      Moreover, he takes returns which (on his own admission) do not cover the
      mining and metallurgical industries, and yet he includes in “new
      values” only surplus-value and variable capital. Our theoretician
      has forgotten that, in those branches of industry which produce goods for
      personal consumption, constant capital also represents new value for
      society and is exchanged for the variable capital and surplus-value
      of those branches of industry which produce means of production (mining
      and metallurgical industries, building, lumbering, railway construction,
      etc.). Had Mr. N.–on not confused the number of “factory”
      workers with the total number of workers capitalistically employed in
      manufacturing industry, he would easily have perceived the errors in his
      calculations.—Lenin

[3]
      For example, in one of the principal centres of the Russian fishing
      industry, the Murmansk coast, the “age-old” and truly
      “time hallowed” form of economic relationships was the

      “pokrut,”[6] which was already fully established in the 17th
      century and continued almost without change until recent times. “The
      relations between the pokrutmen and their masters are not limited to the
      time spent at the fisheries: on the contrary, they embrace the whole life
      of the pokrutmen, who are permanently dependent economically on their
      masters” (Material on Artels in Russia, Vol. II,
      St. Petersburg, 1874, p. 33). Fortunately, in this branch of industry
      also, capitalism is apparently marked by a “contemptuous attitude to
      its own historical past.” “Monopoly . . . is giving way to
      . . . the capitalist organisation of the industry with hired
      labourers” (Productive Forces, V, pp. 2-4).—Lenin

[4]
      Cf Studies, p. 91, footnote 85, p. 198. (See present edition,
      Vol. 2, “A Characterisation of Economic Romanticism.”
      –Ed.)—Lenin
 


[6]
Pokrut—the form of economic relations that existed among
      members of artels engaged in hunting sea animals or fishing in the north
      of Russia; the means of production in the artel belonged to an employer to
      whom the workers were in bondage. The employer usually received two-thirds
      of the catch, and the workers only one-third. The workers were compelled
      to sell part of their catch to the employer at a low price, payment being
      made in goods, which was very much to the disadvantage of the workers.
      [p.  599]
    


[5]
      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, p. 9.  [p. 600]
    

 
  

V. The Significance of the Border Regions. Home or Foreign Market?

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Appendices to “The Development of Capitalism in Russia”




Lenin: Appendices to 'The Development of Capitalism in Russia'









Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Appendices to “The Development 
of Capitalism in Russia”


Written: 1896-1899.
Source: Lenin’s Collected Works, 4th Edition, Moscow, 1964,
  Volume 3, pp. 601-608
Publisher: Progress Publishers
First Published: First printed in book form at the end 
  of March 1899. Published according to the text of the second edition, 1908.
Original Transcription & Markup: R. Cymbala (2000)
Re-Marked up by: Kevin Goins (2008)
Public Domain: Lenin Internet Archive (2000). You may freely copy, distribute, display and 
  perform this work; as well as make derivative and commercial works. 
  Please credit “Marxists Internet Archive” as your source.



Contents






Combined Table of Statistics on Small Peasant Industries of Moscow Gubernia (to 
Chapter V)
  601



Table of Statistics on the Factory Industry of European Russia (to Chapter VII)
  601



The Chief Centres of Factory Industry in European Russia (to Chapter VII)
  603

 
 








Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Combined Table of Statistics on Small Peasant Industries of Moscow Gubernia (to Chapter V)




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Combined Table of 
Statistics on Small Peasant Industries of Moscow Gubernia (to Chapter V)








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Appendices to “The Development of Capitalism in Russia”





Combined Table of Statistics on Small Peasant Industries of Moscow Gubernia
(to Chapter V)


This is a HUGE table pasted between pages 600 and 601.


 
  


|

Table of Statistics on the Factory 
Industry of European Russia (to Chapter VII)

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Table of Statistics on the Factory Industry of European Russia (to Chapter VII)




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: Table of Statistics 
on the Factory Industry of European Russia (to Chapter VII)








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Appendices to “The Development 
of Capitalism in Russia”




Table of Statistics on the Factory Industry of European Russia (to Chapter
VII)




 
  

Combined Table of Statistics
on Small Peasant Industries of Moscow Gubernia (to Chapter V)

|

The Chief Centres of Factory Industry 
in European Russia (to Chapter VII)

  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## The Chief Centres of Factory Industry in European Russia (to Chapter VII)




Lenin: 1899: The Development of Capitalism in Russia: The Chief Centres 
of Factory Industry in European Russia (to Chapter VII)








Vladimir Ilyich Lenin
Appendices to “The Development
of Capitalism in Russia”




The Chief Centres of Factory Industry in European Russia (to Chapter VII)


This is another HUGE table on pages 603-607.


 
  

Table of Statistics on the Factory 
Industry of European Russia (to Chapter VII)

|


  
   







Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 




==========

## Uncritical Criticism









Lenin: Uncritical Criticism







V. I.  

      Lenin
Uncritical Criticism
(Regarding Mr. P. Skvortsov’s Article “Commodity Fetishism” in Nauchnoye Obozreniye, No. 12, 1899.)




Written: Written in January-March, 1900 

Published:

      Published in May and June, 1900 in the magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye, Nos. 5 and 6[10].

      Published according to the text of Nauchnoye Obozreniye.

      Source:
Lenin
  Collected Works,

      ...,

      ...,

      Moscow,

      Volume 3,

      pages 609-632.

      Translated: ... ...

      Transcription\Markup:
R. Cymbala
Public Domain:

      Lenin Internet Archive

      (2002).

      You may freely copy, distribute,
display and perform this work; as well as make derivative and
commercial works. Please credit “Marxists Internet
Archive” as your source.

      
• README



    

 

      “Jove is wrathful” . . . . This has long been known as a very amusing
      sort of spectacle, and actually the anger of the stern Thunderer
      merely calls forth laughter. Further confirmation of this old truth
      has been supplied by Mr.P. Skvortsov, who has let loose a host of the
      choicest “wratliful” remarks against my book on the process of
      the formation of a home market for Russian capitalism.
    
 I 

      “To depict the process as a whole,” Mr. Skvortsov grandly
      instructs me, “one must set forth one’s understanding of
      the capitalist mode of production; to confine oneself to mere
      references to the theory of realisation is quite superfluous.”
      Why references to the theory of the home market are
      “superfluous” In a book devoted to an analysis of data on
      the home market, remains the secret of our stern Jove, who by
      “setting forth one’s understanding,”
      “understands”. giving extracts from Capital, half of
      which are irrelevant. “The author may be reproached for the
      dialectical (a specimen of Mr. Skvortsov’s wit!)
      “contradiction that, having set himself the aim of
      examining a problem” (of how the home market is being
      formed for Russian capitalism), “he comes, at the end of
      his references to theory, to the conclusion that no such
      problem exists at all,” Mr. Skvortsov is so pleased with this
      remark of his that he repeats it several times, not seeing, or
      not wishing to see, that it is based on a gross error. At the
      end of the first chapter of my book I

    

      say that “the problem of the home market as a separate,
      self-sufficient problem not depending on that of the degree of
      capitalist development does not exist at all”

      (69).[11]
Well, does the critic disagree with
      that? No, he agrees with it, for on the preceding page he says
      that my remarks are “fair.” That being the case, what has
      occasioned his clamour and attempt to divest my conclusion of
      its most important part? That also remains a secret. At the end
      of the introductory, theoretical chapter, I definitely indicate
      the theme of interest to me: “the question of how a home
      market is being formed for Russian capitalism reduces itself to
      the following: How and in what direction are the diverse aspects
      of the Russian national economy developing? What constitutes
      the connection between and interdependence of these diverse
      aspects?” (69). Does the critic consider these questions
      unworthy of examination? No, he prefers to avoid the issue of
      the theme I set myself and to point to other themes with
      which, at Jove’s behest, I should have occupied myself. I
      should, in his opinion, have “described the reproduction
      and circulation both of that part of the product which is
      produced in agriculture and in industry capitalistically, and of
      that part which is produced by independent peasant
      producers. . . and shown the relation between them, i.e., the
      magnitudes of constant and variable capital and of surplus-value
      in each of the indicated departments of social labour”
      (2278). Now that is simply a high-sounding and totally
      meaningless phrase! Before attempting to describe the
      reproduction and circulation of the product which is produced in
      agriculture capitalistically, one must first ascertain
      exactly how and to what extent agriculture becomes
      capitalist, among peasants or among landlords, in one district
      or in another, etc. Unless this is done (and that is what I have
      done in my book), the description suggested by Mr. Skvortsov
      will remain a series of commonplaces. Before we can speak of the
      part of the product which is produced in industry
      capitalistically, we must first ascertain exactly which industry
      in Russia is becoming capitalist and to what extent it is doing
      so. That is precisely what I tried to do by processing the data
      on the handicraft industry, for example; our stern critic
      grandly passes all this by in silence and with a supremely
      serious air invites me to mark time and to

    

      dispose of the matter with empty commonplaces about capitalist
      industry! The question as to exactly which peasants in Russia are
      “independent producers” also requires a study of the facts,
      and that is what I tried to undertake in my book; had
      Mr. Skvortsov pondered over this question, he would not have
      made the nonsensical assertion that the categories of constant
      capital, variable capital and surplus-value may, without further
      ado, be applied to the economy of “independent peasant
      producers.” In a word, the elaboration of the theme proposed by
      Mr. Skvortsov is possible only after clearing up the
      questions I have indicated. Under the guise of amending my
      formulation of the problem, our stern critic beats a retreat
      from an analysis of concrete and historically specific reality
      to simply copying Marx.
    

      Incidentally, we cannot pass by in silence the following trick
      by Mr. P. Skvortsov, one that splendidly characterises our
      critic’s methods. Prof. Sombart (says Mr. P. Skvortsov) shows
      that German exports lag behind the development of German
      industry. “These data,” Mr. P. Skvortsov explains, “go
      to confirm my conception of markets.” Good, isn’t it?
      Mr. Skvortsov’s arguments illustrate the meaning of the
      well-known saying: there’s a bush in the garden, and my uncle’s
      in Kiev. . . . We are discussing the theory of realisation, and
      he tells us: capitalism, like feudalism, lives on
      surplus-labour! If we add to such inimitable trick  a number of
      stern rebukes, we shall get the sum-total of Mr. Skvortsov’s
      “criticism.




      But let the reader judge for himself: to show my “failure
      to understand,” Mr. P. Skvortsov cites, on pages 2279 and 2280,
      extracts from various parts of the first chapter, picks out
      isolated words from isolated sentences and exclaims:
      “The finding, the exchange, the theory of the
      home market, the finding of the replacing, and finally,
      the compensating! I do not think such precision of terms
      can be taken as evidence that Mr. Ilyin clearly understands
      Marx’s ‘remarkable’ theory of realisation!?” Now that is
      precisely the sort of “criticism” that was once ridiculed
      by Chernyshevsky; a man takes up The Adventures of Chichikov
      and begins to “criticise”: “Chi-chi-kov,
      tchi-tchi. . . Oh how funny! The finding, the exchange.... I do
      not think that is

clear...” [12]
      Oh, what destructive
      criticism!
    
 

      On page 52 of my book I say that it was not; necessary to divide
      the product according to its natural form in analysing the
      production of individual capital, but that it was absolutely
      necessary in analysing the reproduction of social capital, for
      in the latter case (and only in the latter case) are we dealing
      with the replacement of the natural form of the
      product. Mr. Skvortsov asserts that I “failed to under
      stand” Marx, severely reprimands me for “translating
      freely,” considers it “necessary to quote Capital at
      length” (the passages quoted stating exactly what I said), and
      pounces upon the following words of mine: “Now, however,
      the question,” i.e., in analysing the reproduction of social,
      and not of individual, capital,



“Is: where will the workers
      and the capitalists obtain their articles of consumption, where
      will the capitalists obtain their means of production, how will
      the finished product meet all these demands and enable
      production to expand?” Underlining this passage, Mr. Skvortsov
      goes on to say: “The passages I have underlined do Indeed
      contain a theory of realisation, only not Marx’s, but
      Mr. Ilyin’s, a theory which has nothing in common with Marx’s
      theory” (2282). Strongly put! But let us see what sort of proof
      is advanced. The proofs, of course, are quotations from Marx,
      including the following: “The question as it immediately
      forelies

      (sic!)[1]

      is this: How is the capital consumed in

    

      production replaced in value out of the annual product, and how
      is the movement of this replacement intertwined with the
      consumption of surplus-value by the capitalists, and of wages
      by the workers?” Conclusion: “I believe that I have shown
      sufficiently that the theory of realisation which Mr. Ilyin
      presents as Marx’s has nothing in common with the analysis given
      by Marx,” etc. All I can do is to ask once again: Good, isn’t
      it? What the difference is between what I say and what is said
      in the quotations from Marx remains the secret of our stern
      critic. All that is clear is that my mortal sin lies in
      “translating freely,” or perhaps in that I explain Marx in
      my “own words,” as Mr. Skvortsov expresses it in another
      part of his article (2287). Just think of it! To expound Marx in
      one’s “own words”! “Genuine” Marxism consists in
      learning Capital by heart and quoting passages from it,
      in season and out . . . à la Mr. Nikolai —on.
    

      Here is an illustration confirming this last remark. In my book
      I say that capitalism “makes its appearance only as a
      result of widely developed commodity circulation,” and, in
      another place, that “capitalism is that stage in the
      development of commodity-production in which labour-power, too,
      becomes a commodity.” Midst thunder and lightning our stern Jove
      announces: “under what conditions capitalism makes its
      appearance . . . is known to every more or less educated reader”
      (sic!), “Mr. Ilyin’s bourgeois horizon,” and other pearls
      adorning the polemics of the wrathful Mr. Skvortsov. Then
      follow quotations from Marx: the first says exactly what I said
      (the purchase and sale of labour-power is the basic condition of
      capitalist production); the second says that the mode of
      circulation derives from the social character of production and
      not vice versa (Das Kapital, II. B.,

      93).[13]
      Mr. Skvortsov imagines he has utterly confuted his opponent
      with this last quotation. Actually, however, he has replaced the
      question I raised by another one and given proof of his ability
      to offer irrelevant quotations. What did I speak of in the
      incriminating passage? Of the fact that capitalism is the result
      of commodity circulation, i.e., of the historical relation
      between capitalist production and commodity circulation. And
      what is spoken of in the passage quoted from Volume II of
      Capital (the volume devoted to the circulation of
      capital)? The relation between capitalist

    

      production and capitalist circulation; Marx is polemising in
      this passage (S. 92. II.

      B.)[14]
      against the
      economists who contrasted natural economy, money economy and
      credit economy as three characteristic economic forms of
      movement in social production; Marx says that that is wrong,
      because money and credit economy are merely modes of circulation
      peculiar to different stages in the development of capitalist
      production, and he concludes with a remark about the “bourgeois
      horizon” of these economists. Mr. Skvortsov thinks
      that “genuine” Marxism consists in clutching at the last
      word of Marx and repeating it, even against an opponent who did
      not dream of discussing the relation between natural, money and
      credit economy. We leave it to the reader to determine which
      party displays “failure to understand,” and among what sort
      of literature such tricks are classified. Behind the clamour of
      his stern rebukes Mr. Skvortsov not only resorted to the
      “point of replacing” but also completely evaded the problem
      of the relation between capitalist production and commodity
      circulation. That is a very important problem, to which I revert
      many times in my book, emphasising the historical role of
      merchant’s capital as the predecessor of capitalist
      production. Mr. Skvortsov would seem to have no objection to
      this (judging by the fact that he says nothing about it). That
      being the case, what sense is there in the noise he makes about
      my statement that capitalism is a result of commodity
      circulation? Does not merchant’s capital express the
      development of commerce, i.e., commodity circulation without
      capitalist production? These questions too, once again, remain
      the secret of the wrathful Jove.
    

      To finish with the “criticism” Mr. Skvortsov directs
      against the theoretical part of my book, I have to examine a few
      more of the stern rebukes and gross errors which abound in the
      article “Commodity Fetishism.”
    

      In my book I say: “The need for a capitalist country to
      have a foreign market is . . . determined . . . by the fact that
      capitalism makes its appearance only as a result of widely
      developed commodity circulation, which transcends the
      limits of the state. It is therefore impossible to conceive a
      capitalist nation without foreign trade, nor is there any such
      nation. As the reader sees, this reason is of a historical
      order” (65). The stern Jove “criticises”: “I, as a
      reader, do not

    

see that this reason is of a historical order. A
      totally unfounded assertion” (2284), etc. If commodity
      circulation is the necessary historical predecessor of
      capitalism, is there any need to explain in addition why
      “this reason is of a historical order”?
    

      For the abstract theory of capitalism all that exists is
      developed and fully established capitalism, and the question of
      its origin is eliminated.
    

      “Mr. Ilyin . . . for the realisation of the product in
      capitalist society . . . turns to the aid of the foreign
      market” (2286). To the reader who is familiar with my Studies
      and The Development of Capitalism in Russia I need
      scarcely explain that this, too, is a trick performed by the
      same method as the preceding ones. A quotation from Marx:
      “. . . foreign commerce only replaces home products by
      articles of other use or bodily

form . . . .”[15]
      Conclusion: “Every literate person, with the exception of
      critically-minded individuals, will understand that Marx says
      the very opposite of Mr. Ilyin’s theory that there is no need to
      go to the foreign market to find ‘an equivalent for that part of
      the product which is being sold,’ to find ‘another part of the
      capitalist product that can replace the first’” (2284). Oh,
      splendid Mr. Skvortsov!
    

      “Mr. Ilyin . . . by ignoring the essential features of
      capitalist society and thus converting it into planned production
      —proportion in the development of different trades
      undoubtedly means planned production—nicely realises, In
      the end, the same quantity of products within the country”
      (2286). Our “critic’s” new trick consists in attributing
      to me the notion that capitalism ensures regular
      proportion. Constant, deliberately maintained proportion would,
      indeed, signify the existence of planning; but this is not the
      proportion which is “established only as the average
      magnitude of a number of continual fluctuations” (that is what
      I say in the passage quoted by Mr. Skvortsov). I definitely say
      that proportion (or conformity) is “assumed” by
      theory, but in fact it is “constantly disturbed,”
      that to replace one distribution of capital by another and
      so create proportion “there must be a crisis” (all
      the words underlined are to be found on that very page 66, which
      is quoted by Mr. Skvortsov). The question arises, what can one

    

      think of a critic who ascribes to his opponent the transformation of
      capitalism into planned production, while making
      reference to the very page and the very paragraph where that
      opponent says that for capitalism there must be a crisis
      so as to create a constantly disturbed proportion??
    
 II 

      Let us pass to the second part of Mr. Skvortsov’s article, which
      is devoted to a criticism of the factual data quoted and
      analysed in my book. Maybe here, at least, we shall find some
      serious criticism relating to problems of which a special study
      has been made by Mr. Skvortsov.
    

      The social division of labour is the basis of commodity economy
      and is the basic process of the formation of a home
      market—says Mr. Skvortsov, quoting my words—“while
      plain ‘division of labour’—not social, we must
      assume—is the basis of manufacture....” In this
      “attempt at irony” the critic reveals his failure to
      understand the elementary difference between division of labour
      in society and division of labour in the workshop: the former
      creates (under commodity production—a condition which I
      definitely specified, so that Mr. Skvortsov’s reminder about the
      division of labour in the Indian village community relates to
      that author’s deplorable weakness for quoting irrelevant
      passages from Marx) isolated commodity-producers, who,
      independently and separately from one another, produce different
      products which enter into exchange; the latter does not alter
      the relation of the producers to society, but merely transforms
      their position in the workshop. That is the reason, so far as I
      can judge, why Marx sometimes speaks of “social division of

      labour”[2]

      and at others simply

    

      of division of labour. If Mr. Skvortsov thinks otherwise, he
      should formulate and explain his opinion instead of dealing out
      stern but wholly meaningless remarks.
    

      “Division of labour is not in the least a characteristic
      feature of manufacture, for division of labour exists in the
      factory too.”
    

      Very well, Mr. Skvortsov! But have I said that this is the only
      feature that distinguishes manufacture from the factory? Had the
      critic at all seriously wanted to discover whether I correctly
      understand the “characteristic features of manufacture” (a
      very interesting and by no means as simple a problem as may
      appear at first sight), could he have kept silent about the fact
      that in the very section concerned I definitely say: “We
      have had occasion elsewhere to enumerate the principal features
      of the concept of manufacture according to Marx (Studies,

      179[3]

)”

      (385, footnote 1)? In the Studies, division of
      labour figures as only one of a series of features. The
      reader of Mr. Skvortsov’s article might, therefore, get an
      absolutely distorted notion of my views, and no notion whatever
      of the critic  s views.
    

      To proceed. The attempt to present a whole number of so-called
      “handicraft” industries as the manufactory stage of Russian
      capitalism is made in my book, if I am not mistaken, for the
      first time, and I, of course, am far from imagining that
      this problem has been altogether settled (particularly since I
      have examined it from a specific point of view). I accordingly
      anticipated criticism of my views, and did so with all the more
      reason, and all the more Interest, because certain Russian
      Marxists had expressed somewhat different views (see The
      Development of Capitalism, p. 550, footnote). But how has
      the problem been treated by Mr. P. Skvortsov? His
      “criticism” amounts in its entirety to an exhortation,
      magnificent for its laconic severity, not to confine myself to a
      “mechanical enumeration of the number of wage-workers, of
      aggregate output in such and such years in this or that sphere
      of production” (2278). If this exhortation does not refer to the
      section of my book which deals with the question of factory
      statistics (Mr. Skvortsov

    

      does not say a word about this), it must refer to the chapter on
      manufacture, the greater part of which consists of factual
      data. How they might have been dispensed with is a secret that
      our stern critic does not reveal, and I continue to hold to the
      opinion that it is better to incur the charge of my exposition
      being dry than to give the reader cause to think that my opinion
      is based on “quotations” from Capital, and not on a
      study of Russian data. If Mr. Skvortsov thinks my enumeration is
      “mechanical,” are we to take it that he considers as wrong
      the conclusions which I have drawn from these data in the second
      half of Chapter VI, and repeated in Chapter VII, §XI I
      ?—Are we to take it that he does not agree that these data
      show a specific structure of industry characterised by a
      specific system of: 1) technique, 2) economy and 3) culture? The
      stern Jove had not a single word to say about this in his
      “criticism,” which, if we discount the wrathful rebukes,
      is left without any content whatsoever. That’s rather little,
      most respected Mr. Skvortsov!
    

      Let us pass to the part played by peasant taxes in developing
      commodity economy. I asserted that at one time poll-taxes had
      been an important factor in the development of exchange, but
      that now commodity-production had become so firmly established
      that the importance of taxes “is becoming altogether
      secondary.” Against this Mr. Skvortsov launches a host of
      paltry and fearful words such as, “fetishism of
      commodities,” unite everything, “omnipotence,” potency of
      commodity-production, etc.; but alas, these potent words merely
      cover up the stern critic’s impotence to refute the conclusion I
      drew. “Even Mr. Kautsky,” writes Mr. Skvortsov, “to
      whom Mr. Ilyin bears resemblance in many respects” . . . (poor
      “Mr. Kautsky,” who “bears resemblance” to the
      “commodity fetishist,” completely fails to understand
      Capital, and resembles that man who is weighed down by a
      “bourgeois horizon,” Mr. Ilyin! Will he recover from the
      blow struck by a “genuine” Marxist?)... “says that-the
      conversion of peasant dues in kind into dues in cash increases
      the peasants’ demand for money” (2288). Very well, stern
      Mr. Critic, but surely that has absolutely nothing to do with
      the problem of the part played by taxes in the peasants’ cash
      expenditure as compared with outlays on the rest of their
      needs and requirements. This problem is

    

not even
      touched upon by Kautsky. Mr. Skvortsov over and over again
      reveals his remarkable talent for offering irrelevant
      quotations. “The main question,” says Mr. Skvortsov,
      advancing his second objection, “which is not explained
      even by the budget data, is as follows: where is the horseless
      peasant to obtain 25 rubles to pay his taxes” (25 per cent
      of his cash expenditure, 25 rubles out of 100 rubles has
      been turned by Mr. Skvortsov simply into 25 rubles!) “and
      the horse-owning peasant 10 rubles? The question is not what
      part of the income (?) taxes constitute in the peasants’ total
      cash expenditure” (2290). I advise Mr. Skvortsov to take out a
      patent for a remarkable invention: the very latest and very
      easiest method of “scientific criticism” that radically
      destroys an opponent. On one out of several hundred pages of his
      book your opponent incidentally raises the question of the
      share of tax expenditure in the total cash expenditure; all you
      have to do is to quote this passage, foist another
      question on your opponent, and you brilliantly prove that
      he is a “commodity fetishist,” who, monster that he is,
      does not give a thought to where the poor horseless peasant is
      to get 25 rubles! And then, as to other pages in the book,
      which deal with the ratio of taxes to income, with the items and
      with the source of income, you can omit them and thus prove that
      your opponent has a “bourgeois horizon.” Really, take out
      a patent, Mr. Skvortsov!
    

      Here ·is another example of how Mr. Skvortsov utilises
      his invention. I ask the reader’s attention: such gems of
      “scientific criticism” are the only ones of their kind.
    

      We refer to the same page 156, which deals with the budget
      figures for peasant taxes. After showing the role of taxes in
      the peasants’ total cash expenditure, I continue: “If,
      however, we do not take the role of taxes in the development of
      exchange, but take them relative to income, we shall see that it
      is an excessively high one. How heavily the traditions of the
      pre-Reform epoch weigh down upon the peasant of today is seen
      most strikingly in the existence of taxes which absorb
      one-seventh of the gross expenditure of the small farmer, or
      even of the allotment holding farm labourer. Moreover, the
      distribution of taxes within the village community is
      astonishingly uneven: the better off the peasant, the smaller
      the part of his total

    

expenditure that goes in taxes. The
      horseless peasant pays in proportion to his income nearly three
      times as much as the peasant owning many horses (see above,
      table on distribution of expenditure). . . ." Any reader
      who is at all attentive in his approach to what he reads must
      naturally ask: Why do I speak of the distribution of taxes
      within the village community, when the budgets relate to the
      farms of peasants not only of different communities, but even of
      different uyezds? Perhaps the uneven distribution is here
      fortuitous—perhaps it depends on the different assessment
      of one dessiatine of allotment land in the different uyezds or
      in the different village communities from which the farms were
      taken for compiling the typical budgets? And so, in order to
      eliminate this inevitable objection, I immediately went on,
      after what I had said, to explain: “. . . We speak of
      the distribution of taxes within the village community, because
      if we calculate the amount of taxes and duties per dessiatine
      of allotment land, it will be found to be nearly
      uniform. . . .” Had the critic wanted to verify these
      words, all he needed to do was to compare the table on page 151
      (amount of taxes and dues per farm) with the table on p. 157
      (quantity of allotment land per household) to convince himself
      with ease that, judging by the budget data, although the
      budgeted farms belong to different communities, and even to
      different uyezds, the amounts of taxes and dues per dessiatine
      of allotment land are nearly uniform.
    

      And now, observe what methods Mr. Critic uses to destroy
      his opponent! He picks out the words I underlined about the
      amount of taxes per dessiatine of allotment land; fails to
      notice (sic!) that these words relate only to the budget
      data; ascribes to these words the meaning that the amount of
      taxes per dessiatine of allotment land is nearly uniform for the
      whole of the Russian peasantry; triumphantly accuses me,
      because of this latter conclusion, of not being acquainted with
      Zemstvo statistical publications, and cites two tables to
      confirm the (generally known) fact that in different village
      communities, volosts and uyezds, the amounts of taxes per
      dessiatine of allotment land are far from being uniform. Having
      performed this trick, the critic goes on to add: “Indeed,
      within a village community where one and the same size of
      allotment is received, the

    

payments will be not nearly but
      actually uniform in size. The whole point is that Mr. Ilyin does
      not know which village community he is talking about. To finish
      with Mr. Ilyin’s abuse of the Zemstvo statistics,”
      etc. . . (2292). I would like very much to know whether another
      example could be found in scientific literature of this sort of
      criticism.
    

      Having acquainted ourselves with the methods by which
      Mr. Skvortsov “has proved” the utter “worthlessness”
      of the budget data I have given, we may presumably ignore the
      potent (and impotent) terms in which the critic expresses his
      dissatisfaction with the very use of budget data. In demanding
      mass data on budgets, Mr. Skvortsov is evidently talking
      again about something that has nothing to do with the case, for
      descriptions of specific farms, such as I made use of,
      never are and never can be of a mass nature. The
      literature relating to the budgets of specific farms is
      indicated by me at the beginning of the section criticised, and
      I would, of course, only be grateful to the critic if he
      supplemented or corrected me. But Mr. Skvortsov knows how to
      “criticise” without touching on the substance of the point
      at issue! I attempted to prove that the budgets were typical by
      comparing the average sizes of family, crop area, land rented
      and number of animals per horseless and one- horse households,
      according to the budget data and the “mass data” (p. 158 of
      my book); but our stern critic simply calls this a
      “curiosity”—on what grounds, nobody knows. Perhaps
      for the same reason that a certain “critic” found the name
      Chichikov so funny? The budgets "are not typical. .. if
      only because the disposal of . . . grain . . . from the autumn
      onwards and its acquisition in the spring are very rarely met
      with in Voronezh Gubernia, whereas for the whole of Russia”
      such disposal has been proved to be the case, supposedly, by
      Mr. Nik. —on (2291). It is a true proverb which says that
      les beaux esprits se


rencontrent*: That “genuine” Marxist,
      Mr. Pavel Skvortsov, coming up against a contradiction between
      the assertions of the “genuine” Marxist, Mr. Nikolai
      —on, and Zemstvo statistical data, unhesitatingly settles
      the problem along the lines that the data are not typical, and
      not that Mr. Nik.—on’s statements are wrong, or too

    

      general. Besides, what has the question of selling grain in autumn
      and buying grain in spring to do with the controversy over whether
      or not certain budgets are typical, budgets which, in examining
      the problem, I do not use at all?
    
 III 

      After the thankless job of explaining the things imputed to me,
      it is a pleasure to meet, at last, with an objection on
      fundamentals, even if formulated in terms of the stein rebukes
      (“fetishism,” “utter failure to understand”) which
      Mr. Skvortsov evidently considers very convincing, and even if
      the critic’s own opinions have had to be surmised rather than
      seen plainly stated. Mr. Skvortsov is quite right when he says
      that my views “are the central theme of the entire book.”
    

      In order to set off our points of disagreement more sharply, I
      will compare two extreme formulations of our opposite views:
      Mr. Skvortsov probably thinks (at all events, it follows from
      his objections) that the less the land the peas ants received
      when they were emancipated, and the higher the price they paid
      for it, the faster would have been the development of capitalism
      in Russia. I think the opposite: the more the land the
      peasants received when they were emancipated, and the lower the
      price they paid for it, the faster, wider and freer would have
      been the development of capitalism in Russia, the higher
      would have been the standard of living of the population, the
      wider would have been the home market, the faster would have
      been the introduction of machinery into production; the more, in
      a word, would the economic development of Russia have resembled
      that of America. I shall confine myself to indicating two
      circumstances which, in my opinion, confirm the correctness of
      the latter view: 1) land-poverty and the burden of taxation have
      led to the development over a very considerable area of Russia
      of the labour-service system of private-landowner farming, i.e.,
      a direct survival of

      serfdom,[4]

      and not at all to the

    

      development of capitalism; 2) it is in our border regions, where
      serfdom was either entirely unknown, or was feeblest,. and where
      the peasants suffer least from land shortage,. labour-service
      and the burden of taxation, that there has been the greatest
      development of capitalism in agriculture. This. comparison is
      necessary precisely for an analysis of the conditions of the
      “transition from the one social formation to the



other "
      which I am so fiercely and so sweepingly accused of ignoring by
      Mr. Skvortsov.
    

      The extremely stereotyped nature of Mr. Skvortsov’s views on the
      economic processes in peasant economy in this country is also
      revealed by his remarks on migration and on the way capitalism
      breaks down medieval barriers. Now, was I not right in drawing a
      comparison between Mr.  Pavel Skvortsov and Mr. Nikolai
      —on? Both “solve” the problem of migration by an
      extremely simple and entirely negative criticism of those
      “who attach importance” to migration. But that conclusion
      is worthy only of the most primitive —to wit,
      “genuine”—Marxism, which contents itself with
      absolutely abstract. . . commonplaces. What does; “attach
      importance” to migration mean? If we take these  words in their
      literal sense, can there be a single economist of sound mind and
      good memory who does not attach importance to the annual
      migrations? If we take these words in the specific sense of
      capitalism, then, firstly, Mr. Skvortsov distort.s my
      meaning, for I say the very opposite in the pas sage he
      quotes. Secondly, an economist who sets out to study the
      characteristics of the economic system and development of Russia
      (not only to bring lengthy, and often irrelevant, quotations
      from Marx) must necessarily ask: what influence is exerted by
      the migrations in Russia? Without making a special study of the
      question, I remarked in the passage indicated by Mr. Skvortsov
      that my conclusions on the differentiation of the peasantry
      fully correspond to those of

Mr. Hourwich.[5]

      Moreover, I repeatedly

    

      touch on the subject of migration in other parts of my
      book. Maybe my views on this subject are wrong, but Mr. Skvortsov
      does absolutely nothing to correct or to supplement them;
      he totally obscures the issue with his stern rebukes. Further,
      my remarks give Mr. Skvortsov grounds for concluding that the
      “commodity fetishist believes in the miraculous power of
      his fetish now” (sic!). Now, that is truly “crushing”! But
      do you deny that I am right, most respected Mr. Critic? Why not
      share your factual considerations with the public and
      examine the data of at least one uyezd? That would be so
      natural for a person who makes a special study of Zemstvo
      statistics! And I take the liberty of holding this view, in
      spite of Mr. Skvortsov’s terrible words (fetishism, miraculous
      power), which—does anyone doubt it?—are enough to
      frighten

      anybody.[6]

 

      Finally, the last point on which one can discuss fundamentals with Mr. Skvortsov is that of the classification of Zemstvo
      statistics on the peasantry. Mr. Skvortsov has made a special
      study of Zemstvo statistics, and, if we are not mistaken, still
      continues to do so. One would, therefore, be justified in
      expecting him to say something based on facts and explaining
      this controversial and extremely interesting subject. I wrote:
      “we reject a limine any classification according to
      allotment and exclusively employ classification according to
      economic strength (draught animals, area under crops),” and I
      went on to say that classification according to allotment, which
      is far more common in our Zemstvo statistics, is absolutely
      unsuitable because life disturbs the equality (within the
      village community) of allotment land tenure: it is sufficient to
      recall such universally known and unchallenged facts as the
      leasing of allotments, their abandonment, the purchase and the
      renting of land and the supplementing of agriculture with
      commercial and industrial enterprises and with work for
      hire. “Economic statistics must necessarily take the
      scale and type of farm as the basis of classification”
      (105). Mr. Skvortsov’s “criticism” consists in the
      following: “Mr. Ilyin is displeased with the classification of statistics on the peasantry according to
      allotment. There are two (sic!) classifications of
      statistics. One is the historical classification, according to
      which village communities (!) having the same amount of
      allotment land per registered person are gathered into one
      group. The other is a factual classification, according to which
      peasant farms having allotments of equal size, regardless of the
      communities to which they belong, are gathered into one
      group. What makes the historical classification important is
      that it clearly shows what the conditions were under which the
      peasantry passed from feudal to capitalist society. . ."
      and so forth on this theme, also examined above      the
      classification Mr. Ilyin proposes. . . utterly confuses the
      historical conception of the conditions of our peasantry’s
      transition from the one social formation to the
      other. Mr. Ilyin’s proposal is more in the nature of an
      industrial census (sic!), such as is taken in Germany”
      (2289). This is a sample of Mr. Skvortsov’s criticism on a
      subject on which he specialises, and on a question on which,
      with the best will in the world, it is

    

      impossible to “quote” Marx. The question is: What is the
      point of this argument about the “historical”
      classification of village communities, when I am dealing
      with the classification of house-to-house data? By what
      miraculous means can the classification of present-day
      house-to-house data “utterly confuse” the long-established
      historical data on village communities? Mr. Skvortsov is
      entitled to use the word “historical” in this connection
      only to the extent that he turns his back on history: if
      the classification of village communities according to size of
      allotment per registered person relates to the history of what
      happened 40 years ago, then what is going on before our eyes
      with ever-increasing rapidity is also history. Further, it is
      altogether inexplicable how a man who studies Zemstvo statistics
      and talks of all things in nothing less than the tone of a
      prophet can write that “there are two classifications” (of
      village communities according to allotment and of households
      according to allotment), when everyone knows that there are
      very many classifications: according to area under crops,
      number of draught animals, number of working members, number of
      farm labourers, house owner ship, and so forth? How can
      Mr. Skvortsov declare so categorically, and without a shadow
      of proof, that only classification according to allotment is
      “factual,” when the point at issue is precisely: is this
      classification a factual one? I show for a number of uyezds
      that the distribution of allotment land among the peasant farms
      continues to this day to be marked by an “equality” that is
      relatively very great (20% of well-to-do households, 26-30% of
      the population, account for 29-36% of the allotment land in
      various uyezds or groups of uyezds), whereas the distribution of
      the factual indices of farming, draught animals, area
      under crops, improved implements, etc., is everywhere, without
      exception, incomparably less equal. Mr. Skvortsov contrives
      to criticise, and even berate, my statements, without
      saying a word about fundamentals.
    

      It goes without saying that, not being a professional
      statistician, I laid no claims to solving the problem of classification. I think, however, that the basic problems of Zemstvo
      statistics (and the problem of the methods of classifying
      information concerning bouseholds is a basic one, as I point out
      in the passage quoted by Mr. Skvortsov) are things

    

      which not merely Zemstvo statisticians, but all economists, have
      a right and even a duty to discuss. One cannot conceive of an
      economist who is studying the actual economic situation in
      Russia being able to dispense with Zemstvo statistics; and if
      the elaboration of Zemstvo statistics and the work of economists
      proceed independently, each in its own way, neither the one nor
      the other can achieve satisfactory results. That classification
      according to allotment is not a satisfactory factual
      classification has been admitted in part by the Zemstvo
      statisticians themselves, who have given a number of
      classifications according to draught animals and to area under
      crops of which I made use in my book. Just now, when the
      importance of the problem is particularly emphasised by
      practically all Marxists and is not denied even by economists of
      other trends, a re-examination of the problem should be
      particularly necessary. But Mr. Skvortsov, instead of offering
      criticism, presents us with pompous but quite vapid phrases like
      the following: “we need a summary of Zemstvo returns which
      gives .a detailed account of the production and reproduction of
      peasant farming, so that anyone who desires may take up such an
      abstract and verify the ’conclusions’ of Messrs. Ilyin,
      Postnikov and Hourwich” (2292). Yes, of course, “we need a
      summary”; but if these words are not to remain an empty sound,
      and if the summary is really to succeed in answering the main
      problems advanced by Russia’s present economic system and by
      that system’s evolution, what is needed is to raise and to
      discuss from all angles the fundamental problem of the methods
      to be employed in drawing up the summary,  to discuss it
      without fail in general publications, and not merely among
      Zemstvo statisticians, and still less within the four walls of
      this or that Zemstvo statistical bureau. I raised this problem
      in my book and attempted to indicate its solution. It is not, of
      course, for me to judge whether the solution is a correct
      one. But I am justified in drawing the conclusion that
      Mr. Skvortsov, for all his sternness, has said nothing whatever
      about the problem, but has instead, without grounds for so
      doing, advocated routine methods, advocated a point of view that
      was already old in 1885 (see footnote on page 103 of The
      Development of Capitalism, where I quote from Mr. V. V.’s

    

      article “A New Type of Local Statistical Publication” his
      admission that “the statistical data must be adapted to the
      groups themselves and not to such a conglomeration of the most
      diverse economic groups of peasants as the village or the
      village community,” and where I raise the question as to why
      Mr. V. V. himself never once made use of the data on these most
      diverse groups).
    


      In conclusion, a few words about “orthodoxy,” which will
      not be superfluous, since Mr. Skvortsov’s appearance in the role
      of “genuine” Marxist renders particularly urgent the
      precisest possible definition of what, if it may be so
      expressed, is one’s position. While not in the least desiring to
      place Mr. B. Avilov on a par with Mr. Skvortsov, I nevertheless
      find it necessary to touch on a passage in the former’s article
      in the same issue of the Nauchnoye Obozreniye. At the end
      of a postscript to this article Mr. B. Avilov says:
      “Mr. Ilyin stands also for orthodoxy. But I think there is
      still plenty of room for ’orthodoxy,’ i.e., the simple
      interpretation of Marx...” (p. 2308). I think that words I
      have italicised are probably a slip of the pen, for I said quite
      definitely that by orthodoxy I do not at all mean the simple
      interpretation of Marx. In the article which Mr. B. Avilov
      has in mind, after the words: “No, let us better remain
      ‘under the sign of orthodoxy,’” I say: “Let us not believe
      that orthodoxy means taking things on trust, that orthodoxy
      precludes critical application and further development, that it
      permits historical problems to be obscured by abstract
      schemes. If there are orthodox disciples who are guilty of these
      truly grievous sins, the blame must rest entirely with those
      disciples and not by any means with orthodoxy, which is
      distinguished by diametrically opposite qualities” (Nauchnoye
      Obozreniye, 1899, No. 8, p.

      1579).[16]
      Thus I
      definitely said that to accept anything on trust, to preclude
      critical application and development, is a grievous sin; and in
      order to apply and develop, “simple interpretation” is
      obviously not enough. The disagreement between those Marxists
      who stand for the so-called “new critical trend” and those
      who stand for so-called “orthodoxy” is that they want to
      apply and develop Marxism in different directions: the
      one group want to remain consistent Marxists, developing the
      basic tenets of

    

Marxism in accordance with the changing
      conditions and with the local characteristics of the different
      countries, and further elaborating the theory of dialectical
      materialism and the political-economic teachings of Marx; the
      other group reject certain more or less important aspects of
      Marx’s teachings, and in philosophy, for instance, take the
      side, not of dialectical materialism, but of neo-Kantianism, and
      in political economy the side of those who label some of Marx’s
      teachings as “tendentious,” etc. The former on this account
      accuse the latter of eclecticism, and in my opinion have very
      good grounds for doing so. The latter call the former
      “orthodox,” and it should never be forgotten that use of
      this term has been made by opponents in controversy, that the
      “orthodox” do not reject criticism in general, but only
      “criticism” by eclectics (who would only be entitled to
      call themselves advocates of “criticism” to the extent that
      in the history of philosophy the teachings of Kant and of his
      followers are called “criticism,” “critical
      philosophy”). In the same article I named authors (p. 1569,
      footnote, and p. 1570,

      footnote[7]

)

      who, in my opinion, are
      representatives of the consistent and integral, and not
      eclectic, development of Marxism, and who have done for this
      development—in the field of philosophy, in the field of
      political economy and in the field of history and
      politics—incomparably more than, for example, Sombart or

      Stammler,[8]

      the mere repetition of whose eclectic views is
      regarded by many today as a big step forward. It is scarcely
      necessary for me to add that latterly the representatives of the
      eclectic trend have grouped themselves around E. Bernstein. I
      shall limit myself to these brief remarks on the question of my
      “orthodoxy,” both because it is not immediately relevant to
      the subject of my article, and because I am unable here to
      elaborate in detail the views of the former, and must refer
      those who are Interested to the German literature. On this
      subject the Russian controversies are merely echoes of the
      German, and unless

    

      one is familiar with the latter one cannot obtain a really
      precise idea of the point at

      issue.[9]


 

Notes
 

[1]

      By the way, about translations. Quoting from my book the
      following passage: “... as though only the absolute
      consuming power of society constituted their (the productive
      forces’) outer limit” (57), Mr. Skvortsov gives me the following
      strict admonition: “Mr. Ilyin ... did not notice the
      clumsiness of his translation, whereas the original says simply
      and clearly: ‘als ob nur die absolute Konsumptionsfähigkeit der
      Gesellschaft ihre Grenze bilde’” (2286). What is wrong with this
      (quite correct) translation the critic does not indicate. But to
      show how strict he is, it will be sufficient to quote a couple
      of his translations. Page 2284: “But when the normal
      annual reproduction is shown on a given scale ... thereby it is
      also shown...” (in the original: ist damit auch unterstellt);
      page 2285: “We are dealing, primarily, with simple
      reproduction. Further on it will be shown” (in the original:
      Ferner wird unterstellt) “not only that products are
      exchanged at their value,” etc. Thus, good Mr. Skvortsov is no
      doubt firmly convinced that “unterstellen” means “to
      show,” and that “wird interstellt” is future tense.
    

      I say nothing about the style of our stern critic, who treats us
      to such phrases as: “now the capitalist mode of production
      equals agricultural industry” (2293).
    —Lenin

[2]

      In chapter twelve, volume one of Capital [in the
      English edition it is Chapter XIV.—Ed.], which deals
      with manufacture, there is a special section entitled
      “Division of Labour in Manufacture, and Division of
      Labour in Society.” At the beginning of this section Marx
      says: “We shall now lightly touch upon the relation
      between the division of labour in manufacture, and the social
      division of labour, which forms the foundation of all
      production of commodities” (Das Kapital, 12,

S. 362).[17]
      How truly instructive it is to contrast this to the trick of
      our wrathful Jove!
    —Lenin

[3]

      See present edition, Vol. 2, The Handicraft Census of 1894-95 in
Perm Gubernia.—Ed.
    —Lenin

[4]

      Incidentally, in my book I definitely advance this thesis (that
      labour-service is a survival of serfdom). Mr. Skvortsov says
      nothing about this, but takes my remark that, fundamentally,
      labour-service has existed ever since the time of Russkaya
      Pravda and storms about it; he cites a quotation from
      Klyuchevsky, talks of home markets in the 12th century, and of
      commodity fetishism, and asserts that

   

I think that
      “commodity production is the miraculous and all-explaining
      starting-point in history (sic!) since the days of Russkaya
      Pravda”(sic!). This, apparently, is some more of the
      “tchi-tchi” type of criticism to which, as it is, I think I
      devoted too much time at the beginning of this article.
    —Lenin

[5]

      A propos of Mr. Hourwich, Mr. Skvortsov, by his unwarranted

   

and
      supercilious attitude towards the “conclusions” of this
      writer, who is known in Marxist literature as the author of two
      books and as a Contributor to magazines, only reveals his own
      conceit.
    —Lenin

[6]

      My words: “Before capitalism appeared, agriculture in
      Russia was the business of the gentry, a lord’s bobby for some,
      and a duty, an obligation for others” (313), in Mr. Skvortsov’s
      opinion “indicate that a whole social formation, the feudal
      mode of production, was merely a lord’s hobby.” No,
      Mr. Skvortsov, they do not “indicate” this at all, for I
      pointed out elsewhere that “feudal economy was a definite,
      regular and complete system” (192), and here I merely described
      one of the features of this system. That landlord economy
      contained an element of the “lord’s hobby” can easily be
      seen by anyone who remembers the “Oblomovs of the feudal or
      bondage-suffering countryside” (218); and it is borne out by the
      Zemstvo statisticians who invented the expression “lord’s
      hobby” (213);—it is p roved even by the data on a certain
      period in the development of the agricultural- machinery
      industry in Russia: the attempts of landlords simply to import
      both workers and machines from abroad (193), which (219) were
      nothing but a “lord’s hobby.”—“When and where the
      transformation by capitalism of the lord of the manor
      [votchinnik]” (Mr. P. S. is wrong in thinking that this category
      is applicable only to the period “prior to the rise of
      serfdom”; it is also applicable to the period of serfdom)
      “and of the dependent peasant into industrialists was
      completed Mr. Ilyin does not, unfortunately, tell us.” (2293) I
      speak of this in chapters II and III, and particularly IV, of my
      book, where I deal precisely with the transformation of
      agriculture into commercial and industrial
      enterprise. Very possibly, what I say about this process
      requires supplementing and correcting; I have no doubt that any
      serious and well-informed critic could do this; but
      Mr. Skvortsov, unfortunately, has utterly obscured the issue by
      simply voicing stern rebukes. That’s hardly enough!
    —Lenin

[7]

      See present edition, Vol. 4, Once More on the Theory of
      Realisation.—Ed.
    —Lenin

[8]

      Cf. against Stammler the very proper remarks made by G. Cunow,
      part of whose article was translated and published in the
      Nauchnoye Obozreniye in 1899; then B. Lvov’s The
      Social Law (ibid.), and the translation of Mr. Sadi Gunter’s
      article which the Nauchnoye Obozreniye promises to
      publish in 1900.
    —Lenin

[9]

      It is this eclecticism, in my opinion, which is the substance of
      the “new” “critical” trend that has “begun to
      take shape” in our literature latterly (cf. Struve’s articles in
      Zhizn, 1899, No. 10, and 1900, No. 2; and
      Tugan-Baranovsky’s in Nauchnoye Obozreniye, 1899, No. 5,
      and 1900, No. 3). The first-mentioned author began to “give
      shape” to leanings towards eclecticism over five years ago in
      his Critical Remarks, and immediately after that book
      appeared an attempt was made (as Struve will be good enough to
      recall) to “open the eyes” of the public to the mixture of
      Marxism and bourgeois science in his

      views.[18]
      It is strange,
      therefore, to hear the following from Struve: “Simply to
      close one’s eyes to the so-called (wrongly so-called,
      perhaps?—V. I.)  ‘bourgeois’ criticism of Marx’s
      teachings and to engage in repeating and paraphrasing them, has
      hitherto proved not only useless but even harmful” (Zhizn,
      No. 2, 305). “Simply to close one’s eyes,” not only to
      bourgeois science, but even to the most absurd NOTES doctrines,
      up to and including extreme obscurantism is, of course,
      ’undoubtedly harmful; that is a banal commonplace. It is one
      thing, however, not to close one’s eyes to bourgeois science, by
      keeping watch on it, and using it, but being critical
      towards it, and refusing to surrender the integrity and
      definiteness of one’s world outlook; but it is another thing to
      give way to bourgeois science and to repeat, for example,
      catchwords about Marx being “tendentious,” etc., which have
      a very definite meaning and significance. As for “repeating
      and paraphrasing,” does the repeating and paraphrasing of
      Bohm-Bawerk and Wieser, Sombart and Stammler, in itself, a
      priori, deserve more attention than the repeating and
      paraphrasing of Marx? Has Struve, who has managed to discern (in
      Russian literature, mind you) the “harmfulness” (sic!) of
      repeating Marx, failed to notice the harmfulness of
      uncritically repeating the fashionable corrections of
      fashionable bourgeois “science”? How far must one have
      departed from Marxism to have arrived at such an opinion, and at
      such an unpardonable “closing of eyes” to the present-day
      “vacillation of thought”! At the end of his article Struve
      particularly requests my views on the questions raised by the
      so-called “critics.” I would reply to this that what
      specially interests me just now is the contemporary eclectic
      trend in philosophy and in political economy, and that I still
      hope at some future date to present a systematic analysis of
      this

      trend;[19]
      but to chase after every single
      “fundamental error” and “fundamental antinomy” ... of
      eclecticism is (I ask the pardon of the
respected “critics”!) simply uninteresting. That is why I shall confine myself
      for the moment to putting forward a counter-suggestion: Let the
      new “critical trend” take the most definite shape, and not
      limit itself to mere hints. The sooner this happens the better,
      for then the less will be the confusion and the more clearly
      will the public appreciate the difference between Marxism and
      the new “trend” in the bourgeois criticism of Marx.
    —Lenin
 



[10]

Lenin’s article “Uncritical Criticism” is an answer to a hostile review
of The Development of Capitalism in Russia by P. N. Skvortsov, a
“Legal Marxist.” Lenin began working on the article in January 1900,
during his last weeks of exile at Shushenskoye. This information is
contained in a letter written by N. K. Krupskaya to Lenin’s
mother. M. A. Ulyanova, dated January 19, 1900. The article was finished
in March 1900, after Lenin’s return from

   

exile, and appeared in the
magazine Nauchnoye Obozreniye (Scientific Review) in May
and June, 1900. This was the last of Lenin’s articles to appear in the
Russian legal press before he went abroad.





[11]

      In his references to The Development of Capitalism in Russia
      Lenin gives the page numbers of the 1899 edition. These have
      been changed to correspond to the pages of the present edition.
    



[12]

      The words in inverted commas “Chi-chi-kov ... etc.,” are a
      paraphrase of the following extract from Chernyshevsky’s
      Essays on the Gogol Period in Russian
      Literature. “...A witty examination of Dead Souls
      might be written as follows: After giving the book’s title:
      The Adventures [pokhozhdeniya] of Chichikov, or Dead Souls,
      begin directly in the following way: ’The cooling down
      lprokhlazhdeniyal of Tchi! tchi! kov—don’t think, reader,
      that I have sneezed ... etc., etc.’ Some twenty years ago there
      were readers who thought that witty” (see N. G. Chernyshevsky,
      Essays on the Gogol Period in Russian Literature,
      St. Petersburg, 1892, p. 64).
    



[13]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, pp. 116-17.
    



[14]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 115.
    



[15]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. II, Moscow, 1957, p. 470.
    



[17]

      Karl Marx, Capital, Vol. I, Moscow, 1958, pp. 350-351.
    



[16]

      Lenin’s article “Once More on the Theory of Realisation,”
      signed V. Ilyin, appeared in Nauchnoye Obozreniye, Issue
      No. 8, August 1899. (See present edition, Vol. 4.)
    



[18]

      “An attempt to ‘open the eyes’ of the public to the mixture
      of Marxism and bourgeois science” is a reference to Lenin’s
      criticism of Struveism, “Legal Marxism,” in his essay
      The Economic Con tent of Narodism and the Criticism of It in
      Mr. Struve’s Book. This essay, contained in Volume 1 of the
      present edition of Lenin’s Collected Works, exposed the
      real nature of the “Legal Marxists,” and showed that they
      were bourgeois liberals who were attempting to use the Marxist
      banner and the working-class movement in the interests of the
      bourgeoisie.
    



[19]

      “A systematic analysis of this
      trend” was made by Lenin in his Materialism and
      Empirio-Criticism. This supremely important philosophical work
      was written in 1908 and appeared in book form in Moscow in
      1909. (See present edition, Vol. 14.)
    









Works
  Index   |  

      Volume 3

 | 

Collected Works

        |   L.I.A. Index




<
  backward

 

forward >





 





